Art in Theory

1900-1990

An Anthology of Changing Ideas



Acknowledgements



Our foremost thanks go to those numerous authors and copyright-holders who
have permitted us to reproduce the texts here included, and to edit them where
we have felt the need to do so. We are also indebted to the translators and
editors of more specialized anthologies who have been most generous in making
material available to us. We have met so little resistance to our requests that
we must own the selection as it stands as an accurate product of our intentions.
This is to say that, within the limits of what could be contained in a single
volume, and of what we could trace within the time at our disposal, this book
fairly represents the substance of our conversations and the nature of our
agreements.

In the long task of tracing and compiling material we have benefited greatly
from the advice and assistance of friends and colleagues at the Open University
and elsewhere. We would like particularly to thank Stephen Bann, David
Batchelor, Tim Benton, Anthony Coulson, Thomas Crow, Trish Evans, Briony
Fer, Tamar Garb, Roberta Glave, Andrew Hemingway, Rosalind Krauss, Fred
Orton, Gillian Perry, Paul Smith and Sarah Wilson. We would also like to
express our considerable gratitude to Val Glenn for her work in tracing
copyright-holders and securing permissions, to Denise Powers for her contribu-
tion to the typing of our manuscripts, to Helen Dore for meticulous attention
to the task of copy-editing, and to Jane Robertson, Managing Editor for
Blackwell Publishers, for keeping the whole project on the rails.

C. H.
P. W.



A Note on the Presentation
and Editing of Texts



A note on presentation xxv

the later part of the century for the theory of art to be treated as an academic
subject. We have generally avoided the insertion of editorial footnotes, but have
supplied essential references in the introductions to individual texts.

We have corrected typographical errors and errors of transcription where we
have discovered them in the anthologized texts, but otherwise we have left
idiosyncrasies of punctuation, spelling and style unchanged.



Where a published document was originally given a title, this has generally been
used for the present publication, in single quotation marks. Titles of books are
given in italics. Where a specific subtitled section of a document has been taken,
this subtitle is used for the extract. The title of the whole work is then given
in the introduction to that text. In the absence of original published titles we
have given descriptive headings without quotation marks. The term 'from'
preceding a title signifies that we have taken a specific extract or extracts from
a longer text, without seeking to represent the argument of the whole. Otherwise
texts are given in their entirety or are edited so as to indicate the argument of
the whole.

It is the aim of this anthology that it should be wide-ranging. We have
therefore preferred the course of including a greater number of texts, of which
several must appear in abbreviated form, to the course of presenting a small
number in their entirety. Texts have been variously edited to shorten them, to
eliminate references which cannot be explained within the space available, and
where necessary to preserve the flow of argument. We have provided information
as to the sources for complete versions of all edited texts. We have also clearly
marked where texts have been edited.

The following conventions have been used throughout. Suspended points
' . . . ' are used to denote the omission of words or phrases within a sentence.
Suspended points within square brackets '[...]' are used to denote omissions
extending from a complete sentence to a paragraph. Asterisks '* * *' denote
omission of more than one paragraph, and may denote exclusion of a complete
subdivision of the original text. It should be noted that a paragraph may end
thus [ . . . ] , either if the last sentence of that paragraph is omitted or if the
following paragraph is omitted. A paragraph may also start thus [. . .] , if one
or more sentences at the beginning of that paragraph have been omitted, or if
a previous paragraph has been omitted.

Notes and references have only been included where we judged them necessary
to the text as printed. That there is a greater proportion of notes in the later
section of the book is largely accounted for by an increasing tendency during



Introduction



The aim of this book is to equip the student of modern art and the interested
general reader with a substantial and representative collection of relevant texts,
drawn from a wide variety of sources. The literature of modern art now
constitutes a massive resource, but it is a resource which presents certain
problems to the student who hopes to profit by it. The most immediately evident
of these is difficulty of access. On the one hand the modern development of
art has been a cosmopolitan business, so that its attendant theory has been
extended through a number of different languages. On the other, the decisive
moments of that development have often been reserved from public view, as
likely to be represented in the private letter or the ephemeral journal as the
broadcast manifesto or the printed book. What this means is that for all except
those equipped both with considerable linguistic abilities and with the resources
of a major library, study of the literature of modern art has necessarily been
highly selective. That there exists a prima facie case for a collection such as
the present one has been made clear to us in our own daily work of teaching
and writing about art in the modern period. It has accordingly been our intention
to improve access to the literature of modern art, both by rendering the present
materials more generally available to study and by providing indications of the
nature and location of other relevant publications.

Of course there exist various specialized collections restricted to particular
movements or periods, and to that extent ours has been a task of synthesis.
Nevertheless, it has been an ambitious undertaking, and it cannot be expected
that the outcome will please all people all of the time. We are aware both that
the usefulness of such an enterprise must depend heavily upon the principles
of selection, and that agreement on such principles is by the very nature of the
subject hard to secure. Anyone seeking to represent the theoretical character of
modern art must address two difficult and interconnected questions: how is
modern art to be defined, and how is the field of its relevant interests to be
circumscribed? To consider the extensive literature and the extended history of
modern art is inescapably to feel the force of questions raised in practice,
questions about the definition of art itself, and about the lines of demarcation
between art and that which art is not. It is also to confront questions about the
construction of historical narratives, about the interests which such narratives



2 Introduction



Introduction 3



may be seen to serve and the kinds of exclusion which they involve. And, most
tellingly from the point of view of the present project, it is to confront the
inter-relationship between the one set of questions and the other; between
problems of definition and problems of historical organization. Any history of
art must establish or assume a form of definition of art, while any history of
modern art must establish or assume a definition of modernity. Any address to
these problems will serve to animate a range of questions: where to draw the
line between theory and practice, where to divide art from language or from
literature or from politics, and so on.



Modernism and modern art

Our selection is not intended to resolve these problems. On the contrary, we
mean to suggest that acknowledgement of the openness of a range of open
questions is a condition of any competent study of modern art and of its theory.
But we can at least be explicit about our historical parameters, since these are
largely decided for us by the current state of art-theoretical debate, and
specifically by that interest in the idea of the Postmodern which has developed
since the later 1960s. The period we have aimed to survey, then, coincides with
the life-span of Modernism as a determining if gradually decaying value in the
theory of art. We therefore commence with the end of the nineteenth century,
at a time when modern art was being widely advanced as a form of independent
culture, its critical bearing upon the world secured not by connections of likeness
or of naturalism, but by virtue of the very independence of its values. Art, it
was then proposed, is an exemplary realm. What might be done, seen, experi-
enced within this realm would have a critical bearing upon the actual conditions
of social existence, but only in so far as art maintained a moral independence
from those conditions.

This position, which can be explicitly identified with the tradition of Mod-
ernism, was never to go unopposed in the development of modern art. Speci-
fically, it was to be maintained in tension with the variant commitments of
Realism, according to which the practice of art constitutes a form of participation
or intervention in the social process. If this tension was continual, it was also
subject to continual adjustments. At times during the twentieth century the two
positions appear irreconcilable. At rare moments they appear virtually to coin-
cide. These adjustments are not simply to be read out of the appearances of
art, however. In the history of modern art such commitments to moral autonomy
from or to intervention in wider forms of social life have not always coincided
with the stylistic forms of practice to which propagandists of both persuasions
have frequently tried to reduce them. Such supposed antitheses as 'abstraction'
and 'representation' have seldom been adequate to the task of formulating
relevant distinctions among the determining commitments of modern art, how-
ever familiar they may have become in the literary scaffolding erected around
it.



i



It should be clear, then, that modern art cannot simply be equated with
Modernism. Rather Modernism stands on the one hand for a cluster of
notionally independent values associated with the practice of modern art and
on the other for a particular form of critical representation of the modern in art
- a representation in which the pursuit of art's moral independence is taken to
be decisive. In saying that we aim to survey the literature of modern art during
the life-span of Modernism, then, we mean to acknowledge the historical
significance of this system of values and to assist the reader in coming to
recognize and to understand it. We mean also to acknowledge other positions,
including those explicitly hostile to Modernism both as practice and as repre-
sentation.

For our present purposes, one significant feature of Modernism as a form of
representation is that it assumes certain kinds of relations between art and theory
and between art and language. In the formulation of Clement Greenberg, whose
name is virtually synonymous with Modernist criticism, the development of
modern art has been 'immanent to practice' and never a matter of theory. It
follows that theory must always be post hoc, either in the sense that theoretical
work is work which attempts to follow and to recount those developments which
practice has already initiated, or in the sense that theory is conceived as a form
of privileged insight into the psychology of practice, as when the artist offers
a retrospective account of the intentions behind some already achieved body of
work.

This is a position - indeed an influential form of theory in itself - which
tends to privilege the artist as unquestionable author, and to consign theory to
the apparatus of documentary ratification. But of course artists do not always
do what they intend, nor is what they say they have done always what they
have done. From another perspective 'representations are always built out of
pre-existing cultural resources, and hence have always to be explained as
developments within an ongoing cultural tradition' (Barry Barnes, Interests and
the Growth of Knowledge, London, 1977, p. 19). The functions of a representation
are not to be explained in terms of the intentions of an individual author; rather
they can only properly be understood in terms of the objectives of some social
group. Whether or not it is always appropriate or rewarding, it is clearly possible
to view any and all works of art as representations in this sense. If the meanings
of art are thus conceived as forms of social and historical meaning, there will
be a concomitant shift in what comes up for the count as relevant theory. For
instance, we may find ourselves paying less heed to artists' confessional state-
ments and more to the circulation of ideas in the world which their practices
inhabit. If this is not a Realist view of theory, it is at least a view which is
commensurable with some Realist critiques of Modernism.

In so far as our selection surveys the field of modern art during the currency
of Modernism, then, it has seemed appropriate to represent the tension between
these two ways of conceiving of theory, even to sustain this tension in our own
deliberations. To speak in general terms of the 'theory of modern art', we would
suggest, is to refer to a body of ideas defined by the continuous interaction of
two almost but not quite reciprocal projects: the theoretical critique of art which



4 Introduction

is based on an understanding of historical process, and the understanding of
historical process which is formed by the critical experience of art. The theory
we have aimed to represent, then, could be conceived of as that body of thought
about art which has been conducted under the conditions of this dilemma. By
the same token, we would suggest that if it makes sense to conceive of a
Postmodern form of art theory, then we must be referring to some circumstance
in which this dilemma, though it may be understood in historical terms, is no
longer experienced as an inescapable condition of thought about art.

If an interest in the life-span of Modernism has provided one basis on which
to consider our selection, we have also been fortunate in the resource provided
by our major predecessor in the documentation of modern art theory. Herschel
B. Chipp's Theories of Modern Art was first published in 1968, which is to say
at the zenith of Modernism - or at least of Modernism considered as an
authoritative form of representation of value in modern art. This is not to say,
however, that Chipp's selection of texts simply reflects that authority. Even
with the benefit of hindsight his survey appears relatively catholic. That is
largely why it has for so long maintained its standing as an indispensable
accompaniment to the study of modern art and of its history. Among the artists
and movements given their due by Chipp were some that had been systematically
marginalized by the hardening orthodoxy of a Modernist art history. There were
clear omissions, however, many of them in just those areas which the art history
of the 1970s and 80s was to be most assiduous in exploring. For example, we
have been able to benefit as Chipp could not from substantial recent publication
in the field of Russian art, from a wholesale revision in the art-historical
understanding of the Surrealist movement, from a revival of interest in the
inter-war debates on Realism and avant-gardism, and, perhaps most significantly,
from the growth of a critical self-consciousness about the history of Modernism
itself. Regarding the period since the publication of Theories of Modern Art, the
field is fallow. While there have been numerous collections surveying individual
movements and intellectual fashions, there has been no sustained attempt to
review the late-twentieth-century literature of art as a multifarious extension of
historical concerns. It must be an important function of such an enterprise -
of an enterprise, that is to say, such as the present one - that while volunteering
an ordered account of the recent past it serves also to reorient the earlier history
and to cast a new light on its characteristic themes. It has accordingly been our
aim both to represent the terms of reference on which theoretical debates of
relevance to art took place in the earlier years of this century, and to extend
the surveying of these debates from the post-war settlement up to the present.
This would unquestionably have been a very different and very much more
demanding task without the markers established by Chipp's pioneering work.



Obscurity and the sense of practice

Consideration of the problem of access to the literature of modern art has led
us to a discussion of the conditions of our selection. The reader's approach to



Introduction 5

this literature will normally involve a further problem not unconnected to the
first: the problem of obscurity. The literature of modern art is by no means
uniformly difficult to understand, but much of it is. Obscurity can occasionally
be deliberate, or at least it can sometimes follow from the refusal of specific
concepts and requirements of rationality by artists and their supporters, or -
which may be to say the same thing - from a determined attempt to conscript
language to the purposes of art. A more general reason for difficulty, however,
is that notwithstanding its engagement with historical themes and issues, the
development of modern art has been a highly specialized business. For all the
claims to immediacy and universality of expression which have accompanied
that development, the distinguishing experience of the modern artist has been
in large part an experience of technical problems and possibilities.

The problem of the obscurity of art-theoretical texts is thus not one which
can be altogether overcome in any representative collection. We have preferred
clearer texts to more obscure ones wherever there has been a choice, and we
have included nothing unless we believe its place is earned by virtue of what
it says. This is not a collection of artists' obiter dicta, and no text has been
included simply by virtue of the supposed standing of its author. That said, it
should be acknowledged that among the texts which we have regarded as sure
candidates for inclusion, some just are difficult. On the other hand, though it
must be beyond the scope of a large anthology to render such texts entirely
transparent, we have aimed to establish a context in which their concerns can
at least be located, both as forms of contribution to a developing body of ideas
about art, and as forms of negotiation with a continually changing world. This
is to say that the anthology as a whole is designed to furnish a context within
which each of its component texts may be the better understood.

It needs to be borne in mind, however, that the literature of modern art has
developed as an accompaniment to forms of practice, typically standing as
justification or explanation of that which, by definition, is supposed to be seen.
The practical growth of abstract art, for example, was accompanied by a
considerable proliferation of theory, much of which was intended to establish
the critical character of the appropriate technical procedures and the meaning-
fulness of specific painterly effects. It is a truism that this theory is obscure,
which is to say that its practical character is often hard to recover. If the texts
of Kandinsky, of Malevich or of Mondrian are to make sense, the reader must
sometimes work to imagine a concrete effect which the artist-as-writer once took
to be self-evident. No awareness of the context of debate, however extensive or
acute, will serve to substitute for this work. The reading of art theory needs to
be accompanied by a calling to mind of art itself; and what this requires is not
just recall of the subjects of pictures, but acknowledgement of the distinctive
properties of objects and surfaces. Reproductions may serve as aide-memoire in
this process, but they cannot replace it. This anthology will be of greatest benefit
to those readers who treat it not simply as a resource for the study of art history,
but as an accompaniment to the first-hand experience of modern art.



6 Introduction



Theory in context

There is more to be said about the question of contextualization, for the common
problem of lack of context is the third of the major barriers to the study of
modern art which we have tried to bear in mind in the compilation and
organization of this book. The nature of the problem is not simply that the
literature of art as we encounter it has generally been disconnected from the
actual practice of art, but rather that the study of modern art itself tends often
to be pursued in isolation from the study of history - and never more so than
when it is considered under its theoretical aspect. This tendency has been
aggravated to the extent that art history has been subject to the protocols of
Modernism. Faced with the dilemma mentioned earlier, the Modernist position
has consistently been to affirm the priority of a supposedly empirical aesthetic
experience over a theoretically informed historical understanding. After all, what
use conceiving of a theory of art in the first place if it is not to be distinguished
from political or social theory or from philosophy?

Yet it is a lesson generally well absorbed in recent art history that what may
appear as a specialized dispute over technical issues is often only really com-
prehensible as the specific form of a larger problem. We may need to consider
the surrounding historical context if we are to understand the circumstances
under which that problem was experienced. The different artistic commitments
of Suprematists and Constructivists, for example, follow from different per-
ceptions of the function and direction of cultural activity in Russia during
the revolution and its aftermath. It is from historical conditions such as
these that the technical issues of practice tend to derive their otherwise inex-
plicable gravity. The awareness of history animates the understanding of art,
just as the critical experience of art sophisticates the understanding of historical
process.

It has in fact been one of the principal objects of our enterprise to emancipate
the reader from a form of experience familiar under the cultural regime of
Modernism: that demeaning combination of unrewarded anticipation and unsat-
isified curiosity which can attend on the viewing of works out of context. It
may be the case, as the Modernist connoisseur would claim, that works of art
do indeed 'speak for themselves' to the adequately sensitive, adequately informed
spectator. But the idea needs to be treated with circumspection. It has too often
in the twentieth century been used as justification for treating those lacking in
information as if they were deficient in sensitivity. We believe that a careful
reading of the theories and debates represented in our collection will serve to
discourage too ready an association of art with civility. One history which this
book has to tell is the history of a modern art which was offered and renewed
in critical response to the hostile conditions of what passed for civilization in the
twentieth century. If that critical impulse was at various times sapped, margi-
nalized, accommodated or even bought off, this does not seem to us a good
reason for denying or forgetting it - certainly not in the name of sensitivity,
nor even in the name of the Postmodern.



Introduction 7

These are now the best and worst of times for modern art. What was once
a marginal aspect of the culture of a few metropolitan centres in Western Europe
has effectively achieved the status of the accepted and characteristic art of its
time the world over. This is another of the histories which this book has to
tell: the story of modern art's move from the margins of public notice to the
centre of the cultural economy. After the defeat of Fascism in the Second World
War, only those parts of the world which were organized according to the
principles of state socialism officially resisted modern art. Even in such places
it had subversive, almost mythic status as an index of freedom. In the ideological
hall of mirrors which was the Cold War, an autonomous art was widely broadcast
as metonymic of international capitalism, in the language of freedom versus
totalitarianism. A certain 'Modernistic' representation of modern art, if not
necessarily the creature itself, thus completed the trek from margin to centre;
from outside to inside, from illegitimacy to acceptance.

This acceptance has itself given rise to problems which a book such as this
must attempt to negotiate. In becoming hegemonic, Modernism opened the way
for a widespread critical reappraisal of its own principles and assumptions.
Modernism had always had its Others, but in the West at least their subordinate
status was generally assumed over a long period. During the final quarter of
the century this assumption has been widely questioned. The notion of 'plu-
ralism' has been associated with a loosening of the authority of Modernist
judgements.

That diversification of practice which is subsumed under the notion of
Postmodernism has no doubt been largely animated by a spirit of inquiry. And
yet it has also been accompanied by some reoccupation of positions identified
as conservative in Modernist terms. In one of those paradoxical developments
which seem to mark the recent period, the very success of an art which staked
its claim on independence has appeared to justify a widespread scepticism as to
the possibility of moral autonomy for art; or, to put the matter slightly
differently, as to the possible survival of art as a morally independent cultural
practice. This is difficult ground. At times it seems there is little to mark the
distinction between, on the one hand, the criticism of an autonomy grown
conformist and, on the other, the renewed demand that art serve ends promul-
gated elsewhere in the social spectrum. The determined defenders of the
autonomy of art were at least proof against one distinctive form of twentieth-
century malaise: that species of soft totalitarianism which has a way of creeping
to the fore when there is little that is culturally vivid to disqualify and to
displace it.

As the century draws to a close, and the critique of Modernism in art is
matched by the collapse of much more widespread social ideologies - repre-
sentatives of which were regularly numbered among Modernism's opponents -
we are witness to a curious mixture of confusion and certainty. In attempting
under these circumstances to review the historical narratives of art in theory,
^^Jl^^^^ht ortthe one hand to resist ..the. ado^

for_c^fusion^ on the other to avoid that species of correctness which would
require nothing so much as the abandonment of autonomy at all levels.



8 Introduction



Selection and organization



We should make clear that while it has been our intention to raise the question
of alternative priorities, we have not attempted to arbitrate between them, nor,
in the contrast of views between theory as post hoc explanation and theory as
determining intellectual context, have we meant to privilege one sense of theory
at the expense of the other. This is not to claim that we are ourselves
theoretically unprejudiced, however. We are as thoroughly inscribed in the
indices of commitment as any of those whom we have presumed to represent.
This inscription is not merely a matter of orientation with respect to the
circumscribed history of art, but of an inscription within history writ large, and
it has no doubt been a force in the composition of the book.

Art in Theory is intended to represent the art theory of the twentieth century
as we conceive it, and thus not primarily to represent the positions of individ-
uals. So far as possible we have made our selection with the wider field in mind.
That is to say, we have been more concerned to represent a body of ideas than
to assemble a corpus of artistic authors, or to do full justice to specific careers.
Indeed we have intended no form of a priori discrimination between authors.
A text is a text whether the writer or speaker be a practising artist, a critic, a
philosopher or a political figure. Though a number of art historians figure among
those included, this is decidely not an anthology of art-historical work. We have
excluded texts which are clearly retrospective, except where it can be said that
the retrospect has served to enable or to prescribe a significant practical direction
- as did various forms of classical revival in the period immediately following
the First World War.

Not all the texts we have included were written with art specifically in mind.
On the other hand we would claim that each of them represents some aspect
of the diverse intellectual materials from which modern art has been made. This
claim also implies a limit. We have not meant to trespass far from the ground
of high art and its attendant theories. We have not seen it as our business to
engage directly with architecture or with design, though both were profoundly
implicated with much theorization of art during the 1920s and 1930s. Nor have
we been primarily concerned with the varieties of popular cultural forms, with
films, television, advertisements and so forth, though these have lately been
much theorized with a rigour previously reserved for accredited 'fine' art, often
by writers who have taken the discipline of art history as a starting point. These
limitations are imposed not out of any intentional spirit of conservatism, but
out of conviction that for any manageable collection to emerge, its focus must
be restricted. This restriction is signalled in our title. It is art we are concerned
with, and the theory it is made of; not the culture it is made of, nor the theory
of the culture.

On the other hand, with the importance of context in mind, the anthology
has been designed as a whole so as to encourage inquiry into the relations
between artistic issues and historical changes. We have divided the material into
eight chronological sections: four for the period from the turn of the century



Introduction 9

to the Second World War, and four for the period since. These overall sections
contain the cross-currents of debate, indeed of outright conflict on occasion, as
to the proper role and concerns of art. Each section is introduced with an essay
outlining major practical developments and theoretical concerns during the
relevant period and where appropriate relating these to the wider, principally
political and economic, forces at work in the contemporary world. Within each
of these main sections texts are then grouped under broadly thematic subhead-
ings. Within each subheading the arrangement is generally chronological - the
exceptions being where we have grouped a number of texts under a common
author, or where we have meant to preserve a sequence of argument or a
geographical connection. Each individual text is then provided with a brief
introduction, specifying the original occasion of its publication and where
appropriate explaining its connection to contemporary events and controversies.
A given text may thus be read for its independent content, as a moment in the
development of a specific body of argument, or as a possible instance of a larger
tendency or body of concerns within a broad historical period.

The practice of modern art has never been untheoretical or without principles,
even when these latter have turned on the importance of spontaneity or of
freedom of choice. We have not aimed to represent art in theory as a rational
and ordered business, however. Though settlements occur in time they can often
not be recognized as such until after their time has passed. Nor would we be
wise to assume the pedagogic powers of history as ordering principles. It is part
of the present meltdown that reason and history are themselves contested as the
relevant criteria of intellectual commitments. There is a need, however, for the
arguments of the past to be made present, in order that they can be learned
from. Walter Benjamin once expressed the desire to produce a book which would
be composed entirely of quotations. In a similar spirit, we have tried to refrain
from prescriptive ordering and to be inclusive. But we cannot entirely dispense
with the supplement: ordering principles are unavoidable if there is to be sense
at all. It is within the considerable limits of editorial obligation that we have
aimed to let the diverse histories of modern art, and of some of its opponents,
speak for themselves.



Charles Harrison

Paul Wood

March 1992



Part I

The Legacy of
Symbolism



I

Introduction



At the turn of the century, to think of modern art was to think of modern
French art. This was not because all modern art was French, but rather because
France was the acknowledged source of those critical concepts and practical
distinctions to which artists of other countries referred when they intended to
mark their own work as modern. The artistic culture of late-nineteenth-century
France was rich and diverse. In the mid-century the authority of an academic
tradition, already interrupted by revolution and complicated by the career
of Jacques-Louis David, had been further challenged by the Realist work of
Gustave Courbet and by the connection of that Realism to the revolutions of
1848. Edouard Manet was no revolutionary, but his pursuit of Realist aims in
the 1860s took effect in that palpable self-consciousness about the social forms
of modernity on the one hand, and the practical means and conditions of
representation on the other, which was subsequently to be defined as Modern-
ism. And in the early 1870s - the time of the Franco-Prussian war and of the
formation and suppression of the Paris Commune - those who were to be called
the Impressionists converged on the project of a modern Naturalism. In the
normal history of modern art the Impressionist movement is established as the
prototype for avant-gardism in modern art. This status was achieved not as a
consequence of explicit radicalism on the part of the artists involved, but rather
because there were several of them, and because a conservative resistance rallied
vociferously, though in the end ineffectually, against their project.

Realism, Naturalism, modernity, avant-gardism; these concepts and the forms
of nineteenth-century French art associated with them were to be substantial
points of reference - positive or negative - for the artists and supporters of the
early-twentieth-century movements. The relations between these concepts had
been subject to various forms of transformation, however. Increasingly after the
mid-1880s, the modern was a contested value. The issues at stake are revealed
in the alternative conceptions of the Impressionist project and its legacy which
were prevalent at the turn of the century. On the one hand it was seen as a
continuing Realist tendency modernized by the adoption of a luminous technique
(a view of Impressionism broadly consistent with the work of Camille Pissarro);
on the other it was associated with intensification of the autonomous effects of
art, and thus seen as tending towards abstraction. (A view of Claude Monet's



14 The Legacy of Symbolism

work along these lines had a decisive effect on the Russian Wassily Kandinsky,
according to the latter's own testimony.) The changing interpretations to which
Paul Cezanne's work was subject in the years between 1885 and 1910 testify to
the continuing problems experienced in characterizing his 'Post-Impressionism',
as Roger Fry was to term it in the latter year.

The view of Impressionism as tending towards abstraction is consistent with
the position of the Symbolists, in whose regard the once-binding association
between Realism and avant-gardism was transformed into a relationship of
virtual antithesis. Symbolism was the avant-garde position of the later 1880s
and 1890s. The continuing force of its aesthetic theory can be recognized in
twentieth-century deliberations on modern art in France and elsewhere, in the
form of a deep and prevalent strain of idealism. The importance of this theory
lay in its welding together of a claim for the autonomy of language and art as
symbol systems, with a claim for the value of aesthetic experience and artistic
insight. In Symbolist theory the meaning of a painting is not in principle any
more firmly secured by its resemblance to features of the real world than the
meaning of a poem is secured by some independent causal connection between
its various words and the objects those words happen to signify. In each case,
it is the internal relations between the parts that secures the possibility of
meaning and effect for the whole. Such ideas are nowadays the commonplaces
of linguistic and semantic theory. But they remained controversial from the end
of the nineteenth century until late into the twentieth. Wherever the effect of
these ideas was felt on thought about the arts during this period, the matter of
their reception or rejection served more decisively than any other single factor
to mark the division between moderns and conservatives.

To this understanding of the autonomy of form, the Symbolists joined a
critique of the value of objective perception as a means to knowledge of reality,
asserting instead the priority of a disinterested but subjective intuition. Thus
Paul Gauguin, who once exhibited with the Impressionists, is to be found at
the turn of the century defending himself against criticism of the 'abstraction'
of his painting with the assertion that it is 'not a material structure', but rather
a 'vision' interpreted 'in an appropriate decor' (Ia3). The identification of art
with intuition was to be given a philosophical exposition in the aesthetics of
Benedetto Croce (Ib14), while considerable support for the Symbolists' emphasis
on the significance of the 'inner life' was to come from work in the new field
of psychoanalysis. Freud was working in Paris in the late 1880s and his
Interpretation of Dreams was published in 1900 (see Ia4).

It remained only to re-establish the Romantic claim that artists are distin-
guished as such by the relative vividness of their inner life and the relative
strength of their intuitions. The 'abstractions' of the artist could then be
advanced as the significant forms of an underlying and enduring reality, their
critical potential all the greater for their emancipation from the merely apparent
and contingent realities of the physical and social world (see IaI). Adoption of
such ideas inevitably entailed disparagement of Naturalist and Realist techniques
for their supposed subservience to the merely superficial. Thus Cezanne's
injunction to Emile Bernard to 'treat nature by means of the cylinder, the sphere,



I Introduction 15

the cone' (Ia6) was seized on not as an instruction in basic modelling, but as
a sign that the older painter's enterprise involved seeing through the accidental
forms of nature to an underlying world of geometrical constants.

In fact, as implied earlier, Cezanne's work resists explanation in terms of an
antithesis between Naturalism and Symbolism. Rather, it serves as demonstra-
tion that a commitment to nature as the origin of sensation can be maintained
in face of a commitment to the decorative autonomy of the painted surface, if
by no means with ease, then certainly with critically remarkable results.

Cezanne's rigour was exceptional, however, and the lessons of his painting
were not easily learned. It was widely assumed among the avant-garde factions
of the early twentieth century that attention to the specific details of the natural
world was inconsistent with fulfilment of the expressive potential of art. As the
form of the modern arts which was most clearly both expressive and abstract -
which is to say free from the requirements of description - music came to be
seen as the type of all the others. Around the turn of the century, musical
theories of expression and composition were adopted as means to the advance-
ment of architecture and painting. (Hence, in large part, the importance of
Richard Wagner and of his theories to the artists of the avant-garde at the turn
of the century.) August Endell and Kandinsky were among those for whom the
apparently 'universal' expressiveness of music held out the possibility of an
abstract visual art, its validity secured not by reference to the appearances of
the material world, but rather by the supposed basicness of certain formal
principles on the one hand and by the promptings of 'inner necessity' on the
other (iBl and IB7-8).

In Naturalist theories the effect of the work of art was supposed to be traceable
back into the world. That it had its origin in that world - in some direct
experience of it - was the guarantee of the work's authenticity. In forms of
theory subject to the gravitational pull of Symbolism, on the other hand, the
effects of art were signs of the authenticity of an inner life; they were
understood, that is to say, as originating in the mind or soul of the artist. There
were some clear implications of this position. With the abandonment of natur-
alistic correspondence as a criterion, a premium was placed on the strength and
authenticity of individual responses and feelings. A requirement of vividness of
expression tended to supplant the traditional requirement of accuracy of de-
scription. 'What I am after, above all, is expression,' Henri Matisse wrote in
1908, and he made it quite clear that he saw pursuit of the ends of expression
as justifying anv liberties he might take with the appearances of people or objects
(IB5).

There was a further important corollary to the increasing relaxation of the
requirements of Naturalism, This development in modern artistic theory coin-
cided in the later nineteenth and early twentieth centuries with a rapid growth
of anthropological study and collection, as scholars and curators sought to make
sense of the various appropriations of empire. For those already engaged with
modern art, the association of formal expressiveness with authenticity led to
substantial revaluation of the generally non-naturalistic images produced by
tribal cultures. Recognition of the formal inventiveness - the originality - of



16 The Legacy of Symbolism

such images involved a reconsideration of their supposed primitivism. Or rather,
the concept of the primitive was subject during the period in question to a
virtual reversal of its traditional critical function. Formerly a term of disparage-
ment, it came to be used as a measure of vitality, of authenticity and of
originality. Following the example of Gauguin, modern artists now claimed
kinship with their supposedly unsophisticated counterparts in pursuit of the
authentic grounds of feeling and expression hidden behind the veil of appear-
ances. By the first decade of the century, conviction of the authentic expressive
power of so-called primitive art had become an item of avant-garde faith,
proclaimed by artists and critics in France, Germany, Russia and England (see,
for instance, Ia3, IB9-11, 13, 15-16). Maintenance of this faith undoubtedly
involved a degree of idealization and abstraction of the art of the colonized
cultures, which is to say that those involved in appreciation of the objects in
question generally paid scant regard to the conditions of their production. On
the other hand it can be said that this appreciation entailed a considerable
questioning of those measures of skill and sophistication by which the relative
authority of European art had previously been established. One important
consequence of such theoretical work as Wilhelm Worringer's was that it served
to revise the grounds on which comparisons might be made between the art
forms of different cultures and epochs (Ib4).

The critical revaluation of the European tradition was in general an important
aspect of early twentieth-century avant-gardism. The supporters of the modern
movements reviewed the art of the past in the light of their present enthusiasms,
recasting the terms in which it had previously been conceptualized and valued.
Thus, for example, the understanding of 'classicism' was divorced by Maurice
Denis and Roger Fry from its traditional association with a canon of literary
and mythologizing subjects and reinterpreted in furtherance of the perceived
commitments of the modern: on the one hand to signify the concentration of
original feeling in visual form, and on the other to suggest that pursuit of such
concentration had been the persistent preoccupation of the Western tradition -
indeed, that it was the true function of the art of all ages and periods. The
defence of a historically-specific modern movement thus took on the character
of a universalizing aesthetic system (see Ib6, 15 and 16).






IA

Classicism and Originality



1 Teodor de Wyzewa (1862-1914) 'Wagnerian Painting'

Wyzewa was Polish by birth but worked in Paris as a leading critic and theorist of the
Symbolist movement, close to Mallarme. His essay anticipates the development of
abstract art and of later formalist theories. Among the typically Symbolist themes which
will recur in later Modernist theory are the idea that art is the means of access to 'the
higher reality of a disinterested life', and the (Wagnerian) belief in a possible fusion of
the various arts. Published as 1'Art wagnerien: la peinture', in No$ Maitres, Paris, 1895,
pp. 11-26, based on an earlier version printed in May 1886 in La revue wagnerienne,
which the author helped to edit. The present version is translated and edited from the
1895 text by Richard Hobbs and Paul Smith.

I

[. . .] The world we live in, which we declare real, is purely a creation of our
soul. The mind cannot go outside itself; and the things it believes to be outside
it are only its ideas. To see, to hear, is to create appearances within oneself,
thus to create Life. But the baneful habit of creating the same things has made
us lose the joyful awareness of our own creative power; we thought real the
dreams we gave birth to, and also this inner self, limited by objects and subject
to them, that we had conceived.

Consequently, we have been the slaves of the world, and the sight of this
world, where we engaged our interests, has since ceased to give us pleasure.
And the Life which we had created - created in order to give us the joy of
creating - has lost its original character. It is necessary therefore to recreate it;
one must build, over and above this world of defiled, habitual appearances, the
holy world of a better life: better, because we can make it intentionally, and
know that we make it. This is the very business of Art.

But from where will the artist take the elements of this higher life? He can
find them nowhere unless in our normal life, in what we call Reality. This is
to say that the artist, and those to whom he wants to communicate the life that
he creates, cannot, as a result of what their minds normally do, erect a living
work of art in their souls, unless it presents itself to them under the very
conditions in which they have always perceived life.



18 The Legacy of Symbolism

And so, this explains the necessity of realism in art; not a realism which
transcribes the vain appearances that we think real, with no other end, but an
artistic realism, which tears these appearances from the false reality of interest
where we perceive them, in order to transport them into the higher reality of
a disinterested life. We see around us trees, animals, men, and we assume they
are living; but, seen in this way, they are only vain shadows which drape the
shifting decor of our vision. They will only live when the artist, in whose special
soul they have a more intense reality, inspires them with this higher life -
recreates them before us.

* * *

... as minds become more refined, Art requires increasingly more diverse
methods than those operative in reality to suggest the same life. Thus, a polychrome
statue resembles the models it has reproduced too much in its material. [ . . . ]

And so again, a drama, when read, will appear more alive to delicate souls
than the same drama played in a theatre by living actors. In order to preserve the
feelings of art, we have an ever more urgent need that the impressions of life
should be given us, in the life of art, by means other than those of real life.

Painting responds to this need. The means it employs to suggest sensations
to us artistically differ entirely from the means employed by reality. For the
colours and lines in a painting are not reproductions of the quite different lines
and colours which are in reality; they are only conventional signs which have
become equivalent to what they signify as the result of an association between
the images. But they are just as different, finally, from real colours and lines
as a word differs from a thought, or a musical note from the emotion it suggests.

* * *

A few outstanding masters, their eyes endowed with an almost pathological
sensitivity, accustomed artists to seeing objects surrounded by the air that bathed
them. From that moment, the vocabulary of painting became modified; new
signs were introduced which created new sensations [ . . . ] .

II

Painting, Literature and Music each suggest just one mode of life. But life exists
in the intimate union of these three modes. Soon, their art must have appeared
to painters, as it did to writers, to be insufficient to create the whole life which
they conceived. Therefore, long ago they wanted to expand the possibilities of
their art, to employ it to reconstitute diverse forms of life. For example, writers
noticed that words, over and above their precise conceptual meaning, had
assumed special resonances for the ear, and that syllables had become musical
tones, as had the rhythms of the sentence. Then, they attempted a new art:
poetry. They employed words no longer for their conceptual value, but as
sonorous syllables evoking emotion in the soul by means of their harmonious
alliance.

The same need to translate the life of the emotions with the means of their
art very quickly drove painters to go beyond the limits of reproducing their
sensations in a wholly realistic way.



Ia Classicism and Originality 19

And a new kind of painting was attempted by them, one which a happy
agreement of circumstances made possible. This is to say that colours and lines
themselves, like words, had also, through familiarity, assumed for souls an
emotional value independent of the objects they represented. We had always
seen a certain facial expression, a certain colour or certain contours accompany
the objects which inspired us with such-and-such an emotion. And behold, these
colours, these contours and these expressions, are linked with these emotions
in our soul; they have become not just signs of our visual sensations, but signs
of our emotions also; they have become, by the accident of this connection,
emotional signs, like the syllables of poetry or musical notes. And so, certain
painters were able to leave behind the original purpose of Art, which was to
suggest the precise sensations of sight. They employed colours and lines for
purely symphonic compositional ends, with no regard for the direct depiction
of a visual object. And nowadays, colours and lines - the means of painting -
can be used in two quite different kinds of painting: the one sensuous and
descriptive which recreates exactly how objects look; the other emotional and
musical, neglectful of treating the objects these colours and lines represent,
using them only as signs of emotion, marrying them in such a way as to produce
in us, by their free play, a complete impression comparable to that of a
symphony, f . . . ]

Therefore, emotional painting, as well as descriptive painting, has a legitimate
right to exist, and possesses the value of an art which is equally precious. [ . . . ]
Its first master was the poetic Leonardo da Vinci. He gave us the emotion of
lascivious terror through the mystery of perverse and supernatural expressions.
Later, . . . Peter Paul Rubens created the most intense symphonies of colour.
[ . . . ] Whereas with Rembrandt, [ . . . ] [we find] a supernatural play of chia-
roscuro which creates an emotion which is at once more troubled and more
restrained. Afterwards, Watteau translated elegant melancholy: he devoted the
delightful grace of his drawings to light-hearted and sweet poems which seem
to recall certain andante movements in Mozart's quartets. And in turn, Delacroix
was the lyricist of violent passions, a little vulgar in their romanticism.

All these masters have proved that painting could equally well be descriptive
of real sensations, or suggestive of real emotions. Only, they have intuited that
these two possibilities demanded two quite different kinds of art, and that they
had to choose one or the other, following their natural inclinations. Today, the
necessity of making a choice is even more vital. [. . .]

Ill

[ . . . ] With admirable candour and the prestigiousness of an incomparable visual
subtlety, M. Monet completes the work of two sincere and powerful masters,
M. Manet and M. Cezanne, and analyses the mobile play of nuances of light.
[... .] We have seen the most elusive secrets of movement and of life captured
by M. Degas. However, emotional painting elaborates and modifies its symphonic
procedures under a flood of more complex emotions. M. Gustave Moreau . . .
delights in the harmonious arrangement of scintillating gems. M. Odilon Redon,



20 The Legacy of Symbolism

in bizarre landscapes, attempts a new kind of creation of desolate terror. [. . .]
And, isolated from these painters as from others, M. Renoir, the greatest genius,
the only real genius among them, expresses sincerely the sweet, ingenuous
dreams of a childlike soul, in interplays of colour as delightful as songs or
caresses. He is alone today in gaining inspiration only from himself, alone in
having at the bottom of his heart a strong enough voice that the noises of the
outside world do not prevent him from hearing it.

And so, while the banality of fashionable formulas wafts out of the Salons,
elsewhere there is a splendid blossoming of works by these masters. [ . . . ] And
yet, all too soon, the engulfing tide of democracy will reach their refuges, and
the sons of these artists . . . will renounce the vain cares of an art already without
clients. The day is coming when finally the democratic and egalitarian art of
universal suffrage will dominate.

2 Paul Signac (1863-1935) from Eugene Delacroix to
Neo-Impressionism

The author was a painter closely involved with the Neo-tmpressionist or Divisionist
tendency. His book was of particular importance in formulating approaches to colour
and to expression developed among late-nineteenth-century French painters and in
transmitting a body of theory to a subsequent generation. His concept of the practice
of art as knowledge employed in the service of sensation was to be taken up by the
Fauves. Originally published as D'Eugene De/acro/x au neo-impressionisme, Edition de
la Revue Blanche, Paris, June 1899. The present extracts are translated from pp. 74-5,
89-94 and 137-8 of the new edition, ed. F. Cachin, Paris, 1964.

For half a century Delacroix tried hard to achieve more brightness and lumi-
nosity, thereby displaying to the colourists who would succeed him the path to
follow and the goal to attain. He still left them much to do, but thanks to his
contribution and his teaching, their task was made easier.

He proved to them all the advantages of a sound technique, of planning and
logic, not hindering the passion for painting but strengthening it.

He gave them the secret of the laws governing colour: the harmony of
similarities, the analogy of opposites.

He showed them how a unified and dull colour scheme is inferior to the
colour produced by the vibrations of different combinations of elements.

He secured for them the resources of optical blending, which gives rise to
new colours.

He advised them to banish dark, dull and drab colours as much as possible.

He taught them that it is possible to modify and reduce a colour without
tarnishing it with mixtures on the palette.

He showed them the moral influence of colour which could contribute to the
effect of the painting; he initiated them into the aesthetic language of colours
and tones.

He incited them to dare everything, never to fear that their harmonies might
be too colourful.




Ia Classicism and Originality 21

The powerful creator is equally the great educator; his teaching is as precious
as his work.

Nevertheless it must be acknowledged that the paintings of Delacroix, despite
his efforts and his knowledge, are not as light nor as coloured as the paintings
of his followers. The Entrance of the Crusaders appears dark beside The Luncheon
of the Boating Party by Renoir and Circus by Seurat. Delacroix seized the
Romantic palette, overloaded with colours, some brilliant, others, too numerous,
earthy and dark; everything it could give him.

He could not have had a more perfect instrument to suit his ideal. In order
to create this instrument, he had only to exclude from his palette the darker
colours which were a useless encumbrance. He did violence to them in order
to extract from them some brightness, but he never dreamt of painting only
with the pure and virtual colours of the prism.

This progress had to be made by another generation: that of the Impression-
ists.

Everything is both connected to and develops from its own time: first one
complicates, then one simplifies. If the Impressionists simplified the palette, if
they achieved greater colour and luminosity, it is thanks to the investigations
of the Romantic master and his struggles with the complicated palette.
* * *

It was in 1886, at the last of the exhibitions of the Impressionist group, that
works appeared for the first time that were painted solely with pure, separated
and balanced colours, mixing optically according to a rational method.

Georges Seurat, who instigated this step forward, exhibited there the first
separated painting. A Sunday on the Grande-Jatte was a decisive canvas which
testified to the very rare qualities of the painter; grouped around him were
Camille Pissarro, his son Lucien Pissarro and Paul Signac, who also exhibited
works painted in a more or less similar technique.

The unexpected vividness and harmony of these innovators' paintings was
immediately noticed, if not exactly welcomed. These qualities were thanks to
the fundamental principles of separation. Since then, this technique has not
stopped developing, thanks to the research and contributions of Henri-Edmond
Cross, Albert Dubois-Pillet, Maximilien Luce, Hippolyte Petitjean, Theo van
Rysselberghe, Henry van de Velde and others; this is in spite of cruel deaths,
of attacks and desertions. [. . .]

If these painters, who would be better described by the epithet Chromo-Lumi-
naristes, adopted the name Neo-Impressionists, this was not to court success (the
Impressionists were still in full flight), but to pay homage to the efforts of their
precursors, and to emphasize in spite of the differences, the common aim: light
and colour. It is in this sense that the title Neo~Impressionist must be understood,
for the technique used by these painters is not at all impressionistic; to the
extent that that of their precursors was based on instinct and the instantaneous,
theirs was by contrast based on reflection and the permanent.

The Neo-Impressionists, like the Impressionists, only had pure colours on
their palette. But they totally repudiated any mixing of colours on the palette,
except, of course, the mixing of colours which were contiguous in the chromatic



22 The Legacy of Symbolism

circle. These, shaded off between each other and lightened with white, tend to
reinstate the various colours of the solar spectrum and all their tones. An orange
mixed with a yellow and a red, a violet shading into red and blue, a green
passing from blue to yellow, are, together with white, the only elements they
used. But, by the optical blending of these pure colours, and by varying their
proportions, they obtained an infinite quantity of colours, from the most intense
to the most grey.

They not only banished from their palettes any mixed colours, they also
avoided spoiling the purity of their colours by putting contrary ones together
on a canvas. Every touch made purely on the palette remains pure on the canvas.

As they used colours prepared with more brilliant powders, and more sump-
tuous materials, these painters could claim that their luminosity and coloration
surpassed that of the Impressionists, who had darkened and spoiled the pure
colours of the simplified palette.

It is not enough for the technique of separation to assure, by the mixture of
pure optical elements, a maximum of luminosity and coloration; it guarantees
the integral harmony of the work by the proportion and balance of these
elements, depending on the rules of contrast, shading and radiance.

These rules, which the Impressionists observed infrequently and instinctively,
are always rigorously applied by the Neo-Impressionists. It is a precise and
scientific method, which does not enfeeble sensation, but guides and protects it.

It would seem that the first question confronting the painter in front of a blank
canvas is the decision as to which curves and patterns will divide the surface,
which colours and tones should cover it. Quite an infrequent worry at a time
when most paintings are instantaneous photographs or useless illustrations.

To reproach the Impressionists for having neglected these concerns would be
puerile, for their obvious plan was to seize the patterns and harmonies of nature,
as they presented themselves, without any concern for order and combination.
'The Impressionist sits on the bank of a river,' said their critic Theodore Duret,
'and paints that which he sees before him.' They proved that, in this way, one
could create marvels.

The Neo-Impressionist, following the advice of Delacroix, will not begin a
canvas without having finalized the composition. Guided by tradition and by
science, he will harmonize the composition with his idea; that is to say, he will
adapt the lines (directions and angles), the light and dark (tones), the colours
(pigments) to the character he wants. The dominance of the lines would be
horizontal for calm, ascending for joy and descending for sadness, with all the
intermediate lines used to depict all the other sensations in their infinite variety.
A polychromatic interplay, no less expressive and diverse, joins with this linear
interplay: corresponding to the ascending lines are warm colours and clear tones;
with the descending lines, cold colours and dark tones predominate; a more or less
perfect balance of warm and cold colours, of pale and intense tones is added to the
calm of the horizontal lines. Thus submitting colour and line to the emotion he
felt and wants to translate, the painter does the work of the poet, of the creator.

In a general way, it is possible to admit that a Neo-Impressionist work is
more harmonious than an Impressionist one. Firstly, thanks to the constant



Ia Classicism and Originality 23

observation of contrast, the harmony of detail in it is more precise. Secondly
thanks to the rational composition and to the aesthetic language of the colours,
it leads to a harmony of the whole and a moral harmony with which the
Impressionist work is deliberately unconcerned.

# * #

It is perhaps easy to paint more luminously than the Neo-Impressionists, but
you would lose colour; you can have more colour, but at the cost of darkening.
Their colour is located in the middle of the radius of the chromatic circle which
goes from the centre - white - to the circumference - black. This location
assures it the maximum saturation of power and beauty. A time will come when
one discovers such a combination either from using a better type of colour than
those which the painter has now, or from using better substances, or new
processes like the direct application of light rays on sensitized surfaces; but it
must be admitted that it was the Neo-Impressionists who knew how to exploit
the current resources, rendering them at once more luminous and more coloured.
Next to one of their paintings, and despite the criticisms which they still
encounter, any painting, however great its artistic qualities, will appear dark or
lacking in colour. It must be understood that we do not want a painter's talent
to depend on how much light and colour there is in his paintings; we know
that with white and black one can create masterpieces and one can paint with
colour and light without merit. But if this research into colour and light is not
the whole of art, is it not at least one of the most important parts? Is he not
an artist who endeavours to create unity in the variety of rhythms of pigments
and tones, and who employs his knowledge in the service of his sensations?

Remembering the phrase of Delacroix: 'Cowardly painting is the painting of
a coward', the Neo-Impressionists could be proud of their austere and simple
painting. And if it is passion that makes artists, rather than technique, they can
be confident: they have the fertile passion of light, of colour and of harmony.

In any case, they will not have repeated that which had been done before;
they will have the risky honour of having produced a new way, of expressing
a personal ideal.

They can develop, but always on the bases of purity and of contrast; they
knew the importance and charm of these too well ever to renounce them.
Gradually freed from the hindrances of their beginnings, the technique of
separation, which permitted them to express their dreams in colour, became
more supple and advanced, promising even more fertile resources.

And if there is no artist among them whose genius allows him to develop
this technique further, at least they have simplified his task. The triumphant
colourist has only to appear: his palette has been prepared for him.



3 Paul Gauguin (1848-1903) Letter to Fontainas

Written from Tahiti in March 1899, in response to published criticism by Andre Fontainas
of Gauguin's painting Whence do we come? What are we? Where are we going? Fontainas
had objected that 'abstractions are not communicated through concrete images unless,



24 The Legacy of Symbolism

in the artist's own mind, they have already taken shape in some natural allegory which
gives them life'. Original published in A. Fontainas intra., Lettres de Paul Gauguin a Andre
Fontainas, Paris, 1921. The present translation is taken from J. Rewald, Paul Gauguin:
Letters to Ambroise Vollard and Andre Fontainas, San Francisco, 1943, pp. 21-4.

Un grand sommeil noir
Tombe sur ma vie
Dormez, tout espoir
Dormez, toute envie.

Verlaine



Monsieur Fontainas,

In the January number of the Mercure de France, you have two interesting
articles, 'Rembrandt' and The Vollard Gallery.' In the latter you mention me.
In spite of your dislike you have tried to make an honest study of the art or
rather the work of a painter who has no emotional effect upon you. A rare
phenomenon among critics.

I have always [thought] that it was the duty of a painter never to answer
criticisms, even hostile ones - especially hostile ones; nor flattering ones, either,
because those are often dictated by friendship.

This time, without departing from my habitual reserve, I have an irresistible
desire to write to you, a caprice if you will, and - like all emotional people -
I am not good at resisting. Since this is merely a personal letter it is not a real
answer but simply a chat on art; your article prompts and evokes it.

We painters, we who are condemned to penury, accept the material difficulties
of life without complaining, but we suffer from them insofar as they constitute
a hindrance to work. How much time we lose in seeking our daily bread! The
most menial tasks, dilapidated studios, and a thousand other obstacles. All these
create despondency, followed by impotence, rage, violence. Such things do not
concern you at all, I mention them only to convince both of us that you have
good reason to point out numerous defects, violence, monotony of tone, clashing
colors, etc. Yes, all these probably exist, do exist. Sometimes however they are
intentional. Are not these repetitions of tones, these monotonous color harmonies
(in the musical sense) analogous to oriental chants sung in a shrill voice, to the
accompaniment of pulsating notes which intensify them by contrast? Beethoven
uses them frequently (as I understand it) in the 'Sonata Pathetique,' for example.
Delacroix too with his repeated harmonies of brown and dull violet, a sombre
cloak suggesting tragedy. You often go to the Louvre; with what I have said in
mind, look closely at Cimabue.

Think also of the musical role color will henceforth play in modern painting.
Color, which is vibration just as music is, is able to attain what is most universal
yet at the same time most elusive in nature: its inner force.

Here near my cabin, in complete silence, amid the intoxicating perfumes of
nature, I dream of violent harmonies. A delight enhanced by I know not what
sacred horror I divine in the infinite. An aroma of long-vanished joy that I
breathe in the present. Animal figures rigid as statues, with something inde-



Ia Classicism and Originality 25

scribably solemn and religious in the rhythm of their pose, in their strange
immobility. In eyes that dream, the troubled surface of an unfathomable enigma.

Night is here. All is at rest. My eyes close in order to see without actually
understanding the dream that flees before me in infinite space; and I experience
the languorous sensation produced by the mournful procession of my hopes.

In praise of certain pictures that I considered unimportant you exclaim: 'if
only Gauguin were always like that!' But I don't want to be always like that.

'In the large panel that Gauguin exhibits there is nothing that explains the
meaning of the allegory.' Yes, there is: my dream is intangible, it comprises no
allegory; as Mailarme said, 'It is a musical poem, it needs no libretto.' Conse-
quently the essence of a work, unsubstantial and out of reach, consists precisely
of 'that which is not expressed; it flows by implication from the lines without
color or words; it is not a material structure.'

Standing before one of my pictures of Tahiti, Mailarme also remarked: 'It is
amazing that one can put so much mystery in so much brilliance.'

To go back to the panel: the idol is there not as a literary symbol but as a
statue, yet perhaps less of a statue than the animal figures, less animal also,
combining my dream before my cabin with all nature, dominating our primitive
soul, the unearthly consolation of our sufferings to the extent that they are
vague and incomprehensible before the mystery of our origin and of our future.

And all this sings with sadness in my soul and in my design while I paint
and dream at the same time with no tangible allegory within my reach - due
perhaps to a lack of literary education.

Awakening with my work finished, I ask myself: 'Whence do we come? What
are we? Where are we going?' A thought which has no longer anything to do
with the canvas, expressed in words quite apart on the wall which surrounds
it. Not a title but a signature.

You see, although I understand very well the value of words - abstract and
concrete - in the dictionary, I no longer grasp them in painting. I have tried
to interpret my vision in an appropriate decor without recourse to literary means
and with all the simplicity the medium permits: a difficult job. You may say
that I have failed, but do not reproach me for having tried, nor should you
advise me to change my goal, to dally with other ideas already accepted,
consecrated. Puvis de Chavannes is the perfect example. Of course Puvis
overwhelms me with his talent and experience, which I lack; I admire him as
much as you do and more, but for entirely different reasons (and - don't be
annoyed - with more understanding). Each of us belongs to his own period.

The government is right not to give me an order for a decoration for a public
building which might clash with the ideas of the majority, and it would be even
more reprehensible for me to accept it, since I should have no alternative but
to cheat or lie to myself.

At my exhibition at Durand Ruel's [1893] a young man who didn't understand
my pictures asked Degas to explain them to him. Smiling, he recited a fable
by La Fontaine. 'You see,' he said, 'Gauguin is the thin wolf without the collar'
[that is, he prefers liberty with starvation to servitude with abundance - John
Rewald].



26 The Legacy of Symbolism

After fifteen years of struggle we are beginning to free ourselves from the
influence of the Academy, from all this confusion of formulas apart from which
there has been no hope of salvation, honor, or money: drawing, color compo-
sition, sincerity in the presence of nature, and so on. Only yesterday some
mathematician [Charles Henry] tried to prove to us that we should use un-
changeable light and color.

Now the danger is past. Yes, we are free, and yet I still see another danger
flickering on the horizon; I want to discuss it with you. This long and boring
letter has been written with only that in view. Criticism of today, when it is
serious, intelligent, full of good intentions, tends to impose on us a method of
thinking and dreaming which might become another bondage. Preoccupied with
what concerns it particularly, its own field, literature, it will lose sight of what
concerns us, painting. If that is true, I shall be impertinent enough to quote
Mallarme: 4 A critic is someone who meddles with something that is none of his
business.*

In his memory will you permit me to offer you this sketch of him, hastily
dashed off, a vague recollection of a beautiful and beloved face, radiant, even
in the shadows. Not a gift but an appeal for the indulgence I need for my
foolishness and violence.



4 Sigmund Freud (1856-1939) from 'On Dreams'

Freud was the founder of psychoanalysis, and his theories were instrumental in forming
modern concepts of human nature and human motivation. His writings on dreams and
on the unconscious changed traditional ideas about the origins of visual imagery and
added a new dimension to the problems of its interpretation. The essay from which the
present extracts are taken was first published in Grenzfragen des Nerven- undSeelen-
/ebens, Wiesbaden, 1901, as a summary of his longer work The Interpretation of
Dreams, published in 1900. The present translation is taken from J. Strachey (ed), The
Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, London,
1953-74.



VI

It is the process of displacement which is chiefly responsible for our being
unable to discover or recognize the dream-thoughts in the dream-content, unless
we understand the reason for their distortion. Nevertheless, the dream-thoughts
are also submitted to another and milder sort of transformation, which leads to
our discovering a new achievement on the part of the dream-work - one,
however, which is easily intelligible. The dream-thoughts which we first come
across as we proceed with our analysis often strike us by the unusual form in
which they are expressed; they are not clothed in the prosaic language usually
employed by our thoughts, but are on the contrary represented symbolically by
means of similes and metaphors, in images resembling those of poetic speech.
There is no difficulty in accounting for the constraint imposed upon the form



Ia Classicism and Originality 27

in which the dream-thoughts are expressed. The manifest content of dreams
consists for the most part in pictorial situations; and the dream-thoughts
must accordingly be submitted in the first place to a treatment which will make
them suitable for a representation of this kind. If we imagine ourselves faced
by the problem of representing the arguments in a political leading article or
the speeches of counsel before a court of law in a series of pictures, we shall
easily understand the modifications which must necessarily be carried out by
the dream-work owing to considerations of representability in the content of the
dream.

The psychical material of the dream-thoughts habitually includes recollections
of impressive experiences - not infrequently dating back to early childhood -
which are thus themselves perceived as a rule as situations having a visual
subject-matter. Wherever the possibility arises, this portion of the dream-
thoughts exercises a determining influence upon the form taken by the content
of the dream; it constitutes, as it were, a nucleus of crystallization, attracting
the material of the dream-thoughts to itself and thus affecting their distribution.
The situation in a dream is often nothing other than a modified repetition,
complicated by interpolations, of an impressive experience of this kind; on the
other hand, faithful and straightforward reproductions of real scenes only rarely
appear in dreams.

The content of dreams, however, does not consist entirely of situations, but
also includes disconnected fragments of visual images, speeches and even bits
of unmodified thoughts. It may therefore perhaps be of interest to enumerate
very briefly the modes of representation available to the dream-work for
reproducing the dream-thoughts in the peculiar form of expression necessary in
dreams.

The dream-thoughts which we arrive at by means of analysis reveal themselves
as a psychical complex of the most intricate possible structure. Its portions stand
in the most manifold logical relations to one another: they represent foreground
and background, conditions, digressions and illustrations, chains of evidence and
counter-arguments. Each train of thought is almost invariably accompanied by
its contradictory counterpart. This material lacks none of the characteristics that
are familiar to us from our waking thinking. If now all of this is to be turned
into a dream, the psychical material will be submitted to a pressure which will
condense it greatly, to an internal fragmentation and displacement which will,
as it were, create new surfaces, and to a selective operation in favour of those
portions of it which are the most appropriate for the construction of situations.
If we take into account the genesis of the material, a process of this sort deserves
to be described as a 'regression'. In the course of this transformation, however,
the logical links which have hitherto held the psychical material together are
lost. It is only, as it were, the substantive content of the dream-thoughts that
the dream-work takes over and manipulates. The restoration of the connections
which the dream-work has destroyed is a task which has to be performed by
the work of analysis.

The modes of expression open to a dream may therefore be qualified as meagre
by comparison with those of our intellectual speech; nevertheless a dream need



28 The Legacy of Symbolism

not wholly abandon the possibility of reproducing the logical relations present
in the dream-thoughts. On the contrary, it succeeds often enough in replacing
them by formal characteristics in its own texture.

In the first place, dreams take into account the connection which undeniably
exists between all the portions of the dream-thoughts by combining the whole
material into a single situation. They reproduce logical connection by approxima-
tion in time and space, just as a painter will represent all the poets in a single
group in a picture of Parnassus. It is true that they were never in fact assembled
on a single mountain-top; but they certainly form a conceptual group. Dreams
carry this method of reproduction down to details; and often when they show
us two elements in the dream-content close together, this indicates that there
is some specially intimate connection between what correspond to them among
the dream-thoughts. [ . . . ]



VII

We have not yet come to the end of our consideration of the dream-work. In
addition to condensation, displacement and pictorial arrangement of the psychi-
cal material, we are obliged to assign it yet another activity, though this is not
to be found in operation in every dream. I shall not deal exhaustively with this
part of the dream-work, and will therefore merely remark that the easiest way
of forming an idea of its nature is to suppose - though the supposition probably
does not meet the facts - that it only comes into operation AFTER the dream-content
has already been constructed. Its function would then consist in arranging the
constituents of the dream in such a way that they form an approximately
connected whole, a dream-composition. In this way the dream is given a kind
of facade (though this does not, it is true, hide its content at every point), and
thus receives a first, preliminary interpretation, which is supported by interpo-
lations and slight modifications. Incidentally, this revision of the dream-content
is only possible if it is not too punctiliously carried out; nor does it present us
with anything more than a glaring misunderstanding of the dream-thoughts.
Before we start upon the analysis of a dream we have to clear the ground of
this attempt at an interpretation.

The motive for this part of the dream-work is particularly obvious. Consider-
ations of intelligibility are what lead to this final revision of a dream; and this
reveals the origin of the activity. It behaves towards the dream-content lying
before it just as our normal psychical activity behaves in general towards any
perceptual content that may be presented to it. It understands that content on
the basis of certain anticipatory ideas, and arranges it, even at the moment of
perceiving it, on the presupposition of its being intelligible; in so doing it runs
a risk of falsifying it, and in fact, if it cannot bring it into line with anything
familiar, is a prey to the strangest misunderstandings. As is well known, we are
incapable of seeing a series of unfamiliar signs or of hearing a succession of
unknown words, without at once falsifying the perception from considerations
of intelligibility, on the basis of something already known to us.



Ia Classicism and Originality 29

Dreams which have undergone a revision of this kind at the hands of a
psychical activity completely analogous to waking thought may be described as
'well-constructed'. In the case of other dreams this activity has completely
broken down; no attempt even has been made to arrange or interpret the
material, and, since after we have woken up we feel ourselves identical with
this last part of the dream-work, we make a judgement that the dream was
'hopelessly confused'. From the point of view of analysis, however, a dream
that resembles a disordered heap of disconnected fragments is just as valuable
as one that has been beautifully polished and provided with a surface. In the
former case, indeed, we are saved the trouble of demolishing what has been
superimposed upon the dream-content.

It would be a mistake, however, to suppose that these dream-facades are
nothing other than mistaken and somewhat arbitrary revisions of the dream-
content by the conscious agency of our mental life. In the erection of a
dream-facade use is not infrequently made of wishful phantasies which are
present in the dream-thoughts in a pre-constructed form, and are of the same
character as the appropriately named 'day-dreams' familiar to us in waking life.
The wishful phantasies revealed by analysis in night-dreams often turn out to
be repetitions or modified versions of scenes from infancy; thus in some cases
the facade of the dream directly reveals the dream's actual nucleus, distorted
by an admixture of other material.

The dream-work exhibits no activities other than the four that have already
been mentioned. If we keep to the definition of 'dream-work' as the process of
transforming the dream-thoughts into the dream-content, it follows that the
dream-work is not creative, that it develops no phantasies of its own, that it
makes no judgements and draws no conclusions; it has no functions whatever
other than condensation and displacement of the material and its modification
into pictorial form, to which must be added as a variable factor the final bit of
interpretative revision. It is true that we find various things in the dream-content
which we should be inclined to regard as a product of some other and higher
intellectual function; but in every case analysis shows convincingly that these
intellectual operations have already been performed in the dream-thoughts and have
only been TAKEN OVER by the dream-content. A conclusion drawn in a dream
is nothing other than the repetition of a conclusion in the dream-thoughts; if
the conclusion is taken over into the dream unmodified, it will appear impec-
cable; if the dream-work has displaced it on to some other material, it will
appear nonsensical. A calculation in the dream-content signifies nothing more
than that there is a calculation in the dream-thoughts; but while the latter is
always rational, a dream-calculation may produce the wildest results if its factors
are condensed or if its mathematical operations are displaced on to other
material. Not even the speeches that occur in the dream-content are original
compositions; they turn out to be a hotchpotch of speeches made, heard or read,
which have been revived in the dream-thoughts and whose wording is exactly
reproduced, while their origin is entirely disregarded and their meaning is
violently changed.



30 The Legacy of Symbolism



VIII

Having been made acquainted with the dream-work ... we shall no doubt be
inclined to pronounce it a quite peculiar psychical process, the like of which,
so far as we are aware, does not exist elsewhere. It is as though we were carrying
over on to the dream-work all the astonishment which used formerly to be
aroused in us by its product, the dream. In fact, however, the dream-work is
only the first to be discovered of a whole series of psychical processes,
responsible for the generation of hysterical symptoms, of phobias, obsessions
and delusions. Condensation and, above all, displacement are invariable charac-
teristics of these other processes as well. Modification into a pictorial form, on
the other hand, remains a peculiarity of the dream-work. If this explanation
places dreams in a single series alongside the structures produced by psychical
illness, this makes it all the more important for us to discover the essential
determining conditions of such processes as those of dream-formation. We shall
probably be surprised to hear that neither the state of sleep nor illness is among
these indispensable conditions. A whole number of the phenomena of the
everyday life of healthy people - such as forgetting, slips of the tongue, bungled
actions and a particular class of errors - owe their origin to a psychical
mechanism analogous to that of dreams and of the other members of the series.
The heart of the problem lies in displacement, which is by far the most
striking of the special achievements of the dream-work. If we enter deeply into
the subject, we come to realize that the essential determining condition of
displacement is a purely psychological one: something in the nature of a motive.
One comes upon its track if one takes into consideration certain experiences
which one cannot escape in analysing dreams. In analysing my specimen dream
I was obliged to break off my report of the dream-thoughts . . . because, as I
confessed, there were some among them which I should prefer to conceal from
strangers and which I could not communicate to other people without doing
serious mischief in important directions. I added that nothing would be gained
if I were to choose another dream instead of that particular one with a view to
reporting its analysis: I should come upon dream-thoughts which required to
be kept secret in the case of every dream with an obscure or confused content.
If, however, I were to continue the analysis on my own account, without any
reference to other people (whom, indeed, an experience so personal as my dream
cannot possibly have been intended to reach), I should eventually arrive at
thoughts which would surprise me, whose presence in me I was unaware of,
which were not only alien but also disagreeable to me, and which I should
therefore feel inclined to dispute energetically, although the chain of thoughts
running through the analysis insisted upon them remorselessly. There is only
one way of accounting for this state of affairs, which is of quite universal
occurrence; and that is to suppose that these thoughts really were present in
my mind, and in possession of a certain amount of psychical intensity or energy,
but that they were in a peculiar psychological situation, as a consequence of
which they could not become conscious to me. (I describe this particular condition
as one of 'repression'.) We cannot help concluding, then, that there is a causal



Ia Classicism and Originality 31

connection between the obscurity of the dream-content and the state of repress-
ion (inadmissibility to consciousness) of certain of the dream-thoughts, and that
the dream had to be obscure so as not to betray the proscribed dream-thoughts.
Thus we are led to the concept of a 'dream-distortion', which is the product
of the dream-work and serves the purpose of dissimulation, that is, of disguise.



X

Hitherto philosophers have had no occasion to concern themselves with a
psychology of repression. We may therefore be permitted to make a first
approach to this hitherto unknown topic by constructing a pictorial image of
the course of events in dream-formation. It is true that the schematic picture
we have arrived at - not only from the study of dreams - is a fairly complicated
one; but we cannot manage with anything simpler. Our hypothesis is that in
our mental apparatus there are two thought-constructing agencies, of which the
second enjoys the privilege of having free access to consciousness for its
products, whereas the activity of the first is in itself unconscious and can only
reach consciousness by way of the second. On the frontier between the two
agencies, where the first passes over to the second, there is a censorship, which
only allows what is agreeable to it to pass through and holds back everything
else. According to our definition, then, what is rejected by the censorship is in
a state of repression. Under certain conditions, of which the state of sleep is
one, the relation between the strength of the two agencies is modified in such
a way that what is repressed can no longer be held back. In the state of sleep
this probably occurs owing to a relaxation of the censorship; when this happens
it becomes possible for what has hitherto been repressed to make a path for
itself to consciousness. Since, however, the censorship is never completely
eliminated but merely reduced, the repressed material must submit to certain
alterations which mitigate its offensive features. What becomes conscious in such
cases is a compromise between the intentions of one agency and the demands
of the other. Repression - relaxation of the censorship - the formation of a
compromise, this is the fundamental pattern for the generation not only of dreams
but of many other psychopathological structures; and in the latter cases too we
may observe that the formation of compromises is accompanied by processes of
condensation and displacement and by the employment of superficial associ-
ations, which we have become familiar with in the dream-work.

We have no reason to disguise the fact that in the hypothesis which we have
set up in order to explain the dream-work a part is played by what might be
described as a 'daemonic' element. We have gathered an impression that the
formation of obscure dreams occurs as though one person who was dependent
upon a second person had to make a remark which was bound to be disagreeable
in the ears of this second one; and it is on the basis of this simile that we have
arrived at the concepts of dream-distortion and censorship, and have endeav-
oured to translate our impression into a psychological theory which is no doubt
crude but is at least lucid. Whatever it may be with which a further investigation



32 The Legacy of Symbolism

of the subject may enable us to identify our first and second agencies, we may
safely expect to find a confirmation of some correlate of our hypothesis that
the second agency controls access to consciousness and can bar the first agency
from such access.

When the state of sleep is over, the censorship quickly recovers its full
strength; and it can now wipe out all that was won from it during the period
of its weakness. This must be one part at least of the explanation of the
forgetting of dreams, as is shown by an observation which has been confirmed
on countless occasions. It not infrequently happens that during the narration of
a dream or during its analysis a fragment of the dream-content which had
seemed to be forgotten re-emerges. This fragment which has been rescued
from oblivion invariably affords us the best and most direct access to the
meaning of the dream. And that, in all probability, must have been the only
reason for its having been forgotten, that is, for its having been once more
suppressed.
* * *



XII

No one who accepts the view that the censorship is the chief reason for
dream-distortion will be surprised to learn from the results of dream-interpre-
tation that most of the dreams of adults are traced back by analysis to erotic
wishes. This assertion is not aimed at dreams with an undisguised sexual content,
which are no doubt familiar to all dreamers from their own experience and are
as a rule the only ones to be described as 'sexual dreams'. Even dreams of this
latter kind offer enough surprises in their choice of the people whom they make
into sexual objects, in their disregard of all the limitations which the dreamer
imposes in his waking life upon his sexual desires, and by their many strange
details, hinting at what are commonly known as 'perversions'. A great many
other dreams, however, which show no sign of being erotic in their manifest
content, are revealed by the work of interpretation in analysis as sexual wish-
fulfilments; and, on the other hand, analysis proves that a great many of the
thoughts left over from the activity of waking life as 'residues of the previous
day' only find their way to representation in dreams through the assistance of
repressed erotic wishes.

There is no theoretical necessity why this should be so; but to explain the
fact it may be pointed out that no other group of instincts has been submitted
to such far-reaching suppression by the demands of cultural education, while
at the same time the sexual instincts are also the ones which, in most people,
find it easiest to escape from the control of the highest mental agencies. Since
we have become acquainted with infantile sexuality, which is often so unobtru-
sive in its manifestations and is always overlooked and misunderstood, we are
justified in saying that almost every civilized man retains the infantile forms of
sexual life in some respect or other. We can thus understand how it is that
repressed infantile sexual wishes provide the most frequent and strongest
motive-forces for the construction of dreams.



Ia Classicism and Originality 33

There is only one method by which a dream which expresses erotic wishes
can succeed in appearing innocently non-sexual in its manifest content. The
material of the sexual ideas must not be represented as such, but must be
replaced in the content of the dream by hints, allusions and similar forms of
indirect representation. But, unlike other forms of indirect representation, that
which is employed in dreams must not be immediately intelligible. The modes
of representation which fulfil these conditions are usually described as 'symbols'
of the things which they represent. Particular interest has been directed to them
since it has been noticed that dreamers speaking the same language make use
of the same symbols, and that in some cases, indeed, the use of the same symbols
extends beyond the use of the same language. Since dreamers themselves are
unaware of the meaning of the symbols they use, it is difficult at first sight to
discover the source of the connection between the symbols and what they replace
and represent. The fact itself, however, is beyond doubt, and it is important
for the technique of dream-interpretation. For, with the help of a knowledge
of dream-symbolism, it is possible to understand the meaning of separate
elements of the content of a dream or separate pieces of a dream or in some
cases even whole dreams, without having to ask the dreamer for his associations.
Here we are approaching the popular ideal of translating dreams and on the
other hand are returning to the technique of interpretation used by the ancients,
to whom dream-interpretation was identical with interpretation by means of
symbols.

Although the study of dream-symbols is far from being complete, we are in
a position to lay down with certainty a number of general statements and a
quantity of special information on the subject. There are some symbols which
bear a single meaning almost universally: thus the Emperor and Empress (or
the King and Queen) stand for the parents, rooms represent women and their
entrances and exits the openings of the body. The majority of dream-symbols
serve to represent persons, parts of the body and activities invested with erotic
interest; in particular, the genitals are represented by a number of often very
surprising symbols, and the greatest variety of objects are employed to denote
them symbolically. Sharp weapons, long and stiff objects, such as tree-trunks
and sticks, stand for the male genital; while cupboards, boxes, carriages or ovens
may represent the uterus. In such cases as these the tertium comparationis, the
common element in these substitutions, is immediately intelligible; but there
are other symbols in which it is not so easy to grasp the connection. Symbols
such as a staircase or going upstairs to represent sexual intercourse, a tie or
cravat for the male organ, or wood for the female one, provoke our unbelief
until we can arrive at an understanding of the symbolic relation underlying them
by some other means. Moreover a whole number of dream-symbols are bisexual
and can relate to the male or female genitals according to the context.

Some symbols are universally disseminated and can be met with in all
dreamers belonging to a single linguistic or cultural group; there are others
which occur only within the most restricted and individual limits, symbols
constructed by an individual out of his own ideational material. Of the for-
mer class we can distinguish some whose claim to represent sexual ideas is



34 The Legacy of Symbolism

immediately justified by linguistic usage (such, for instance, as those derived
from agriculture, e.g. 'fertilization' or 'seed') and others whose relation to sexual
ideas appears to reach back into the very earliest ages and to the most obscure
depths of our conceptual functioning. The power of constructing symbols has
not been exhausted in our own days in the case of either of the two sorts of
symbols which I have distinguished at the beginning of this paragraph. Newly
discovered objects (such as airships) are, as we may observe, at once adopted
as universally available sexual symbols.

It would, incidentally, be a mistake to expect that if we had a still profounder
knowledge of dream-symbolism (of the language of dreams') we could do
without asking the dreamer for his associations to the dream and go back entirely
to the technique of dream-interpretation of antiquity. Quite apart from individ-
ual symbols and oscillations in the use of universal ones, one can never tell
whether any particular element in the content of a dream is to be interpreted
symbolically or in its proper sense, and one can be certain that the whole content
of a dream is not to be interpreted symbolically. A knowledge of dream-sym-
bolism will never do more than enable us to translate certain constituents of
the dream-content, and will not relieve us of the necessity for applying the
technical rules which I gave earlier. It will, however, afford the most valuable
assistance to interpretation precisely at points at which the dreamer's associations
are insufficient or fail altogether.

Dream-symbolism is also indispensable to an understanding of what are known
as 'typical' dreams, which are common to everyone, and of 'recurrent' dreams
in individuals.

If the account I have given in this short discussion of the symbolic mode of
expression in dreams appears incomplete, I can justify my neglect by drawing
attention to one of the most important pieces of knowledge that we possess on
this subject. Dream-symbolism extends far beyond dreams: it is not peculiar to
dreams, but exercises a similar dominating influence on representation in
fairy-tales, myths and legends, in jokes and in folk-lore. It enables us to trace
the intimate connections between dreams and these latter productions. We must
not suppose that dream-symbolism is a creation of the dream-work; it is in
all probability a characteristic of the unconscious thinking which provides
the dream-work with the material for condensation, displacement and dramat-
ization.



5 Otto Weininger (1880-1903) from Sex and Character

The author became a cult figure in Austro-German intellectual life after his death by
suicide in October 1903. His book Geschiecht und Charakter had been published a few
months earlier in Vienna. Violently misogynistic and anti-Semitic though his own views
were, Weininger's acute theorization of the supposed decline of modern civilization had
an impact on much wider cultural circles. He was, for example, read in Italian translation
by de Chirico, and invoked in de Chirico's essay of 1919 'On Metaphysical Art'.
Weininger's work constitutes an early and forceful statement of that influential viewpoint



Ia Classicism and Originality 35

which connects the decay of the spiritual and artistic aspects of life to modern
materialism and the rise of science. It also serves to demonstrate the uncomfortable
fact that Nazism had a considerable intellectual pedigree. The book was in its sixth
edition by 1906, when an authorized English translation was published in London. The
present text is taken from that version.



[. . .] The scientific man ranks . . . below the artist and the philosopher. The
two latter may earn the title of genius which must always be denied to the
scientific man. Without any good reason having been assigned for it, it has
usually been the case that the voice of genius on any particular problem is
listened to before the voice of science. Is there justice in this preference? Can
the genius explain things as to which the man of science, as such, can say
nothing? Can he peer into depths where the man of science is blind?

The conception genius concludes universality. If there were an absolute genius
(a convenient fiction) there would be nothing to which he could not have a
vivid, intimate, and complete relation. Genius, as I have already shown, would
have universal comprehension, and through its perfect memory would be
independent of time. To comprehend anything one must have within one
something similar. A man notices, understands, and comprehends only those
things with which he has some kinship. The genius is the man with the most
intense, most vivid, most conscious, most continuous, and most individual ego.
The ego is the central point, the unit of comprehension, the synthesis of all
manifoldness.

The ego of the genius accordingly is simply itself universal comprehension,
the centre of infinite space; the great man contains the whole universe within
himself; genius is the living microcosm. He is not an intricate mosaic, a chemical
combination of an infinite number of elements ... he is everything. In him and
through him all psychical manifestations cohere and are real experiences, not
an elaborate piece-work, a whole put together from parts in the fashion of
science. For the genius the ego is the all, lives as the all; the genius sees nature
and all existences as whole; the relations of things flash on him intuitively; he
has not to build bridges of stones between them. And so the genius cannot be
an empirical psychologist slowly collecting details and linking them by associ-
ations; he cannot be a physicist, envisaging the world as a compound of atoms
and molecules.

It is absolutely from his vision of the whole, in which the genius always lives,
that he gets his sense of the parts. He values everything within him or without
him by the standard of this vision, a vision that for him is no function of time,
but a part of eternity. [...] The scientist takes phenomena for what they
obviously are; the great man or the genius for what they signify. Sea and
mountain, light and darkness, spring and autumn, cypress and palm, dove and
swan are symbols to him, he not only thinks that there is, but he recognizes in
them something deeper. The ride of the Valkyrie is not produced by atmospheric
pressure and the magic fire is not the outcome of a process of oxidation.

And all this is possible for him because the outer world is as full and strongly
connected as the inner in him, the external world in fact seems to be only a



36 The Legacy of Symbolism

special aspect of his inner life; the universe and the ego have become one in
him, and he is not obliged to set his experience together piece by piece according
to rule. [. . .] The infinity of the universe is responded to in the genius by a
true sense of infinity in his own breast; he holds chaos and cosmos, all details
and all totality, all plurality, and all singularity in himself. [ . . . ]
* * *

[. . .] It is notable that the Jews, even now when at least a relative security of
tenure is possible, prefer moveable property, and, in spite of their acquisitive-
ness, have little real sense of personal property, especially in its most charac-
teristic form, landed property. Property is indissolubly connected with the self,
with individuality. It is in harmony with the foregoing that the Jew is so readily
disposed to communism. Communism must be distinguished clearly from so-
cialism, the former being based on a community of goods, an absence of
individual property, the latter meaning, in the first place a co-operation of
individual with individual, of worker with worker, and a recognition of human
individuality in every one. Socialism is Aryan (Owen, Carlyle, Ruskin, Fichte).
Communism is Jewish (Marx). Modern social democracy has moved far apart
from the earlier socialism, precisely because Jews have taken so large a share in
developing it. In spite of the associative element in it, the Marxian doctrine
does not lead in any way towards the State as a union of all the separate
individual aims, as the higher unit combining the purposes of the lower units.
Such a conception is as foreign to the Jew as it is to the woman.



Judaism, at the present day, has reached its highest point since the time of
Herod. Judaism is the spirit of modern life. Sexuality is accepted, and contem-
porary ethics sing the praises of pairing. [ . . . ] It is the Jew and the woman
who are the apostles of pairing to bring guilt on humanity.

Our age is not only the most Jewish but the most feminine. It is a time when
art is content with daubs and seeks its inspiration in the sports of animals; the
time of a superficial anarchy, with no feeling for Justice and the State; a time
of communistic ethics, of the most foolish of historical views, the materialistic
interpretation of history; a time of capitalism and of Marxism; a time when
history, life, and science are no more than political economy and technical
instruction; a time when genius is supposed to be a form of madness; a time
with no great artists and no great philosophers; a time without originality and
yet with the most foolish craving for originality; a time when the cult of the
Virgin has been replaced by that of the Demi-vierge. It is the time when pairing
has not only been approved but has been enjoined as a duty.

But from the new Judaism the new Christianity may be pressing forth;
mankind waits for the new founder of religion, and, as in the year one, the age
presses for a decision. The decision must be made between Judaism and
Christianity, between business and culture, between male and female, be-
tween the race and the individual, between unworthiness and worth, between
the earthly and the higher life, between negation and the God-like. Man-
kind has the choice to make. There are only two poles, and there is no middle
way.



Ia Classicism and Originality 37

6 Paul Cezanne (1839-1906) Letters to Emile Bernard

The painter and writer Emile Bernard visited Cezanne in Aix in 1904. In their ensuing
correspondence the older artist expounded the priorities of his practice. Bernard drew
on these letters in his subsequent writings. His interpretation of Cezanne's work and
ideas was all the more influential for appearing to carry the authority of a confidant.
From J. Rewald, Cezanne's Letters, 4th edition, Oxford, 1976.

Aix-en-Provence, 15 April, 1904

[ . . . ] I am happy with the expression of warm artistic sympathy which you
kindly address to me in your letter.

May I repeat what I told you here: treat nature by means of the cylinder,
the sphere, the cone, everything brought into proper perspective so that each
side of an object or a plane is directed towards a central point. Lines parallel
to the horizon give breadth, whether it is a section of nature or, if you prefer,
of the show which the Pater Omnipotens Aeterne Deus spreads out before our
eyes. Lines perpendicular to this horizon give depth. But nature for us men is
more depth than surface, whence the need to introduce into our light vibrations,
represented by the reds and yellows, a sufficient amount of blueness to give the
feel of air.

I must tell you that I had another look at the study you made from the lower
floor of the studio, it is good. You only have to continue in this way, I think.
You have the understanding of what must be done and you will soon turn your
back on the Gauguins and [van] Goghs! [. . .]



Aix, 12 May, 1904

[ . . . ] My absorption in work and my advanced age will sufficiently explain the
delay in answering your letter.

You entertain me, moreover, in your last letter with such a variety of topics,
though all are connected with art, that I cannot follow it in all its developments.

I have already told you that I like Redon's talent enormously, and from my
heart I agree with his feeling for and admiration of Delacroix. I do not know
if my indifferent health will allow me ever to realize my dream of painting his
apotheosis.

I progress very slowly, for nature reveals herself to me in very complex ways;
and the progress needed is endless. One must look at the model and feel very
exactly; and also express oneself distinctly and with force.

Taste is the best judge. It is rare. Art addresses itself only to an excessively
limited number of individuals.

The artist must scorn all judgment that is not based on an intelligent
observation of character.

He must beware of the literary spirit which so often causes the painter to
deviate from his true path - the concrete study of nature - to lose himself too
long in intangible speculation.



38 The Legacy of Symbolism

The Louvre is a good book to consult but it must be only an intermediary.
The real and immense study to be undertaken is the manifold picture of nature.



Aix, 26 May, 1904

[. . .] On the whole I approve of the ideas you are going to expound in your
next article for Occident. But I must always come back to this: painters must
devote themselves entirely to the study of nature and try to produce pictures
which will be an education. Talking about art is almost useless. The work which
brings about some progress in one's own craft is sufficient compensation for
not being understood by the imbeciles.

The man of letters expresses himself in abstractions whereas a painter, by
means of drawing and colour, gives concrete form to his sensations and
perceptions. One is neither too scrupulous nor too sincere nor too submissive
to nature; but one is more or less master of one's model, and above all, of the
means of expression. Get to the heart of what is before you and continue to
express yourself as logically as possible. [ . . . ]

Aix, 25 July, 1904

[. . .] I have received the Revue Occidentale. I can only thank you for what you
wrote about me.

I am sorry that we cannot be side by side, for I don't want to be right in
theory, but in front of nature. Ingres in spite of his 'estyle' (Aixian pronunci-
ation) and his admirers, is only a very small painter. The greatest, you know
them better than I; the Venetians and the Spaniards.

In order to make progress, there is only nature, and the eye is trained through
contact with her. It becomes concentric through looking and working. I mean
to say that in an orange, an apple, a ball, a head, there is a culminating point;
and this point is always - in spite of the tremendous effect; light and shade,
colour sensations - the closest to our eye; the edges of the objects flee towards
a centre on our horizon. With a small temperament one can be very much of a
painter. One can do good things without being very much of a harmonist or a
colourist. It is sufficient to have a sense of art - and this is without doubt the
horror of the bourgeois, this sense. Therefore institutions, pensions, honours
can only be made for cretins, humbugs and rascals. Don't be an art critic, but
paint, there lies salvation. [. . .]



Aix, 23 December, 1904

[. . .] I shall not enter with you into aesthetic considerations. Yes, I approve
of your admiration for the strongest of the Venetians; we praise Tintoretto.
Your need to find a moral, an intellectual point of support in works, which
assuredly will never be surpassed, keeps you constantly on the qui vive,
incessantly on the search for the means, only dimly perceived, which will surely



Ia Classicism and Originality 39

lead you, in front of nature, to sense your own means of expression; and on
the day you find them, be convinced you will rediscover without effort, in front
of nature, the means employed by the four or five great ones of Venice.

This is true, without any possible doubt - I am quite positive: - an optical
sensation is produced in our visual organs which allows us to classify the planes
represented by colour sensations as light, half tone or quarter tone. Light,
therefore, does not exist for the painter. As long as we are forced to proceed
from black to white, with the first of these abstractions providing something
like a point of support for the eye as much as for the brain, we flounder, we
do not succeed in becoming masters of ourselves, in being in possession of
ourselves. During this period (I am necessarily repeating myself a little) we turn
towards the admirable works that have been handed down to us through the
ages, where we find comfort, support, such as a plank provides for the bather.

[.-]



Aix, 23 October, 1905

[. . .] Your letters are precious to me for a double reason: The first being purely
egoistic, because their arrival lifts me out of the monotony caused by
the incessant pursuit of the sole and unique aim, which leads in moments of
physical fatigue to a kind of intellectual exhaustion; and the second, allows me
to reassess for you, undoubtedly rather too much, the obstinacy with which I
pursue the realization of that part of nature, which, coming into our line of
vision, gives us the picture. Now the theme to develop is that - whatever our
temperament or form of strength face to face with nature may be - we must
render the image of what we see, forgetting everything that existed before us.
Which, I believe, must permit the artist to give his entire personality, whether
great or small.

Now, being old, nearly 70 years, the sensations of colour, which give the
light, are for me the reason for the abstractions which do not allow me to cover
my canvas entirely nor to pursue the delimitation of the objects where their
points of contact are fine and delicate; from which it results that my image or
picture is incomplete. On the other hand the planes fall one on top of the other,
from whence neo-impressionism emerged, which circumscribes the contours
with a black line, a fault which must be fought at all costs. But nature, if
consulted, gives us the means of attaining this end.



Aix, 21 September, 1906

[ . . . ] I am in such a state of mental disturbance, I fear at moments that my
frail reason may give way. After the terrible heatwave that we have just had, a
milder temperature has brought some calm to our minds, and it was not too
soon; now it seems to me that I see better and that I think more correctly about
the direction of my studies. Will I ever attain the end for which I have striven



40 The Legacy of Symbolism

so much and so long? I hope so, but as long as it is not attained a vague state
of uneasiness persists which will not disappear until I have reached port, that
is until I have realized something which develops better than in the past, and
thereby can prove the theories - which in themselves are always easy; it is only
giving proof of what one thinks that raises serious obstacles. So I continue to
study. [ . . . ]

I am always studying after nature and it seems to me that I make slow
progress. I should have liked you near me, for solitude always weighs me down
a bit. But I am old, ill, and I have sworn to myself to die painting, rather than
go under in the debasing paralysis which threatens old men who allow them-
selves to be dominated by passions which coarsen their senses.

If I have the pleasure of being with you one day, we shall be better able to
discuss all this in person. You must forgive me for continually coming back to
the same thing; but I believe in the logical development of everything we see
and feel through the study of nature and turn my attention to technical questions
later; for technical questions are for us only the simple means of making the
public feel what we feel ourselves and of making ourselves understood. The
great masters whom we admire must have done just that. [. . .]



7 Maurice Denis (1870-1943) 'Cezanne'

The French painter-theorist Denis had a role equal to Bernard's in establishing the terms
of Cezanne's modern reputation. In this essay he represents Cezanne's work as the
essential form of modern painting: an assiduous blending of the naive and empirical
with the classic and rational. Originally published in L'Occ/dent, Paris, September 1907,
in the year after Cezanne's death. The present translation by Roger Fry published in
Burlington Magazine, XVI, London, January-February 1910, pp. 207-19 and 275-80.
Fry's introductory note voices the avant-garde view that Cezanne's art was central to
an epochal new movement.

Introductory Note

Anyone who has had the opportunity of observing modern French art cannot
fail to be struck by the new tendencies that have become manifest in the last
few years. A new ambition, a new conception of the purpose and methods of
painting, are gradually emerging; a new hope too, and a new courage to attempt
in painting that direct expression of imagined states of consciousness which has
for long been relegated to music and poetry. This new conception of art, in
which the decorative elements preponderate at the expense of the representative,
is not the outcome of any conscious archaistic endeavour, such as made, and
perhaps inevitably marred, our own pre-Raphaelite movement. It has in it
therefore the promise of a larger and a fuller life. It is, I believe, the direct
outcome of the Impressionist movement. It was among Impressionists that it
took its rise, and yet it implies the direct contrary of the Impressionist
conception of art.



Ia Classicism and Originality 41

It is generally admitted that the great and original genius, - for recent criticism
has the courage to acclaim him as such - who really started this movement, the
most promising and fruitful of modern times, was Cezanne. [ . . . ]

* * *

Roger E. Fry.

I

There is something paradoxical in Cezanne's celebrity; and it is scarcely easier
to explain than to explain Cezanne himself. The Cezanne question divides
inseparably into two camps those who love painting and those who prefer to
painting itself the literary and other interests accessory to it. I know indeed that
it is the fashion to like painting. The discussions on this question are no longer
serious and impassioned. Too many admirations lend themselves to suspicion.
'Snobbism' and speculation have dragged the public into painters' quarrels, and
it takes sides according to fashion or interest. Thus it has come about that a
public naturally hostile, but well primed by critics and dealers, has conspired
to the apotheosis of a great artist, who remains nevertheless a difficult master
even for those who love him best.

* * *

At the moment of his death, the articles in the press were unanimous upon
two points; and, wherever their inspiration was derived from, they may fairly
be considered to reflect the average opinion. The obituaries, then, admitted first
of all that Cezanne influenced a large section of the younger artists; and secondly
that he made an effort towards style. We may gather, then, that Cezanne was
a sort of classic, and that the younger generation regards him as a representative
of classicism.

Unfortunately it is hard to say without too much obscurity what classicism is.

Suppose that after a long sojourn in the country one enters one of those
dreary provincial museums, one of those cemeteries abandoned to decay, where
the silence and the musty smell denote the lapse of time; one immediately
classifies the works exhibited into two groups: in one group the remains of the
old collections of amateurs, and in the other the modern galleries, where the
commissions given by the State have piled together the pitiful novelties bought
in the annual salons according as studio intrigues or ministerial favour decides.
It is in such circumstances that one becomes really and ingenuously sensitive
to the contrast between ancient and modern art; and that an old canvas by some
Bolognese or from Lebrun's atelier, at once vigorous and synthetic in design,
asserts its superiority to the dry analyses and thin coloured photographs of our
gold-medallists!

Imagine, quite hypothetically, that a Cezanne is there. So we shall understand
him better. First of all, we know we cannot place him in the modern galleries,
so completely would he be out of key among the anecdotes and the fatuities.
One must of sheer necessity place him among the old masters, to whom he is
seen at a glance to be akin by his nobility of style. Gauguin used to say, thinking
of Cezanne: 'Nothing is so much like a croute [a daub] as a real masterpiece.'



42 The Legacy of Symbolism

Croute or masterpiece, one can only understand it in opposition to the mediocrity
of modern painting. And already we grasp one of the certain characteristics of
the classic, namely, style, that is to say synthetic order. In opposition to modern
pictures, a Cezanne inspires by itself, by its qualities of unity in composition
and colour, in short by its painting. The actualities, the illustrations to popular
novels or historical events, with which the walls of our supposed museum are
lined, seek to interest us only by means of the subject represented. Others
perhaps establish the virtuosity of their authors. Good or bad, Cezanne's canvas
is truly a picture.

Suppose now that for another experiment, and this time a less chimerical one,
we put together three works of the same family, three natures-mortes, one by
Manet, one by Gauguin, one by Cezanne. We shall distinguish at once the
objectivity of Manet; that he imitates nature 'as seen through his temperament',
that he translates an artistic sensation. Gauguin is more subjective. His is a
decorative, even a hieratic interpretation of nature. Before the Cezanne we think
only of the picture; neither the object represented nor the artist's personality
holds our attention. We cannot decide so quickly whether it is an imitation or
an interpretation of nature. We feel that such an art is nearer to Chardin than
to Manet and Gauguin. And if at once we say: this is a picture and a classic
picture, the word begins to take on a precise meaning, that, namely, of an
equilibrium, a reconciliation of the objective and subjective.

In the Berlin Museum, for instance, the effect produced by Cezanne is
significant. However much one admires Manet's La Serve or Renoir's Enfants
Berard or the admirable landscapes of Monet and Sisley, the presence of Cezanne
makes one assimilate them (unjustly, it is true, but by the force of contrast) to
the generality of modern productions: on the contrary the pictures of Cezanne
seem like works of another period, no less refined but more robust than the
most vigorous efforts of the Impressionists.

Thus we arrive at our first estimate of Cezanne as reacting against modern
painting and against Impressionism.
* * *

Impressionism - and by that I mean much more the general movement, which
has changed during the last twenty years the aspect of modern painting, than
the special art of a Monet or a Renoir - Impressionism was synthetic in its
tendencies, since its aim was to translate a sensation, to realize a mood; but its
methods were analytic, since colour for it resulted from an infinity of contrasts.
For it was by means of the decomposition of the prism that the Impressionists
reconstituted light, divided colour and multiplied reflected lights and gradations;
in fact, they substituted for varying greys as many different positive colours.
Therein lies the fundamental error of Impressionism. The Fifre of Manet in
four tones is necessarily more synthetic than the most delicious Renoir, where
the play of sunlight and shadow creates the widest range of varied half-tones.
Now there is in a fine Cezanne as much simplicity, austerity and grandeur as
in Manet, and the gradations retain the freshness and lustre which give their
flower-like brilliance to the canvases of Renoir. Some months before his death
Cezanne said: 'What I wanted was to make of Impressionism something solid



Ia Classicism and Originality 43

and durable, like the art of the museums.' It was for this reason also that he
so much admired the early Pissarros, and still more the early Monets. Monet
was, indeed, the only one of his contemporaries for whom he expressed great
admiration.

Thus at first guided by his Latin instinct and his natural inclination, and
later with full consciousness of his purpose and his own nature, he set to work
to create out of Impressionism a certain classic conception.

In constant reaction against the art of his time, his powerful individuality
drew from it none the less the material and pretext for his researches in style;
he drew from it the sustaining elements of his work. At a period when the
artist's sensibility was considered almost universally to be the sole motive of a
work of art, and when improvisation - 'the spiritual excitement provoked by
exaltation of the senses' - tended to destroy at one blow both the superannuated
conventions of the academies and the necessity for method, it happened that
the art of Cezanne showed the way to substitute reflexion for empiricism without
sacrificing the essential role of sensibility. Thus, for instance, instead of the
chronometric notation of appearances, he was able to hold the emotion of the
moment even while he elaborated almost to excess, in a calculated and intentional
effort, his studies after nature. He composed his natures-mortes, varying inten-
tionally the lines and the masses, disposing his draperies according to premedi-
tated rhythms, avoiding the accidents of chance, seeking for plastic beauty; and
all this without losing anything of the essential motive - that initial motive which
is realized in its essentials in his sketches and water colours. I allude to the
delicate symphony of juxtaposed gradations, which his eye discovered at once,
but for which at the same moment his reason spontaneously demanded the
logical support of composition, of plan and of architecture.

There was nothing less artificial, let us note, than this effort towards a just
combination of style and sensibility. That which others have sought, and
sometimes found, in the imitation of the old masters, the discipline that he
himself in his earlier works sought from the great artists of his time or of the
past, he discovered finally in himself. And this is the essential characteristic of
Cezanne. His spiritual conformation, his genius, did not allow him to profit
directly from the old masters: he finds himself in a situation towards them
similar to that which he occupied towards his contemporaries. His originality
grows in his contact with those whom he imitates or is impressed by; thence
comes his persistent gaucherie, his happy naivete, and thence also the incredible
clumsiness into which his sincerity forced him. For him it- is not a question of
imposing style upon a study as, after all, Puvis de Chavannes did. He is so
naturally a painter, so spontaneously classic. If I were to venture a comparison
with another art, I should say that there is the same relation between Cezanne
and Veronese as between Mallarme of the 'Herodiade' and Racine of the
'Berenice'. With the same elements - new or at all events refreshed, without
anything borrowed from the past, except the necessary forms (on the one hand
the mould of the Alexandrine and of tragedy, on the other the traditional
conception of the composed picture) - they find, both poet and painter, the
language of the Masters. Both observed the same scrupulous conformity to the



44 The Legacy of Symbolism

necessities of their art; both refused to overstep its limits. Just as the writer
determined to owe the whole expression of his poem to what is, except for idea
and subject, the pure domain of literature - sonority of words, rhythm of phrase,
elasticity of syntax - the painter has been a painter before everything. Painting
oscillates perpetually between invention and imitation: sometimes it copies and
sometimes it imagines. These are its variations. But whether it reproduces
objective nature or translates more specifically the artist's emotion, it is bound
to be an art of concrete beauty, and our senses must discover in the work of
art itself - abstraction made of the subject represented - an immediate satisfac-
tion, a pure aesthetic pleasure. The painting of Cezanne is literally the essential
art, the definition of which is so refractory to criticism, the realization of which
seems impossible. It imitates objects without any exactitude and without any
accessory interest of sentiment or thought. When he imagines a sketch, he
assembles colours and forms without any literary preoccupation; his aim is nearer
to that of a Persian carpet weaver than of a Delacroix, transforming into coloured
harmony, but with dramatic or lyric intention, a scene of the Bible or of
Shakespeare. A negative effort, if you will, but one which declares an unheard
of instinct for painting.

He is the man who paints. Renoir said to me one day: 'How on earth does
he do it? He cannot put two touches of colour on to a canvas without its being
already an achievement.'

It is of little moment what the pretext is for this sampling of colour: nudes
improbably grouped in a non-existent landscape, apples in a plate placed awry
upon some commonplace material - there is always a beautiful line, a beautiful
balance, a sumptuous sequence of resounding harmonies. The gift of freshness,
the spontaneity and novelty of his discoveries, add still more to the interest of
his slightest sketches.

'He is', said Serusier, 'the pure painter. His style is a pure style; his poetry
is a painter's poetry. The purpose, even the concept of the object represented,
disappears before the charm of his coloured forms. Of an apple by some common-
place painter one says: I should like to eat it. Of an apple by Cezanne one says:
How beautiful! One would not peel it; one would like to copy it. It is in that
that the spiritual power of Cezanne consists. I purposely do not) say idealism,
because the ideal apple would be the one that stimulated most the mucous
membrane, and Cezanne's apple speaks to the spirit by means of the eyes.'

'One thing must be noted,' Serusier continues: 'that is the absence of subject.
In his first manner the subject was sometimes childish: after his evolution the
subject disappears, there is only the motive.' (It is the word that Cezanne was
in the habit of using.)

That is surely an important lesson. Have we not confused all the methods of
art - mixed together music, literature, painting? In this, too, Cezanne is in
reaction. He is a simple artisan, a primitive who returns to the sources of his
art, respects its first postulates and necessities, limits himself by its essential
elements, by what constitutes exclusively the art of painting. He determines to
ignore everything else, both equivocal refinements and deceptive methods. In
front of the motive he rejects everything that might distract him from painting,



Ia Classicism and Originality 45

might compromise his petite sensation as he used to say, making use of the
phraseology of the aesthetic philosophy of his youth: he avoids at once deceptive
representation and literature.

II

The preceding reflections allow us to explain in what way Cezanne is related
to Symbolism. Synthetism, which becomes, in contact with poetry, Symbolism,
was not in its origin a mystic or idealist movement. It was inaugurated by
landscape-painters, by painters of still-life, not at all by painters of the soul.
Nevertheless it implied the belief in a correspondence between external forms
and subjective states. Instead of evoking our moods by means of the subject
represented, it was the work of art itself which was to transmit the initial
sensation and perpetuate its emotions. Every work of art is a transposition, an
emotional equivalent, a caricature of a sensation received, or, more generally,
of a psychological fact.

'I wished to copy nature,' said Cezanne, 'I could not. But I was satisfied
when I had discovered that the sun, for instance, could not be reproduced, but
that it must be represented by something else ... by colour.' There is the
definition of Symbolism such as we understood it about 1890. The older artists
of that day, Gauguin above all, had a boundless admiration for Cezanne. I must
add that they had at the same time the greatest esteem for Odilon Redon. Odilon
Redon also had searched outside of the reproduction of nature and of sensation
for the plastic equivalents of his emotions and his dreams. He, too, tried to
remain a painter, exclusively a painter, while he was translating the radiance
and gloom of his imagination. [ . . . ]

It is a touching spectacle that a canvas of Cezanne presents; generally
unfinished, scraped with a palette-knife, scored over with pentimenti in turpen-
tine, many times repainted, with an impasto that approaches actual relief. In all
this evidence of labour, one catches sight of the artist in his struggle for style
and his passion for nature; of his acquiescence in certain classic formulae and
the revolt of an original sensibility; one sees reason at odds with inexperience,
the need for harmony conflicting with the fever of original expression. Never
does he subordinate his efforts to his technical means; 'for the desires of the
flesh,' says St Paul, 'are contrary to those of the spirit, and those of the spirit
are contrary to those of the flesh, they are opposed one to another in such wise
that ye do not that which ye would.' It is the eternal struggle of reason with
sensibility which makes the saint and the genius.

Let us admit that it gives rise sometimes, with Cezanne, to chaotic results.
We have unearthed a classic spontaneity in his very sensations, but the realiz-
ation is not reached without lapses. Constrained already by his need for synthesis
to adopt disconcerting simplifications, he deforms his design still further by the
necessity for expression and by his scrupulous sincerity. It is herein that we
find the motives for the gaucherie with which Cezanne is so often reproached,
and herein lies the explanation of that practice of naivete and ungainliness
common to his disciples and imitators. [ . . . ]



46 The Legacy of Symbolism

What astonishes us most in Cezanne's work is certainly his research for form,
or, to be exact, for deformation. It is there that one discovers the most hesitation,
the most pentimenti on the artist's part. The large picture of the Baigneuses, left
unfinished in the studio at Aix, is from this point of view typical. Taken up
again, numberless times during many years, it has varied but little in general
appearance and colour, and even the disposition of the brush-strokes remains
almost permanent. On the other hand the dimensions of the figures were often
readjusted; sometimes they were life-size, sometimes they were contracted to
half; the arms, the torsos, the legs were enlarged and diminished in unimaginable
proportions. It is just there that lies the variable element in his work; his sentiment
for form allowed neither of silhouette nor of fixed proportions. [ . . . ]

On the walls of Jas de Bouffan, covered up now with hangings, he has left
improvisations, studies painted as the inspiration came, and which seem carried
through at a sitting. They make one think, in spite of their fine pictorial quality,
of the fanfaronnades of Claude in Zola's 'L'CEuvre', and of his declamations
upon 'temperament'. The models of his choice at this period are engravings
after the Spanish and Italian artists of the seventeenth century. When I asked
him what had led him from this vehemence of execution to the patient technique
of the separate brush-stroke, he replied, 'It is because I cannot render my
sensation at once; hence I put on colour again, / put it on as best I can. But
when I begin I endeavour always to paint with a full impasto like Manet, giving
the form with the brush.'*

'There is no such thing as line,' he said, 'no such thing as modelling, there
are only contrasts. When colour attains its richness form attains its plenitude.'

Thus, in his essentially concrete perception of objects, form is not separated
from colour; they condition one another, they are indissolubly united. And in
consequence in his execution he wishes to realize them as he sees them, by a
single brush-stroke. [ . . . ] All his faculty for abstraction - and we see how far
the painter dominates the theorist - all his faculty for abstraction permits him
to distinguish only among notable forms 'the sphere, the cone and the cylinder'.
All forms are referred to those which he is alone capable of thinking. The
multiplicity of his colour schemes varies them infinitely. But still he never
reaches the conception of the circle, the triangle, the parallelogram; those are
abstractions which his eye and brain refuse to admit. Forms are for him volumes.

Hence all objects were bound to tell for him according to their relief, and to
be situated according to planes at different distances from the spectator within
the supposed depth of the picture. A new antinomy, this, which threatens to
render highly accidental 'that plane surface covered with colours arranged in a
determined order'. Colorist before everything, as he was, Cezanne resolves this
antinomy by chromatism - the transposition, that is, of values of black and
white into values of colour.

'I want,' he told me, following the passage from light to shade on his closed
fist - 'I want to do with colour what they do in black and white with the
stump.' He replaces light by colour. This shadow is a colour, this light, this
half-tone are colours. The white of this table-cloth is a blue, a green, a rose;
they mingle in the shadows with the surrounding local tints; but the crudity in



Ia Classicism and Originality 47

the light may be harmoniously translated by dissonant blue, green and rose. He
substitutes, that is, contrasts of tint for contrasts of tone. He disentangles thus
what he used to call 'the confusion of sensations'. In all this conversation, of
which I here report scraps, he never once mentioned the word values. His
system assuredly excludes relations of values in the sense accepted in the schools.

Volume finds, then, its expression in Cezanne in a gamut of tints, a series of
touches; these touches follow one another by contrast or analogy according as
the form is interrupted or continuous. This was what he was fond of calling
modulating instead of modelling. We know the result of this system, at once
shimmering and forcible; I will not attempt to describe the richness of harmony
and the gaiety of illumination of his pictures. [. . .]
* * *

He is at once the climax of the classic tradition and the result of the great
crisis of liberty and illumination which has rejuvenated modern art. He is the
Poussin of Impressionism. He has the fine perception of a Parisian, and he is
splendid and exuberant like an Italian decorator. He is orderly as a Frenchman
and feverish as a Spaniard. He is a Chardin of the decadence and at times he
surpasses Chardin. There is something of El Greco in him and often the
healthfulness of Veronese. But such as he is he is so naturally, and all the
scruples of his will, all the assiduity of his effort have only aided and exalted
his natural gifts.

[-..] The two operations, the Aspect and Prospect, as Poussin says, are no
longer separate with Cezanne. To organize one's sensations was a discipline of
the seventeenth century; it is the preconceived limitation of the artist's recep-
tivity. But the true artist is like the true savant, 'a child-like and serious nature'.
He accomplishes this miracle - to preserve amidst his efforts and his scruples
all his freshness and naivete.



8 Maurice Denis (1870-1943) 'From Gauguin and
van Gogh to Neo-Classicism'

Denis here aims to reassert the importance of the Symbolist movement of the 1890s
and to establish a revived classicism as its proper successor. His essay thus provides
a bridge between the anti-naturalist tendencies of Symbolism and the 'call to order' of
the post-war years. Originally published in [.'Occident, Paris, May 1909; reprinted in
Denis, Theories 1890-1910, Paris, 1912, from which the present version is translated.

The great hurricane that renewed French art around 1890 originated in the shop

of Pere Tanguy, colour-merchant, rue Clauzel, and in the Gloanec Inn at

Pont-Aven. Gauguin gathered together at Pont-Aven a number of disciples:

Chamaillard, Seguin, Filiger, Serusier, the Dutchman de Hahn. This formed

i the 'weighty school of fundamentals, in the midst of large pitchers of cider'.

At Tanguy's - he was a former member of the Commune, a gentle anarchistic

| dreamer - there were spread out for the edification of the young, the revolu-

| tionary productions of van Gogh, Gauguin, Emile Bernard and their emulators.



48 The Legacy of Symbolism

They hung in disarray next to canvases of the uncontested master, the initiator
of the new movement, Paul Cezanne.

Bernard, van Gogh, Anquetin, Toulouse-Lautrec were the rebels of the
Cormon studio: we were just ourselves. Bonnard, Ibels, Ranson, Denis, those
around Serusier, were the rebels of the Julien studio. Sympathetic to everything
that seemed new and subversive, we were drawn to those who wiped the slate
clean of both academic teaching, and of romantic or photographic naturalism,
which had been universally asserted to be the only theory worth taking seriously
in a scientific and democratic epoch. [. . .]

Those who witnessed the 1890 movement can no longer be shocked by
anything; the most ludicrous and incomprehensible efforts of those who are now
called the 'Fauves' can only stir memories of the extravagances of our generation.
To know what excitement is, the vertigo of the unexpected, it is necessary to
have seen the Volpini cafe during the exhibition of 1889. Tucked in a corner
away from the Great Fair, far from the official art, and the masterpieces
assembled for retrospectives, the first works by Gauguin, Bernard, Anquetin,
etc. hung quite pathetically, brought together for the first time, f . . .]

At this time, the critics reproached us for wanting to babble like children.
Actually, we did return to childhood, we played the fool, and that was without
doubt the most intelligent thing to do. Our art was an art of savages, of
primitives. The movement of 1890 proceeded simultaneously from a state of
extreme decadence and from the ferment of renewal. It was the moment when
the diver touches bottom and resurfaces.

Without doubt, the hurricane of 1890 had been long prepared. These artists
whose appearance caused a scandal, were the products of their time and place;
it would be unjust to isolate them from their elders the Impressionists; in
particular, it seems that the influence of Camille Pissarro on them was consid-
erable. Moreover, they could not be reproached for having misunderstood their
immediate precursors; and they showed from the outset the greatest esteem for
those who launched them on their way; not only Camille Pissarro and Cezanne,
and Degas, and Odilon Redon, but also Puvis de Chavannes whose official
endorsement could have displeased their youthful intransigence.

It was therefore the necessary culmination - action and reaction together -
of the great Impressionist movement. Everything has been said on this subject:
the absence of any rule, the uselessness of academic teaching, the triumph of
naturalism, the influence of Japan, all determined the joyous flourishing of an
art apparently freed of all constraint. New motifs, the sun, and artificial lighting
and all the vividness of modern life were allowed into the domain of art.
Literature mixed with the vulgarities of Realism to put an end to the refined
touches of Symbolism; the 'slice of life' was served ungarnished; at the same
time the aristocratic love of the choice word, of the unadulterated state of the
soul and of obscurity in poetry, provoked the lyricism of the young writers.
That which we demanded of Cezanne, Gauguin and van Gogh, they found in
the works of Verlaine, Mallarme and Laforgue: in a manifesto article in the
Revue Encyclopedique Albert Aurier wrote: 'Everywhere the right to dream is
demanded, the right to fields of azure, the right to fly to the stars of absolute



Ia Classicism and Originality 49

truth. The myopic copying of anecdotes from society, the stupid imitation of
nature's blemishes, dull observation, trompe-Poeil, the glory of being as true,
as banally exact, as the photograph no longer satisfies any painter, any sculptor
worthy of this name.' Musicians, less nihilistic than painters, but like them
preoccupied with more individual liberty and more expressiveness, submitted at
once to the influence of Wagnerian romanticism, of Russian picturesqueness,
and of the pure music which was revealed to them by Cesar Franck, Bach and
the contrapuntilists of the sixteenth century.

Everything was in ferment. But finally it must be admitted that in the plastic
arts, the idea of art as at first just restricted to the idea of the copy, relied on
nothing more than Naturalist prejudice in both temperament and individual
sensation. Critics said that that was how they saw things. We heightened the
disgust with conventions, without any other goal than to destroy them: the right
to do anything did not know any restriction. The excess of this anarchy brought
about as a reaction the pursuit of the systematic and the taste for theory. [. . .]

Van Gogh and Gauguin resumed with vigour this epoch of confusion and of
renaissance. Next to the scientific impressionism of Seurat, they represented
barbarity, revolution and fever - and finally docility. Their efforts at the
beginning escaped every classification: and their theories were hard to differen-
tiate from the older Impressionism. For them, as for their predecessors, art was
the rendering of sensation, it was the exaltation of individual sensibility. All the
elements of excess and disorder derived from Impressionism exasperated them
at first; it was only little by little that they became aware of their innovative
role, and they perceived that their synthetism or their symbolism is precisely
the antithesis of Impressionism.

Their work conquered its domain of influence by its brutal and paradoxical
nature. We see the proof in the Northern countries, Russia, Scandinavia,
Finland, where their influence preceded - and prepared - that of Cezanne.
Without the destructive and contradictory anarchism of Gauguin and van Gogh,
the example of Cezanne, with everything that it brings with it from tradition,
measure and order, would not have been understood. The revolutionary elements
of their works were the vehicle for the constructive elements. However, for the
attentive observer, it has been easy to distinguish since 1890, in the excessiveness
of the works and the paradoxes of the theories, a classical reaction.

It suffices to remember that we have demanded since this distant era the title
of 'Neo-Traditionalists'. But that is unimportant compared to what has hap-
pened since. The important fact is that since then an evolution has occurred
towards order, and even amongst those who participated in the movement of
1890, or those who claimed to be attached to it. [ . . . ] In the midst of its elders,
youth has become resolutely classical. One knows of the infatuation of the new
generation for the seventeenth century, for Italy, for Ingres: Versailles is in
fashion, Poussin applied to the nude; Bach always brings in a full house;
Romanticism is ridiculed. In literature, in politics, young people have a passion
for order. The return to tradition and to discipline is as unanimous as was the
cult of the self and the spirit of revolt in our generation. In support of this, I
note the fact that in the vocabulary of avant-garde critics, the word 'classical'



50 The Legacy of Symbolism

is the supreme compliment, and consequently serves to designate the most
'advanced 1 trends. Henceforth Impressionism will be considered an era of
'ignorance and frenzy' to which stands opposed 'a more noble art, more
measured, more ordered, more cultivated' (consider the work of Braque).

Truly, the moment has come where it is necessary to choose, as Barres has
said, between traditionalism and the intellectual point of view. Trade unionists,
or monarchists of the Action Franchise, have equally come down to earth from
their liberal or libertine clouds, and endeavour to remain within the logic of
facts, to reason only with realities; but the monarchist theory, total nationalism,
has amongst other advantages, that of keeping alive the successful experiences
of the past. We, the other painters, have developed towards classicism because
we have had the joy of posing the double aesthetic and psychological problem
of art. We have substituted for the idea of 'nature viewed through a tempera-
ment' [Zola], the theory of equivalences or of the symbol. We affirm that the
emotions or states of the soul provoked by some spectacle, create in the artistic
imagination signs or plastic equivalents capable of reproducing these emotions
or states of the soul without the need to create a copy of the initial spectacle;
that each state of our sensibility must correspond to an objective harmony
capable of being thus translated.

Art is no longer a purely visual sensation that we record, a photograph of
nature, as sophisticated as possible. On the contrary, it is a creation of our spirit
which nature provokes. Instead of 'working from vision, we search for the
mysterious centre of thought', as Gauguin said. The imagination becomes once
again, as in Baudelaire, the queen of the faculties. Thus, we liberate our sensibility.
Art, rather than a copy, becomes the subjective transformation of nature.

Objectively speaking, decorative, aesthetic and rational composition, which the
Impressionists never considered because it ran contrary to their taste for
improvisation, has become the counterpart, the necessary corrective to the theory
of equivalents. In the cause of expressivity, this authorized all transpositions,
even caricatures, any excesses of aspect: objective transformation has obliged each
artist to transpose everything into beauty. In summary, the expressive synthesis,
the symbol of a sensation has become an eloquent transcription of it, and
simultaneously an object composed for visual pleasure.



Profoundly linked in Cezanne, these two trends developed to differing extents
in van Gogh, Gauguin, Bernard, all of the old Synthetists. One can come to
terms with their thinking, can basically summarize the essential element of their
theories, as composed of two kinds of formal change. While decorative changes
of form are the most common of Gauguin's preoccupations, it is by contrast
subjective changes in form which give van Gogh's painting its character and
lyricism. In the case of the former, one discovers beneath rustic or exotic
surfaces, a rigorous logic and the artifices of composition, which, if one dare
say it, preserves a little of the Italian rhetoric. The latter, by way of contrast,
is an exasperated Romantic, who comes to us from the land of Rembrandt. The
picturesque and the pathetic affect him more than plastic beauty and organiz-
ation. Thus they represent an exceptional moment of the double movement,



Ia Classicism and Originality 51

both Classical and Romantic. Let us look in these two painters of our youth
for some concrete images to illustrate this abstract and perhaps obscure thesis.

In the spirited and abrupt style of van Gogh, in his search for radiance, and
his violence of tone, I find everything that seduces the young Tachistes, and the
reason why they content themselves with patches or streaks of pure colour.
They admire his aggressive attitude in the face of nature, his abnormal,
heightened, but truly lyrical vision of things; his impulse of conscience to say
everything that he feels; the insistence with which he affirms the most capricious
movements of his sensibility - and by what rudimentary means! - using a violent
stroke, the bold relief of the thickening out of the paint. There is in his works
an awkward way of attacking the canvas that the last of the Romantics took as
a sign of genius; consider the heavy emphasis that Zola imposed on this type
of painting in VGLuvre. The pathetic and trivial influence of Naturalism had left
its mark even on this mystic, this sophisticated man, this poet; I still see this
in the new generation. The word temperament, with all its animalistic conno-
tations, has retained its prestige. Van Gogh, finally, caused in the younger
generation a reversion to Romanticism.
* * *

[ . . . ] Gauguin, who created so much disorder and incoherence in his life, did
not tolerate any of this in his painting. He loved clarity, a sign of intelligence.
The reconstruction of art, which Cezanne began with the materials of Impress-
ionism, was continued by Gauguin with less sensibility and breadth, but with
more theoretical rigour. He made the thoughts of Cezanne more explicit. In re-
immersing them in the sources of art, in investigating the primary principles
which he called the eternal laws of the beautiful, he gave them a greater force.
'Barbarity', he wrote, 'is for me a return to youth ... I have retreated far, further
than the horses of the Parthenon . . . right back to the dada of my childhood,
the beloved wooden horse.'

We are indebted to the barbarians, to the primitives of 1890, for having
highlighted some essential truths. We can no longer reproduce nature and life
by more or less improvised trompe-l'oeil, but on the contrary, must reproduce
our emotions and our dreams by representing them, using forms and harmonious
colours. This is, I insist, a new position - at least for our times - on the problem
of the nature of art. This concept is a fertile one.

I repeat, this concept is the fundamental one in art of all ages; there is no
real art which is not Symbolist. [. . .]



If the youth of today manages to reject the negative systems which have
disorganized art and aesthetics - and, simultaneously, French society and
intelligence - they will find the truly contemporary elements of a classical
restoration in our Synthetist or Symbolist views, in the rational interpretation
of Cezanne and Gauguin. The theories of 1890 will have done more than just
give a paradoxical twist to eternal verities. They will have made a new order
rise up from anarchy. Our simple methods had at least the advantage of adapting
themselves to new elements introduced by Impressionism, and of using them.
Born of an attitude of decadence, they do not offer us an irresistible idea from



52 The Legacy of Symbolism

the distant past, but organize the fresh resources of modern art, our realities, in
such a way as to allow us to reconcile the example of the masters and the
demands of our sensibility.

The history of art is nothing other than a perpetual beginning. The same
principles of colour which make up the richness of a Gauguin or a van Goch
were applied by Tintoretto and Titian. The beauty of the curves, the style of
the lines of a Degas or a Puvis de Chavannes can be found on the side of Greek
vases, and of primitive frescoes.

We are aware of only a small number of positive truths; at least we can verify
in the past glimpses of laws, certainties acquired by our own unfettered
experience. Thus the idea of tradition, at first shapeless and rudimentary, has
developed and enriched itself.
* * *

As the language of man, symbol of ideas, art can only be idealistic. Any
confusion on this point has, hopefully, been definitively dispelled. We have once
more given pride of place to intelligence, and highest of all, imagination, in the
work of the artist. Whatever the impetus of a work towards nature, one must
not forget that art does not have superior value unless it corresponds to the
noblest and the most mysterious characteristics of the human soul. There is no
example of a great artist who was not also a great poet, nor of a great work
whose subject was purely pictorial. The most painterly of painters, Rembrandt,
Rubens or Corot, were never content with being superb technicians: the works
which immortalized them are, properly speaking, religious, no matter what their
literary content may be.

The productions of modern art do not extend far beyond a small circle of
initiates; these are small coteries which benefit from it. Every type of sensibility,
every artist, incomplete though he may be, possesses a set of admirers, his
public. Now the work of art must reach and move all people. The classical
masterpieces have a character of universality, of the absolute, either because
they express and epitomize an entire civilization, or because they give rise to a
new culture. These masterpieces depict an order of the universe, a divine order,
that the human intelligence can manifest in a way that is fundamentally the
same, though presented via a variety of individual formulations. These formula-
tions only become classical to the extent that they express this order with greater
eloquence and clarity. [. . .]

In this essay we have not tried to explain the enigma of genius. We circle around
this miracle only to define various approaches and differing aspects. The
evolution from Symbolism to Classicism that we have tried to make clear and
to explain, does not diminish artistic spontaneity. If we hope that artistic
freedom knows definite limits and that its sensibility submits itself to the
judgment of reason, we also hope that these limits will increase its virtues, and
that genius restrained by proper rules will acquire greater concentration, depth
and force. It is true that we are tired of the individualist spirit, which rejects
tradition, teaching and discipline and considers the artist as a kind of demi-god,
whose caprice defies rules. It is true that this falsehood, initially our own, has







Ia Classicism and Originality 53

become intolerable to us. However, we still maintain, from our Symbolist point
of view, that the work of art is a general translation of individual emotions.
The new order that we have discerned, born out of the experiences and the
theories of 1890, born from anarchy itself, is based on a subordination of the
faculties one to another. At the bottom level one always finds sensation; it
proceeds from particular sensibility to general reason. One would not know how
to look for the subject of a work of art except in individual perception, in the
spontaneous perception of a relation, of an equivalence between certain states
of the soul and certain plastic signs which they necessarily translate. The novelty
consists in thinking that this type of symbolism, far from being incompatible
with the classical method, can renew the effectiveness of that method and draw
admirable developments from it. Not the least advantage of our system is the
fact that the basis for a very objective art, a very general and plastic language,
even a classical art, is the most subjective and the most subtle aspect of the
human soul, the most mysterious spirit of our inner life.



9 Julius Meier-Graefe (1867-1935) 'The Mediums of
Art, Past and Present'

From the opening chapter of Modern Art: Being a Contribution to a New System of
Aesthetics, originally published in German as Entwickelungsgeschichte der modernen
Kunst, 1904. Meier-Graefe's thoughtful and pioneering work helped decide the terms of
reference in which the historical development of modern art was conceived by sub-
sequent writers. The present text is taken from the translation by F. Simmonds and
G. Chrystal, London and New York, 1908.



I

Our collective artistic culture was bound to suffer, when the collective forces
of art were concentrated in a special domain, that of pictures and statues. The
fact is not minimized by the consideration, that this development was the work
of a glorious history, originating in the most brilliant phases of modern culture.
Nor can it be denied that the most splendid epochs of humanity achieved their
great results without the omnipotence of pictures. [ . . . ]

In these days, the pure work of art has been brought into immediate contact
with every-day life; an attempt has been made to transform it utterly, to make
it the medium of the aesthetic aspirations of the house, whereas this function
belongs properly to the house itself and the utilitarian objects in it. We have
tried to popularize the highest expression of art, something only significant
when applied to the loftiest purposes, something, the enjoyment of which
without a certain solemnity is inconceivable, or, at least, only to be attained in
moments of peculiar detachment. We have succeeded merely in vulgarizing it.

This is the source of the great error that retards our artistic culture. We
revolve in vicious circles round the abstract work of art.



54 The Legacy of Symbolism

The painted or carved image is in its nature immovable. Not only because it
was originally composed for a given space, but because the world of emotion
to which it belongs lies wholly apart. This may be so powerful, that its
association with the things of daily life cannot be effected without serious
damage either to the one or the other.

The association of works of art with religious worship was therefore the most
natural association possible. A heavenly illumination, itself possessed of all the
attributes of divinity, art gave impetus to the soul in its aspirations towards the
mystic, its flight from the sufferings of daily life, and offered the best medium
possible for that materialization of the divine idea, which the primitive man
demands in religion. The ancient Greek worship, with its natural, purely
sensuous conceptions, was the happiest basis for the artist, for in Greece religion
and art were one thing: beauty. The god was the ideal of beauty.

When the temple became a church, art lost its original purity, and became
the handmaid of the hierarchy. But religion was so deeply implanted in the
souls of the faithful, that both to executant and recipient the service never lost
the mystic atmosphere, the common bond, and all hostile antagonism was
avoided. It was the Reformation that first drove the image from the temple,
and gave to worship a form, the austerity of which excluded any sensuous
enjoyment.

This was one of the many contributory impulses that brought about the
confusion of aesthetics. Art was so closely bound up with religion, that it almost
seemed as if the enlightenment that shattered the one, must be dangerous to
the other. The mysticism of art and that of religion had formerly mingled their
currents. As a fact, the former was no less obscure than the latter - who can
say even now, what the essence of art is? But the pious and sometimes beautiful
fable of religion had to perish, to make way, not for Luther's compromise, but
for something radically opposite, science, by which the raison d'etre of art
remained unaffected. Indeed, as science could not satisfy the mystic yearnings
of the soul, the sphere of art was, if possible, extended, though it could no
longer be restricted to conventional forms.

The emancipation of man from the dogmas of the church was an advance. In
the domain of art, where it destroyed the fixed convention as to subject, it
might have become beneficent. But as a fact, it entailed retrogression. Painting
was not yet strong enough to stand alone, or perhaps it was already enervated;
instead, now that it was free from all objective constraint, of rising to the heights
of pure art, sustained by its own convention alone, it gradually became vul-
garized, and finally fell into perplexities from which it had been preserved in
the early ages of culture;

A three-fold watchword inspired the political and social contests of the new
age: Freedom, Truth, Equality. We think we have the first two; and our
generation is warring for a verdict as to the third.

Art thought herself bound to take part in the contest. As on other battlefields,
the three sections of the ideal were upheld simultaneously, and as in these
again, the fight was sharpest and most decisive over the first two, Freedom
and Truth.



Ia Classicism and Originality 55

Broadly speaking, the trilogy, taken absolutely, is Utopian, and even nonsen-
sical; but in social matters, the ideal regulates itself in a rational manner. In
art, where such was not the case, where the extravagance of the postulate was
far in excess of its good sense, it worked most mischievously.

Art was to be free - but free from what? The innovators forgot, that freedom
implies isolation. In her impulsive vehemence, art cast away the elements that
made her indispensable to man. The vaster the wide ocean of unbounded aims
before her, the more distant was the terra firma which had been her home. She
lost her native land.

* * *

It was only in those earlier days, when proprietary rights were not associated

with art, that the relation of the layman thereto approached the socialistic ideal.

Art was for all, for it belonged to no one. It stood above individual greed, a

highly communistic symbol in an age that in all else was far indeed from the

socialism of our day. Now it has become the expression of our terrible class

distinctions. It is only accessible to an aristocracy, whose domination is the more

sinister, in that it is not based solely on rank and wealth, that is to say, on

things by the division of which the ardent socialist hopes to re-establish the

social equilibrium. There is nothing so unattainable, for the enjoyment of it

presupposes an abnormal refinement of aesthetic perception, which has become

as rare as genius itself. Nowadays, one must not only have a great deal of money

to buy art, but one must be an exceptional creature, of peculiar gifts, to enjoy

:;i it. It exists only for the few, and these are far from being the most admirable

 or beneficent of mankind; they seem, indeed, to show all the characteristics of

H the degenerate. Loftiness of character, or of intelligence, are not essential to the

| comprehension of art. The greatest men of our age have notoriously known

I nothing about it, and what is more remarkable, artists themselves often under-

V stand it least of all. Artists have talked more nonsense about art than any other

class of men. Modern artistic culture can scarcely be accounted an indispensable

element of general culture any longer, for the simple reason that art has ceased

to play a part in the general organism.

* * *



II

The incomprehensibility of painting and sculpture to the general public has
been shrouded in a veil of pretentious exposition. The amount of talking and
writing about art in our day exceeds that in all other epochs put together. The
increase of sociability rising from increase of wealth made it necessary to invent
suitable occupations for unproductive energies. Chatter about art became a
highly popular form of such amusement; it requires no special preparation, no
exertion, is independent of weather and seasons, and can be practised in
drawing-rooms! Art has become like caviare - everyone wants to have it, whether
they like it or not. The immaterial elements of the former give a certain
intellectual tone to the sport, which is lacking in a feast of caviare; it is therefore
complacently opposed to such material enjoyments. [. . .]



Ill,



56 The Legacy of Symbolism

Love of art, however, especially the kind of love that goes beyond platonic
limits, becomes rarer as those who meddle with it multiply in every land.
Purchase has become the touchstone of such affection; like marriage, it is a
practical token of sentiment, and even to the artist, this evidence is generally
more important than the impulse that inspired it.

It can hardly be otherwise now. If art is to be anything, it must not arouse
merely that languid attention which people manifest when they politely approve
something as 'very interesting.' It is not enough that it should inspire the pens
of scribblers, and develop itself alone, and not others. In the form to which it
is confined today - that of picture or statue, a marketable commodity - it could
only exercise an influence by fulfilling the purpose of other marketable things:
that of being purchased. But the popularization of art is rendered impossible
by the extravagant prices commanded by recognized works of art and demanded
for those that are not so recognized, by a frantic, absurd, and unhappily,
thoroughly dishonest traffic. I can conceive of rich people who would refrain
from the purchase of pictures out of sheer disgust at the trade, a desire to keep
their hands clean. The purchasing amateur is a personality made up of the most
obscure springs of action. The absolutely incalculable fluctuations in prices, the
influence of fashion, nowhere so demented as in this connection, the desire to
go on improving his collection, i.e., to bring it up to the fashionable standard
of the moment, forces the collector to be always selling, to become the
shamefaced dealer, who is, of course, the most shameless, and who introduces
additional elements of disorder into a commerce already chaotic. The result is
that there are, as a fact, no buyers, but only dealers, people who pile their
pictures one above the other, deal exclusively, or almost exclusively, with each
other, and have no connection with the real public. Statistics, showing how few
are the hands to which the immense artistic wealth of the world is confined,
would make a sensation. A great London dealer once told me that he had only
three customers! Durand-Ruel, of Paris, has several times had certain famous
Impressionist pictures in his possession at progressive prices, rising some 1000
per cent each time, and the purchasers have often been the same persons on
several occasions.

Such conditions reduce the aesthetic usefulness of a work to a minimum.
Pictures become securities, which can be kept locked up like papers. Even the
individual, the owner, ceases to enjoy his possession. Nine-tenths of the most
precious French pictures are kept for nine-tenths of the year in magnificent
cases, to protect them from dust. Sales are effected as on the Bourse, and
speculation plays an important part in the operations. The goods are scarcely
seen, even at the sale. A typical, but by no means unique, example is afforded
by the late Forbes collection. It consisted of I forget how many hundreds or
thousands of pictures. To house them, the owner rented the upper storey of
one of the largest London railway stations, vast storehouses, but all too
circumscribed to allow of the hanging of the pictures. They stood in huge stacks
against the walls, one behind the other: the Israels, Mauves, and Marises were
to be counted by hundreds, the French masters of 1830 by dozens; there were
exquisite examples of Millet, Corot, Daubigny, Gourbet, &c, and Whistler.



Ia Classicism and Originality 57

Although the stacks of pictures were held up by muscular servants, the
enjoyment of these treasures was a tremendously exhausting physical process.
One walked between pictures; one felt capable of walking calmly over them!
After five minutes in the musty atmosphere, goaded by the idiotic impulse to
see as much as possible, and the irritating consciousness that it was impossible
to grasp anything, every better instinct was stifled by an indifference that
quenched all power of appreciation. The deathly calm one broke in upon, as
one toiled sweating through these bare gigantic rooms where there was no space
to turn, the whistling of the engines, the trembling of the floor as the trains
ran in and out below, seemed to inspire a kind of strange fury, a silent longing
to destroy the whole lot.

Who would be the loser if this were actually done? If anything could justify
anarchism, it is the knowledge that the greatest artists toil in poverty, to enable
a few dealers to grow rich after their deaths, and a few fanatics to hoard their
works in warehouses. The most notorious vices are not so grotesquely irrational
as this mania for hoarding, which, owing to its apparent innocuousness, has not
yet been recognised as a malady. All the famous collectors of Paris, London,
and America are more or less tainted with this disease. We enter their houses
full of eager anticipation, and quit them with a sigh of relief, half suffocated
by the pictures that cover every inch of wall-space, and wholly depressed, not
by a feeling of envy, but by the thought that there are people who have
voluntarily accepted the torture of spending their lives among all these things.

Even if a wiser economy should improve the conditions we have described,
it will never be possible to induce a better appreciation of art by commercial
means. Hence all the fine ideas of 'popular art' are doomed to remain mere
dreams. It is materially impossible to produce pure works of art at prices that
will bring them within the means of the masses. [. . .]
* * *



ni

* * *

The dwelling-house of to-day has lost its formal relation to the age. Save for
non-social, practical considerations, which express themselves in a certain com-
fort and in the employment of space to the best advantage, it shows a lack of
cohesion with our lives. Contrary to the usage of former times, our sphere of
action is now generally outside our houses. This action itself has changed, no
less than its field; mental effort tends more and more to take the place of
physical exertion. The men whose activity is most prolific in these days, that
is, whose wills have the strongest influence upon production, use their limbs
and muscles the least. The intellectual apparatus accordingly requires care and
protection in its leisure.

The dwelling has become a place of recuperation, and this determines the
character of the busy man's domicile.

As places of recuperation, our dwellings have, as a fact, become better adapted
for artistic elements, and even for abstract works of art. We may for the moment



58 The Legacy of Symbolism

set aside the dismal fact that the pure work of art is generally the only artistic
thing in the house, and quite without relation to all the rest. Such conditions
only make it the more essential, if man is not to renounce every loftier stimulus
from without. But if the work in the house is to have any influence, in conditions
so far removed from those of the earlier vehicles of art, it must be subordinated
to these new conditions. It is not the chief object that draws us to the place
containing it, as in the case of a museum; we do not approach it with the
devoutness of the soul athirst for mystic rapture, as formerly in a church.
Comfort is the essential in this modern shrine, and a picture that disturbs our
sense of well-being is clearly out of place in a house.

This sense of comfort is certainly not to be satisfied merely by artistic
qualities. The very works that make the deepest impression upon us, are least
adapted to domestic combination, because the sensuous value that might promote
satisfaction, is present in them in forms unsuitable to our four walls or our
hundred prepossessions. There are things one admires, and others one wishes
to possess. That which decides between them is a whole world, and not a kind
of hygiene, which teaches us to live with certain sensations, because they demand
intellectual effort and sacrifice.

Art under such conditions ceases to be divine; she is no longer the enchantress
who brings men to their knees before her, but rather a gentle little housewife,
who surrounds us with tender attentions, and eagerly produces the sort of things
that will distract tired people after a day's work.

Such a function is beneath the dignity of art. She could not accept it, if she
was to remain what she had been in the past. It did not embrace her whole
domain; it belongs by right to utilitarian art.

[ . . . ] If the uses of art change, art itself must change. If it cannot have the
place it requires, it becomes meaningless. If it stands alone, it perishes. To
restrict our artistic requirements to abstract painting and sculpture is a folly of
the same order as that of the madman in the fable, who wished that everything
he touched might turn to gold. Abstract art is a holiday delight. We are not a
race of pleasure-seekers, and we are proud to say so. Our most rational idea is
to divide, not wealth, but work, to see an era when there will be no drones,
when every one will exert himself for the common good. In such a state the
amateur will cease to exist.



IV

For what then do artists create, pending what is generally the posthumous
consummation - that accumulation of their works described above?

Some for an unattainable object, every step towards which is marked by tears
and blood, an ideal that can only be described in somewhat metaphysical
rhetoric: the satisfaction of a conscience that has no relation to extrinsic things,
of a supernal ambition, grandiose and dazzling in its conscious determination,
in its consistent effort towards the elusive goal, amazing in the unconsciousness
with which it achieves results that would seem only possible to the most
strenuous toil. Creation for the sake of creation.



Ia Classicism and Originality 59

A far-seeing idealism sustains them, the hope that they will succeed in giving
a new form of beauty. A blind optimism leads them, even when most neglected,
to believe that they will be appreciated by some, that some will share the new
joys they have discovered. And when the futility of such hopes is demonstrated,
when they see their works passed over, or, worse still, bought by purchasers
who have none of that intimate delight in their creations on which they had
counted, they withdraw into themselves and do their greatest work.

Sometimes that which appears to them in their confident self-knowledge their
greatest work, is recognized by the enlightened at last, and becomes an eternal
possession, a lasting element in after generations of artists, in whose works it
lives in another form, completed by new achievement. It passes into the artistic
heritage of the nation, and finally plays its part in national culture. Others fail;
not that their self-knowledge is at fault, but that their talent or their intelligence
falls short. Their numeric preponderance is so great, that they completely crowd
out the few, and the limited demand of the public for pictures is supplied almost
exclusively by them. I suppose that to every thousand painters of the one class,
there is not more than one of the other. Imagine such a proportion in any other
calling! The artist can mislead the public more easily than can a man of any
other profession, for setting aside the affinity of the herd for all that is
superficial, a sort of halo surrounds the painter; he profits by a number of
institutions very favourable to mediocrity, which give a certain importance to
the metier as such, and are readily turned to account by the adroit.

Foremost among these is the art-exhibition, an institution of a thoroughly
bourgeois nature, due to the senseless immensity of the artistic output, and the
consequent urgency of showing regularly what has been accomplished in the
year. This institution may be considered the most important artistic medium of
our age. [. . .]

Artists acquiesce in the system, because if they held aloof, their last means
of expression would be denied them. They want, at least, to let their work be
seen, and see it themselves, even among that of a thousand others, even for a
few months, even under barbaric conditions. What becomes of it after the
exhibition is indifferent to them. It is enough if the picture fulfils its purpose
at the exhibition, attracts attention, is discussed by the critics, and, perhaps,
even - this is the culminating distinction! - receives a medal.

To secure these results in competition with the thousands who are bent on
the same ends, it is above all things necessary that a picture should have certain
qualities that distinguish it from the rest. If the artist is bold enough, he makes
it very large, or at all events very insistent, that it may strike the eye, even if
badly hung.

It is obvious that under such conditions the purpose achieved by competition
in other domains - that of promoting the selection of the best - can never be
fulfilled. A variety of those base impulses, which always urge on the compact
majority against the loftier individuality, play their part in the result. Rarely,
indeed, has a genius been brought to light through these channels. The greater
artists avoid these exchanges, and even the amateur does not frequent them,
since quantity is not the only thing he craves.



60 The Legacy of Symbolism

The remnant of artistic sensibility that lingers in our age bids fair to be
systematically crushed out by these exhibitions. If perchance any of the palatial
barracks that house them should survive for posterity, they will be more
damaging to us than any other relic. There will be persons who will go through
these galleries in the spirit in which we visit ruined castles, and the rusty
picture-hooks will be to them like gruesome instruments of torture.

Pictures once hung on these hooks . . .

This is the end of the history of pictures. We have, at least, the comfort of
knowing that we can sink no lower. Once the symbol of the holiest, diffusing
reverence in the church, and standing above mankind like the Divinity itself,
the picture has become the diversion of an idle moment; the church is now a
booth in a fair; the worshippers of old are frivolous chatterers.



Ia Classicism and Originality 61

[realized that every corner of the palace, every column, every window possessed
|g spirit, an impenetrable soul. I looked around at the marble heroes, motionless
pi the lucid air, beneath the frozen rays of that winter sun which pours down
pn us without love, like perfect song. A bird was warbling in a window cage.
||it that moment I grew aware of the mystery which urges men to create certain
jpfrange forms. And the creation appeared more ^extraordinary than the creators.
|V. Perhaps the most amazing sensation passed on to us by prehistoric man is
at of presentiment. It will always continue. We might consider it as an eternal
^roof of the irrationality of the universe. Original man must have wandered
tirough a world full of uncanny signs. He must have trembled at each step.



10 Giorgio de Chirico (1888-1978) 'Mystery and
Creation'

Although of an Italian family, de Chirico was Greek by birth and upbringing, with a
consequent familiarity with the classical heritage. He studied in Munich, where he was
attracted to the painting of Boecklin and Klinger and the philosophy of Schopenhauer
and Nietzsche. In Paris from 191 1 to the outbreak of war he developed his 'Metaphysical
painting': a self-consciously enigmatic type of picture clearly inviting Freudian forms of
interpretation. The present text was written during this phase and before his return to
Italy in 1915. It was first published by Andre Breton in his Surrealism and Painting,
Paris, 1928. The present translation is taken from the London Bulletin (an organ of the
Surrealist movement in England), no. 6, October 1938, p. 14.

To become truly immortal a work of art must escape all human limits: logic
and common sense will only interfere. But once these barriers are broken it will
enter the regions of childhood vision and dream.

Profound statements must be drawn by the artist from the most secret recesses
of his being; there no murmuring torrent, no birdsong, no rustle of leaves can
distract him.

What I hear is valueless; only what I see is living, and when I close my eyes
my vision is even more powerful.

It is most important that we should rid art of all that it has contained of
recognizable material to date, all familiar subject matter, all traditional ideas, all
popular symbols must be banished forthwith. More important still, we must
hold enormous faith in ourselves: it is essential that the revelation we receive,
the conception of an image which embraces a certain thing, which has no sense
in itself, which has no subject, which means absolutely nothing from the logical
point of view, I repeat, it is essential that such a revelation or conception should
speak so strongly in us, evoke such agony or joy, that we feel compelled to
paint, compelled by an impulse even more urgent than the hungry desperation
which drives a man to tearing at a piece of bread like a savage beast.

I remember one vivid winter's day at Versailles. Silence and calm reigned
supreme. Everything gazed at me with mysterious, questioning eyes. And then



'-

fa-

'

fit.-



IB

Expression and the Primitive



1 August Endell (1871-1925) The Beauty of Form
and Decorative Art'

Endell was an architect and designer associated with the Jugendstil tendency. In
writings published in Munich at the turn of the century he advanced the idea of a new
visual art, justified by analogy with music, which would be both abstract and expressive.
The present essay was originally published in Dekorative Kunst, I, Munich, 1897-8, pp.
75-7, 119-25; the translation is taken from T. and C. Benton and D. Sharp (eds.),
Form and Function, London, 1975.

In the ever more vehement yearning for a new style in architecture and applied
art, and in the new, original and independent style of decoration, the dissonant
warning voices of the cautious can be heard. From the dizzy heights of their
experience, they smile down sympathetically upon the foolish exploits of their
juniors and still remain ready to show to the general public the only path of
truth. They teach us that there can be no new form, that all possibilities have
been exhausted in the styles of the past, and that all art lies in an individually
modified use of old forms. It even extends to selling the pitiful eclecticism of
the last decades as the new style.

To those with understanding, this despondency is simply laughable. For they
can clearly see, that we are not only at the beginning of a new stylistic phase,
but at the same time on the threshold of the development of a completely new
Art. An Art with forms which signify nothing, represent nothing and remind
us of nothing, which arouse our souls as deeply and as strongly as music has
always been able to do.

The barbarian finds our music distasteful; culture and education are necessary
for its full appreciation. Appreciation of visual form is also something that must
be acquired. We must learn to see it and really immerse ourselves in form. We
must discover how to use our eyes. It may well be that man has for a long time
delighted in form subconsciously. In the history of the fine arts this development
can be clearly studied but it has not yet reached the point where it has finally
taken root never to be forgotten. Painters have taught us a great deal, but their
primary aim has always been colour, and where they were concerned with form,



#;




Ib Expression and the Primitive 63

they mainly searched for the conceptual quality by the exact reproduction of
the object, and not the aesthetic quality, which nature only rarely and by chance
offers in the dimensions which the painter requires.

If we wish to understand and appreciate formal beauty we must learn to see
in a detailed way. We must concentrate on the details, on the form of the root
of a tree, on the way in which a leaf is connected to its stalk, on the structure
of the bark, on the lines made by the turbid spray on the shores of a lake. Also
we must not just glance carelessly at the form. Our eye must trace, minutely,
every curve, every twist, every thickening, every contraction, in short we must
experience every nuance in the form. For there is only one point in our field
of vision which we can see exactly, and it is only that which is clearly seen,
which can hold some meaning for us. If we see in this way, an immensely rich
new world is revealed to us, full of totally new experience. A thousand sensations
are awakened within us. New feelings and shades of feeling, continual unex-
pected transformations. Nature seems to live and we begin to understand that
there really are sorrowing trees and wicked treacherous branches, virginal grasses
and terrible, gruesome flowers. Of course, not everything is going to affect us
in this way, there are also things which are boring, meaningless and ineffectual,
but the alert eye will everywhere observe forms of superb, soul-shattering
magnificence.

This is the power of form upon the mind, a direct, immediate influence
without any intermediary stage, by no means an anthropomorphic effect, but
one of direct empathy. If we speak of a sorrowing tree, we do not at all think
of the tree as a living being which sorrows, but mean only that it awakens the
feeling of sorrow within us. Or when we say that the pine tree aspires upwards
we do not animate the pine tree. It is just that the expression, of the act of
aspiring, produces more easily in the mind of the listener a clearer image of
verticality. We are employing nothing more than a verbal aid to make up for
an inadequate vocabulary and to produce a living concept more quickly.

'How can the feelings aroused by form be explained?' is a question voiced
most loudly by those who have never experienced them. I could answer, that
there is no place for this here, that one can enjoy music without having to know
why the chords can possibly move us so greatly. But in order to pacify those
who doubt and to pave their way into the world of form, I should like to attempt
to describe the emotive effect of the elements of form and their constituent
parts, and also to at least outline the psychological explanation, so far as is
possible without lengthy discussion ...

The straight line is not only mathematically but also aesthetically superior to
all other lines. If we follow a straight line, for instance the vertical, with our
eyes, this always retains the same direction in our field of vision. In contrast
to this, a curved line, perhaps that of a round-headed archway for instance,
alters its shape continually: first vertical, then slanting upwards, then horizontal,
then slanting down and finally descending vertically. Whereas during the
observation of curved lines there is always something new to grasp, the straight
line always looks the same. As we look, our perception is quickened, and this



64 The Legacy of Symbolism

is accelerated, the further the straight line extends, since every extra second of
looking appears to add nothing to our perception. But since more familiar things
are grasped more readily still, urging the eye on, the speed with which we
perceive a straight line rises continuously.

Every quick motion gives us a certain feeling which we will call for the
moment 'the feeling of speed'. The straight line awakes this feeling in us; it
looks quick and the more so the longer it is. The width of the straight line,
however - we are here speaking of real and not mathematical lines - has the
effect of slowing it down. For a wide straight line requires more time for it to
be appreciated than a narrow one, since it requires more perception. The straight
line therefore appears faster or slower depending on whether it is narrow or
broad.

The effect of direction is of a completely different nature. The vertically
descending straight line (i.e. the straight line which we follow from the top
downwards) has a light and effortless effect. The horizontal has a quiet strength,
and the vertically ascending line gives the effect of strong exertion. The slanting
positions, slanting downwards or upwards, offer intermediary nuances, so that
we have a continual table of characteristics stretching from a feeling of minimum
effort to the strongest feeling of all. This emotional appeal is probably based
on the fact that directing the eye upwards requires more effort than looking
downwards. The reason for this is not quite clear. The mid-point of the eye is
in front of the pivoting point, and probably of the centre of gravity. This in
fact would mean that raising the eyeball requires effort but that lowering it
does not. Besides this, certain assumptions about the processes in the retina
enable us to give a second reason for the emotional effect which we are
discussing. This however can only be developed in a more comprehensive
description. [ . . . ]

Straightforwardness, sincerity, warmth, solemnity, profundity and sublimity
all have a slow tempo in common, whereas frivolity, provocation, arrogance,
harshness, violence and savagery are transmitted to us by speed and suddenness.
In both cases, however, there is a step by step gradation of tension, effort, force,
intensity or whatever one wishes to call it. An element of lightness and
effortlessness is present in all simplicity and frivolity, whereas that which is
savage or inspired calls forth within us extremes of effort. And just as with
these extremes, there is a certain tempo for every emotion and a corresponding
degree of exertion. We have attempted in the accompanying Table to organize
the main nuances of emotion. In the horizontal rows, the effort rises from left
to right whereas it is the tempo which rises in the vertical lines from bottom
to top. The inner rectangle contains feelings of gaiety, those outside it are
feelings of apathy. Apathy results in us from everything which is too weak or
too strong, too slow or too fast for our endurance . . .

And because all sensations are only tempo and tension, form is able to awaken
all shades of emotion within us. For we saw that the straight line always awoke
within us not only these two kinds of sensation, but indeed every other possible
variety. [ . . . ]




Ib Expression and the Primitive 65



Malicious


Scornful


Haughty


Pathetic Frigid


Pitiless


Cruel


Terrible
Hideous


Facetious


Frivolous


Provocative


Arrogant Harsh


Violent


Savage


Coquettish


Chic


Ebulliant


Daring Reckless


Majestic


Awesome


Dreadful


Affected


Gracious


Elegant


Energetic Vigorous


Firm


Brutal


Bestial


Sweet

Insipid

Vacuous


Dainty

Delicate

Straight-
forward


Flexible
Devoted
Sincere


Fiery Strong Rugged
Generous Distinguished Mighty
Warm Solemn Profound


Powerful

Monstrous

Sublime


Frightful

Awful

Gruesome

Desperate


Dim


Weak


Tired


Troubled Sad


Melancholic


Sombre



Light



EFFORT



ft [It is impossible, of course, to translate the German words precisely: this Table is intended
essence of EndelPs idea.]



Heavy

to give the



:%



2 Andre Derain (1880-1954) Letters to Vlaminck

The painters Derain and Vlaminck were both involved with the 'Fauve' tendency in France
in the first decade of the century. In these letters, written in 1905 and 1909, Derain
addresses the common ground of an interest in heightened pictorial colour, conceived
; as a strong form of response to naturalistic effects. Originally published in A. Derain,
Lettres a Vlaminck, Paris, 1955, from which this translation is made.



Estaque [undated, 1905]

[. . .] I sense that I am moving towards something better, where colourfulness
counts for less than it did last year, so that more time can be spent on the issue
of painting itself

We are at a truly arduous stage of the problem. I am so lost that I ask myself
in what words I can explain this to you ... If one does not attempt decorative
art, all one can do is increasingly to purify the transposition of nature. We
didn't do this on purpose, solely for the sake of colour. The design runs parallel.
Many things are lacking in our idea of our art.

All in all, I can see no future except in composition, because in working from
nature I am a slave to such stupid things that my emotions feel the repercussions
of it. I don't see the future as corresponding to our trends; on the one hand,
we are trying to disengage ourselves from objective things, and on the other
hand, we retain them as both origin and final aim. No, honestly, if I stand back,
I do not see in the least what I should do in order to be logical.

To compose visually, to amuse oneself in composing pictures like Denis, which
are things one can see, is ultimately nothing but the transposition of a theatrical
set. I think that the problem is rather to group forms in the light and to
harmonize them simultaneously with the materials available. [. . .]

Collioure, 28 July 1905

I have so many things to tell you that I don't know which should be first. I
am taking advantage of the rain to write to you, because usually there is a



66 The Legacy of Symbolism

radiant sun which exasperates me by increasing the difficulties I have with
synthesis, and also by complicating the acrobatics I attempt on the subject of
light - so far as this concerns my experiments.
My trip has helped on two major points:

1 A new concept of light, which consists in the following: the negation of
shadow. Here, the light is very strong, the shadows very clear. Shadows are a
world of clarity and luminosity which is opposed to the sunlight: a world which
one calls reflections.

Until now we have neglected both of these, and in the future, there will be
a recovery of the expressive dimension of composition.

2 To know, in the company of Matisse, how to eradicate all division of tone.
He continues; but I have completely abandoned it, and hardly use it any more.
It's logical in a luminous and harmonious panel. But it damages things which
draw their expressive power from deliberate dissonances.

It's ultimately a world which self-destructs when pushed to the absolute. I'm
hurrying back to my work for the Independents, which is, all in all, the most
logical from my point of view and which accords perfectly with my means of
expression.

I would also like to resume my work in oil, because the events of each day
only serve to give solid form to my first ideas. [. . .]

1909

[. . .] I'm piling up a lot of notes which may be of use to you. It's a shame
that you can only spend eight days here. These landscape 'landscapes' are
wonderful and would really please you. As for the atmosphere, it's fine, fine
and colourful! . . .

Nevertheless, I'm going to do some landscapes, but against my will, almost.
I don't feel the need for landscapes, nor for portraits, nor for still lifes. I've
had wonderful feelings, whose grandeur can only be matched by a total
possession of forms, which I use equally to create the grandeur. It's very difficult
to possess a landscape.

But it's easier to create a harmonious shape, which in its very essence carries
its own title, creating it through those affections one has felt in the physical
world.

What Delacroix said is true: 'Nature is a dictionary; one draws words from
it.' But more important than the dictionary is the will to write, the unity of
our own thought; this is nothing other than the translation in spatial form of
our virility, of our cowardice, of our sensitivity and of our intelligence. All of this,
amalgamated, constitutes this personality which is realized in a shaped form.

Thus, for my painting for the Independents, must it have been better that it
was? No, it would have spoken more absolutely in its intention, if it hadn't kept
being so confident about the direction it was heading in.

I think it's a mistake to pretend we only have a good side; showing our faults
and our incapacities is the best statement of absolute value to our neighbour.



Ib Expression and the Primitive 67

So, while my canvas is not what it should have been, it's enough for another
to understand that it is mine alone. It's already something!

. . . You are only good for decorative art! Good, that's perfectly all right. But
my intelligence and my will create a reality, showing that they want to exceed
the gifts which have been given to me.

Even if I don't create an absolute for myself, I at least give it my all, the
equal to what I understand, and what I want.

It would take a long time to write to you about this. But this interests me
beyond all measure. I want to talk to you about what interests me, the modern
view of life. I think about it intensely here. It seems to me that everything
converges on (or coincides with?) the search for happiness. Now, one can be
disinterested, in an absolute way, living above and beyond joy or unhappiness;
that does sometimes happen to great artistic emotions. But when you come back
down to earth, you feel it all the more. To the maximum of joy corresponds
the maximum of unhappiness.

Only one thing can save painting, and that's the joke. The joke shines through
everything. The joke is all-powerful. With the joke one can pull through
anything. Basically one is often very bored; but one manages to interest the
spirit in the mask that one attaches to it. That's the most wonderful thing. But
what ... to joke about something from frustration . . . what happens afterwards
is, you joke about your spirit itself.

From another point of view, greatness, great size is a stupid thing. What is
a thing of great stature, of sentimental nobility, of great enthusiasm? If it wants
to be thus, then it's stupid.

We are too uncertain of the progress of ideas in our era to desire a definite
character. We have to submit to unconsciousness. As for the result, we cannot
learn from our own lessons.

Similarly, it's ridiculous to want to adopt an attitude; it's necessary to follow
life with kindness, drawing the maximum pleasure from that which surrounds
you. When I say 'pleasure' I don't mean you have to be physically happy. I
speak above all, of the assessment of this pleasure. [ . . . ]



3 Ernst Ludwig Kirchner (1880-1934) Programme of
the Briicke

The Brucke (The Bridge) was the name adopted by an avant-garde group founded in
Dresden in 1905. The artists originally involved were Kirchner, K. Schmidt-Rottluff, E.
Heckel and F. Bleyl. Together with the Munich-based Der Blaue Reiter (The Blue Rider),
The Brucke represented the Expressionist tendency in German art. The programme was
first published in 1906 as a woodcut broadsheet to accompany the Brucke exhibition
at the Seifert factory, Dresden. The present text is translated from the woodcut.

With faith in progress and in a new generation of creators and spectators we
call together all youth. As youth, we carry the future and want to create for
ourselves freedom of life and of movement against the long established older



68 The Legacy of Symbolism

forces. Everyone who reproduces that which drives him to creation with
directness and authenticity belongs to us.

4 Wilhelm Worringer (1881-1965) from Abstraction
and Empathy

Subtitled 'A Contribution to the Psychology of Style', Worringer's essay was written as
a doctoral thesis in 1906. It was published as Abstraktion und Einfiihlung in Munich by
Piper Verlag in 1908, and was to be continuously reprinted for over forty years. It was
influential in countering what Worringer called the 'European-classical prejudice of our
customary historical conception and valuation of arf. It also furnished theoretical
support for that widespread Modernist tendency in which enthusiasm for so-called
primitive art was conjoined with interest in modern forms of abstraction. The present
text is taken from the opening chapter, in the translation by Michael Bullock of the third
- 1910 - edition, London and New York, 1953.

[. . .] Our investigations proceed from the presupposition that the work of art,
as an autonomous organism, stands beside nature on equal terms and, in its
deepest and innermost essence, devoid of any connection with it, in so far as
by nature is understood the visible surface of things. Natural beauty is on no
account to be regarded as a condition of the work of art, despite the fact that
in the course of evolution it seems to have become a valuable element in the
work of art, and to some extent indeed positively identical with it.

This presupposition includes within it the inference that the specific laws of
art have, in principle, nothing to do with the aesthetics of natural beauty. It is
therefore not a matter of, for example, analysing the conditions under which a
landscape appears beautiful, but of an analysis of the conditions under which
the representation of this landscape becomes a work of art.

Modern aesthetics, which has taken the decisive step from aesthetic objectiv-
ism to aesthetic subjectivism, i.e. which no longer takes the aesthetic as the
starting-point of its investigations, but proceeds from the behaviour of the
contemplating subject, culminates in a doctrine that may be characterised by
the broad general name of the theory of empathy. This theory has been clearly
and comprehensively formulated in the writings of Theodor Lipps. [. . .]

... the basic purpose of my essay is to show that this modern aesthetics,
which proceeds from the concept of empathy, is inapplicable to wide tracts of
art history. Its Archimedian point is situated at one pole of human artistic feeling
alone. It will only assume the shape of a comprehensive aesthetic system when
it has united with the lines that lead from the opposite pole.

We regard as this counter-pole an aesthetics which proceeds not from man's
urge to empathy, but from his urge to abstraction. Just as the urge to empathy
as a pre-assumption of aesthetic experience finds its gratification in the beauty
of the organic, so the urge to abstraction finds its beauty in the life-denying
inorganic, in the crystalline or, in general terms, in all abstract law and necessity.

We shall endeavour to cast light upon the antithetic relation of empathy and
abstraction, by first characterizing the concept of empathy in a few broad strokes.



Ib Expression and the Primitive 69

The simplest formula that expresses this kind of aesthetic experience runs:
Aesthetic enjoyment is objectified self-enjoyment. To enjoy aesthetically means
to enjoy myself in a sensuous object diverse from myself, to empathize myself
into it. 'What I empathize into it is quite generally life. And life is energy,
inner working, striving and accomplishing. In a word, life is activity. But activity
is that in which I experience an expenditure of energy. By its nature, this
activity is an activity of the will. It is endeavour or volition in motion.' [. . .]

The presupposition of the act of empathy is the general apperceptive activity.
'Every sensuous object, in so far as it exists for me, is always the product of
two components, of that which is sensuously given and of my apperceptive
activity. 1
* * *

No psychology of the need for art - in the terms of our modern standpoint:
of the need for style - has yet been written. It would be a history of the feeling
about the world and, as such, would stand alongside the history of religion as
its equal. By the feeling about the world I mean the psychic state in which, at
any given time, mankind found itself in relation to the cosmos, in relation to
the phenomena of the external world. This psychic state is disclosed in the
quality of psychic needs, i.e. in the constitution of the absolute artistic volition,
and bears outward fruit in the work of art, to be exact in the style of the latter,
the specific nature of which is simply the specific nature of the psychic needs.
Thus the various gradations of the feeling about the world can be gauged from
the stylistic evolution of art, as well as from the theogony of the peoples.

Every style represented the maximum bestowal of happiness for the humanity
that created it. This must become the supreme dogma of all objective consider-
ation of the history of art. What appears from our standpoint the greatest
distortion must have been at the time, for its creator, the highest beauty and
the fulfilment of his artistic volition. Thus all valuations made from our
standpoint, from the point of view of our modern aesthetics, which passes
judgement exclusively in the sense of the Antique or the Renaissance, are from
a higher standpoint absurdities and platitudes. [. . .]

The need for empathy can be looked upon as a presupposition of artistic
volition only where this artistic volition inclines toward the truths of organic
life, that is toward naturalism in the higher sense. The sensation of happiness
that is released in us by the reproduction of organically beautiful vitality, what
modern man designates beauty, is a gratification of that inner need for self-ac-
tivation in which Lipps sees the presupposition of the process of empathy. In
the forms of the work of art we enjoy ourselves. Aesthetic enjoyment is
objectified self-enjoyment. The value of a line, of a form consists for us in the
value of the life that it holds for us. It holds its beauty only through our own
vital feeling, which, in some mysterious manner, we project into it.

Recollection of the lifeless form of a pyramid or of the suppression of life
that is manifested, for instance, in Byzantine mosaics tells us at once that here
the need for empathy, which for obvious reasons always tends toward the
organic, cannot possibly have determined artistic volition. Indeed, the idea forces
itself upon us that here we have an impulse directly opposed to the empathy



70 The Legacy of Symbolism

impulse, which seeks to suppress precisely that in which the need for empathy
finds its satisfaction.

This counter-pole to the need for empathy appears to us to be the urge to
abstraction. [. . .]

The extent to which the urge to abstraction has determined artistic volition
we can gather from actual works of art ... We shall then find that the artistic
volition of savage peoples, in so far as they possess any at all, then the artistic
volition of all primitive epochs of art and, finally, the artistic volition of certain
culturally developed Oriental peoples, exhibit this abstract tendency. Thus the
urge to abstraction stands at the beginning of every art and in the case of certain
peoples at a high level of culture remains the dominant tendency, whereas with
the Greeks and other Occidental peoples, for example, it slowly recedes, making
way for the urge to empathy. [. . .]

Now what are the psychic presuppositions for the urge to abstraction? We
must seek them in these peoples' feeling about the world, in their psychic
attitude toward the cosmos. Whereas the precondition for the urge to empathy
is a happy pantheistic relationship of confidence between man and the phenome-
na of the external world, the urge to abstraction is the outcome of a great inner
unrest inspired in man by the phenomena of the outside world; in a religious
respect it corresponds to a strongly transcendental tinge to all notions. We might
describe this state as an immense spiritual dread of space, f . . .]

Comparison with the physical dread of open places, a pathological condition
to which certain people are prone, will perhaps better explain what we mean
by this spiritual dread of space. In popular terms, this physical dread of open
places may be explained as a residue from a normal phase of man's development,
at which he was not yet able to trust entirely to visual impression as a means
of becoming familiar with a space extended before him, but was still dependent
upon the assurances of his sense of touch. As soon as man became a biped, and
as such solely dependent upon his eyes, a slight feeling of insecurity was
inevitably left behind. In the further course of his evolution, however, man
freed himself from this primitive fear of extended space by habituation and
intellectual reflection.

The situation is similar as regards the spiritual dread of space in relation to
the extended, disconnected, bewildering world of phenomena. The rationalistic
development of mankind pressed back this instinctive fear conditioned by man's
feeling of being lost in the universe. The civilized peoples of the East, whose
more profound world-instinct opposed development in a rationalistic direction
and who saw in the world nothing but the shimmering veil of Maya, they alone
remained conscious of the unfathomable entanglement of all the phenomena of
life, and all the intellectual mastery of the world-picture could not deceive them
as to this. Their spiritual dread of space, their instinct for the relativity of all
that is, did not stand, as with primitive peoples, before cognition, but above
cognition.

Tormented by the entangled inter-relationship and flux of the phenomena of
the outer world, such peoples were dominated by an immense need for tran-
quillity. The happiness they sought from art did not consist in the possibility



Ib Expression and the Primitive 71

of projecting themselves into the things of the outer world, of enjoying
themselves in them, but in the possibility of taking the individual thing of the
external world out of its arbitrariness and seeming fortuitousness, of eternalizing
it by approximation to abstract forms and, in this manner, of finding a point
of tranquillity and a refuge from appearances. Their most powerful urge was,
so to speak, to wrest the object of the external world out of its natural context,
out of the unending flux of being, to purify it of all its dependence upon life,
i.e. of everything about it that was arbitrary, to render it necessary and
irrefragable, to approximate it to its absolute value. Where they were successful
in this, they experienced that happiness and satisfaction which the beauty of
organic-vital form affords us; indeed, they knew no other beauty, and therefore
we may term it their beauty. [ . . . ]

If we accept this proposition ... we are confronted by the following fact: The
style most perfect in its regularity, the style of the highest abstraction, most
strict in its exclusion of life, is peculiar to the peoples at their most primitive
cultural level. A causal connection must therefore exist between primitive culture
and the highest, purest regular art-form. And the further proposition may be
stated: The less mankind has succeeded, by virtue of its spiritual cognition, in
entering into a relation of friendly confidence with the appearance of the outer
world, the more forceful is the dynamic that leads to the striving after this
highest abstract beauty.

;: Not that primitive man sought more urgently for regularity in nature, or
experienced regularity in it more intensely; just the reverse: it is because he
stands so lost and spiritually helpless amidst the things of the external world,
because he experiences only obscurity and caprice in the inter-connection and
jilux of the phenomena of the external world, that the urge is so strong in him
to divest the things of the external world of their caprice and obscurity in the
world-picture and to impart to them a value of necessity and a value of
regularity. To employ an audacious comparison: it is as though the instinct for
the 'thing in itself were most powerful in primitive man. Increasing spiritual
mastery of the outside world and habituation to it mean a blunting and dimming
.of this instinct. Only after the human spirit has passed, in thousands of years
of its evolution, along the whole course of rationalistic cognition, does the feeling
for the 'thing in itself re-awaken in it as the final resignation of knowledge.
That which was previously instinct is now the ultimate product of cognition.
Having slipped down from the pride of knowledge, man is now just as lost and
helpless vis-a-vis the world-picture as primitive man, once he has recognized
that 'this visible world in which we are is the work of Maya, brought forth by
magic, a transitory and in itself unsubstantial semblance, comparable to the
optical illusion and the dream, of which it is equally false and equally true to
say that it is, as that it is not' (Schopenhauer, Kritik der Kantisehen Philosophie).
* * *

In the urge to abstraction the intensity of the self-alienative impulse is . . .
not characterized, as in the need for empathy, by an urge to alienate oneself
from individual being, but as an urge to seek deliverance from the fortuitousness
of humanity as a whole, from the seeming arbitrariness of organic existence in



72 The Legacy of Symbolism

general, in the contemplation of something necessary and irrefragable. Life as
such is felt to be a disturbance of aesthetic enjoyment. [ . . . ] Popular usage
speaks with striking accuracy of 'losing oneself in the contemplation of a work
of art.

In this sense, therefore, it cannot appear over-bold to attribute all aesthetic
enjoyment - and perhaps even every aspect of the human sensation of happi-
ness - to the impulse of self-alienation as its most profound and ultimate
essence. [ . . . ]

5 Henri Matisse (1869-1954) 'Notes of a Painter'

A major statement of Matisse's principles as a painter, composed soon after he was
established as the leader of the 'Fauve' tendency in French painting. The artist took the
opportunity to defend himself against criticism from the self-styled Sar Peladan, a
Symbolist painter and Rosicrucian. The 'Notes' provide an important reference for
modern concepts of artistic expression. Originally published as 'Notes d'un peintre' in
La Grande Revue, Paris, 25 December 1908. First English translation published in Henri
Matisse, New York (Museum of Modern Art), 1931. The present translation is taken
from J. D. Flam, Matisse on Art, London and New York, 1973, pp. 32-40.

A painter who addresses the public not just in order to present his works, but
to reveal some of his ideas on the art of painting, exposes himself to several
dangers.

In the first place, knowing that many people like to think of painting as an
appendage of literature and therefore want it to express not general ideas suited
to pictorial means, but specifically literary ideas, I fear that one will look with
astonishment upon the painter who ventures to invade the domain of the literary
man. As a matter of fact, I am fully aware that a painter's best spokesman is : ,
his work. A

However, such painters as Signac, Desvallieres, Denis, Blanche, Guerin and
Bernard have written on such matters and been well received by various
periodicals. Personally, I shall simply try to state my feelings and aspirations as
a painter without worrying about the writing.

But now I forsee the danger of appearing to contradict myself. I feel very
strongly the tie between my earlier and my recent works, but I do not think
exactly the way I thought yesterday. Or rather, my basic idea has not changed,
but my thought has evolved, and my modes of expression have followed my
thoughts. I do not repudiate any of my paintings but there is not one of them
that I would not redo differently, if I had it to redo. My destination is always
the same but I work out a different route to get there.

Finally, if I mention the name of this or that artist it will be to point out
how our manners differ, and it may seem that I am belittling his work. Thus
I risk being accused of injustice towards painters whose aims and results I best
understand, or whose accomplishments I most appreciate, whereas I will have
used them as examples, not to establish my superiority over them, but to show
more clearly, through what they have done, what I am attempting to do.



Ib Expression and the Primitive 73

What I am after, above all, is expression. Sometimes it has been conceded that
I have a certain technical ability but that all the same my ambition is limited,
and does not go beyond the purely visual satisfaction such as can be obtained
from looking at a picture. But the thought of a painter must not be considered
as separate from his pictorial means, for the thought is worth no more than its
expression by the means, which must be more complete (and by complete I do
not mean complicated) the deeper is his thought. I am unable to distinguish
between the feeling I have about life and my way of translating it.

Expression, for me, does not reside in passions glowing in a human face or
manifested by violent movement. The entire arrangement of my picture is
expressive: the place occupied by the figures, the empty spaces around them,
the proportions, everything has its share. Composition is the art of arranging
in a decorative manner the diverse elements at the painter's command to express
his feelings. In a picture every part will be visible and will play its appointed
role, whether it be principal or secondary. Everything that is not useful in the
picture is, it follows, harmful. A work of art must be harmonious in its entirety:
any superfluous detail would replace some other essential detail in the mind of
the spectator.

Composition, the aim of which should be expression, is modified according
to the surface to be covered. If I take a sheet of paper of a given size, my
drawing will have a necessary relationship to its format. I would not repeat this
drawing on another sheet of different proportions, for example* rectangular
instead of square. Nor should I be satisfied with a mere enlargement, had I to
transfer the drawing to a sheet the same shape, but ten times larger. A drawing
must have an expansive force which gives life to the things around it. An artist
who wants to transpose a composition from one canvas to another larger one
must conceive it anew in order to preserve its expression; he must alter its
character and not just square it up onto the larger canvas.

Both harmonies and dissonances of colour can produce agreeable effects. Often
when I start to work I record fresh and superficial sensations during the first
session. A few years ago I was sometimes satisfied with the result. But today
if I were satisfied with this, now that I think I can see further, my picture
would have a vagueness in it: I should have recorded the fugitive sensations of
a moment which could not completely define my feelings and which I should
barely recognize the next day.

I want to reach that state of condensation of sensations which makes a
painting. I might be satisfied with a work done at one sitting, but I would soon
tire of it; therefore, I prefer to rework it so that later I may recognize it as
representative of my state of mind. There was a time when I never left my
paintings hanging on the wall because they reminded me of moments of
over-excitement and I did not like to see them again when I was calm. Nowadays
I try to put serenity into my pictures and re-work them as long as I have not
succeeded.

Suppose I want to paint a woman's body: first of all I imbue it with grace
and charm, but I know that I must give something more. I will condense the



74 The Legacy of Symbolism

meaning of this body by seeking its essential lines. The charm will be less
apparent at first glance, but it must eventually emerge from the new image
which will have a broader meaning, one more fully human. The charm will
be less striking since it will not be the sole quality of the painting, but it
will not exist less for its being contained within the general conception of the
figure.

Charm, lightness, freshness - such fleeting sensations. I have a canvas on which
the colours are still fresh and I begin to work on it again. The tone will no
doubt become duller. I will replace my original tone with one of greater density,
an improvement, but less seductive to the eye.

The Impressionist painters, especially Monet and Sisley, had delicate sensa-
tions, quite close to each other: as a result their canvases all look alike. The
word 'impressionism' perfectly characterizes their style, for they register fleeting
impressions. It is not an appropriate designation for certain more recent painters
who avoid the first impression, and consider it almost dishonest. A rapid
rendering of a landscape represents only one moment of its existence [duree]. I
prefer, by insisting upon its essential character, to risk losing charm in order
to obtain greater stability.

Underlying this succession of moments which constitutes the superficial
existence of beings and things, and which is continually modifying and trans-
forming them, one can search for a truer, more essential character, which the
artist will seize so that he may give to reality a more lasting interpretation.
When we go into the seventeenth- and eighteenth-century sculpture rooms in
the Louvre and look, for example, at a Puget, we can see that the expression
is forced and exaggerated to the point of being disquieting. It is quite a different
matter if we go to the Luxembourg; the attitude in which the sculptors catch
their models is always the one in which the development of the members and
tensions of the muscles will be shown to greatest advantage. And yet movement
thus understood corresponds to nothing in nature: when we capture it by
surprise in a snapshot, the resulting image reminds us of nothing that we have
seen. Movement seized while it is going on is meaningful to us only if we do
not isolate the present sensation either from that which precedes it or that which
follows it.

There are two ways of expressing things; one is to show them crudely, the
other is to evoke them through art. By removing oneself from the literal
representation of movement one attains greater beauty and grandeur. Look at an
Egyptian statue: it looks rigid to us, yet we sense in it the image of a body
capable of movement and which, despite its rigidity, is animated. The Greeks
too are calm: a man hurling a discus will be caught at the moment in which
he gathers his strength, or at least, if he is shown in the most strained and
precarious position implied by his action, the sculptor will have epitomized and
condensed it so that equilibrium is re-established, thereby suggesting the idea
of duration. Movement is in itself unstable and is not suited to something
durable like a statue, unless the artist is aware of the entire action of which he
represents only a moment.



*-



Ib Expression and the Primitive 75

I must precisely define the character of the object or of the body that I wish
to paint. To do so, I study my method very closely: If I put a black dot on a
sheet of white paper, the dot will be visible no matter how far away I hold it:
it is a clear notation. But beside this dot I place another one, and then a third,
and already there is confusion. In order for the first dot to maintain its value
I must enlarge it as I put other marks on the paper.

If upon a white canvas I set down some sensations of blue, of green, of red,
each new stroke diminishes the importance of the preceding ones. Suppose I
have to paint an interior: I have before me a cupboard; it gives me a sensation
of vivid red, and I put down a red which satisfies me. A relation is established
between this red and the white of the canvas. Let me put a green near the red,
and make the floor yellow; and again there will be relationships between the
green or yellow and the white of the canvas which will satisfy me. But these
different tones mutually weaken one another. It is necessary that the various
marks I use be balanced so that they do not destroy each other. To do this I
must organize my ideas; the relationship between the tones must be such that
it will sustain and not destroy them. A new combination of colours will succeed
the first and render the totality of my representation. I am forced to transpose
until finally my picture may seem completely changed when, after successive
modifications, the red has succeeded the green as the dominant colour. I cannot
copy nature in a servile way; I am forced to interpret nature and submit it to
the spirit of the picture. From the relationship I have found in all the tones
there must result a living harmony of colours, a harmony analogous to that of
a musical composition.

For me all is in the conception. I must therefore have a clear vision of the
whole from the beginning. I could mention a great sculptor who gives us some
admirable pieces: but for him a composition is merely a grouping of fragments,
which results in a confusion of expression. Look instead at one of Cezanne's
pictures: all is so well arranged that no matter at what distance you stand or
how many figures are represented you will always be able to distinguish each
figure clearly and to know which limb belongs to which body. If there is order
and clarity in the picture, it means that from the outset this same order and
clarity existed in the mind of the painter, or that the painter was conscious of
their necessity. Limbs may cross and intertwine, but in the eyes of the spectator
they will nevertheless remain attached to and help to articulate the right body:
all confusion has disappeared.

The chief function of colour should be to serve expression as well as possible.
I put down my tones without a preconceived plan. If at first, and perhaps
without my having been conscious of it, one tone has particularly seduced or
caught me, more often than not once the picture is finished I will notice that
I have respected this tone while I progressively altered and transformed all the
others. The expressive aspect of colours imposes itself on me in a purely
instinctive way. To paint an autumn landscape I will not try to remember what
colours suit this season, I will be inspired only by the sensation that the season
arouses in me: the icy purity of the sour blue sky will express the season just



76 The Legacy of Symbolism

as well as the nuances of foliage. My sensation itself may vary, the autumn may
be soft and warm like a continuation of summer, or quite cool with a cold sky
and lemon-yellow trees that give a chilly impression and already announce
winter.

My choice of colours does not rest on any scientific theory; it is based on
observation, on sensitivity, on felt experiences. Inspired by certain pages of
Delacroix, an artist like Signac is preoccupied with complementary colours, and
the theoretical knowledge of them will lead him to use a certain tone in a certain
place. But I simply try to put down colours which render my sensation. There
is an impelling proportion of tones that may lead me to change the shape of a
figure or to transform my composition. Until I have achieved this proportion
in all the parts of the composition I strive towards it and keep on working.
Then a moment comes when all the parts have found their definite relationships,
and from then on it would be impossible for me to add a stroke to my picture
without having to repaint it entirely.

In reality, I think that the very theory of complementary colours is not
absolute. In studying the paintings of artists whose knowledge of colours
depends upon instinct and feeling, and on a constant analogy with their
sensations, one could define certain laws of colour and so broaden the limits of
colour theory as it is now defined.

What interests me most is neither still life nor landscape, but the human figure.
It is that which best permits me to express my almost religious awe towards
life. I do not insist upon all the details of the face, on setting them down
one-by-one with anatomical exactitude. If I have an Italian model who at first
appearance suggests nothing but a purely animal existence, I nevertheless
discover his essential qualities, I penetrate amid the lines of the face those which
suggest the deep gravity which persists in every human being. A work of art
must carry within itself its complete significance and impose that upon the
beholder even before he recognizes the subject matter. When I see the Giotto
frescoes at Padua I do not trouble myself to recognize which scene of the life
of Christ I have before me, but I immediately understand the sentiment which
emerges from it, for it is in the lines, the composition, the colour. The title
will only serve to confirm my impression.

What I dream of is an art of balance, of purity and serenity, devoid of
troubling or depressing subject matter, an art which could be for every mental
worker, for the businessman as well as the man of letters, for example, a
soothing, calming influence on the mind, something like a good armchair which
provides relaxation from physical fatigue.

Often a discussion arises as to the value of different processes, and their
relationship to different temperaments. A distinction is made between painters
who work directly from nature and those who work purely from imagination.
Personally, I think neither of these methods must be preferred to the exclusion
of the other. Both may be used in turn by the same individual, either because
he needs contact with objects in order to receive sensations that will excite his
creative faculty, or his sensations are already organized. In either case he will



Ib Expression and the Primitive 77

be able to arrive at that totality which constitutes a picture. In any event I think
that one can judge the vitality and power of an artist who, after having received
impressions directly from the spectacle of nature, is able to organize his
sensations to continue his work in the same frame of mind on different days,
and to develop these sensations; this power proves he is sufficiently master of
himself to subject himself to discipline.

The simplest means are those which best enable an artist to express himself.
If he fears the banal he cannot avoid it by appearing strange, or going in for
bizarre drawing and eccentric colour. His means of expression must derive
almost of necessity from his temperament. He must have the humility of mind
to believe that he has painted only what he has seen. I like Chardin's way of
expressing it: 'I apply colour until there is a resemblance.' Or Cezanne's: 'I
want to secure a likeness', or Rodin's: 'Copy nature!' Leonardo said: 'He who
can copy can create.' Those who work in a preconceived style, deliberately
turning their backs on nature, miss the truth. An artist must recognize, when
he is reasoning, that his picture is an artifice; but when he is painting, he should
feel that he has copied nature. And even when he departs from nature, he must
do it with the conviction that it is only to interpret her more fully.

Some may say that other views on painting were expected from a painter,
and that I have only come out with platitudes. To this I shall reply that there
are no new truths. The role of the artist, like that of the scholar, consists of
seizing current truths often repeated to him, but which will take on new meaning
for him and which he will make his own when he has grasped their deepest
significance. If aviators had to explain to us the research which led to their
leaving earth and rising in the air, they would merely confirm very elementary
principles of physics neglected by less successful inventors.
v An artist always profits from information about himself, and I am glad to
have learned what is my weak point. M. Peladan in the Revue Hebdomadaire
reproaches a certain number of painters, amongst whom I think I should place
myself, for calling themselves 'Fauves', and yet dressing like everyone else, so
that they are no more noticeable than the floor-walkers in a department store.
Does genius count for so little? If it were only a question of myself that would
set M. Peladan's mind at ease, tomorrow I would call myself Sar and dress like
a necromancer.

In the same article this excellent writer claims that I do not paint honestly,
and I would be justifiably angry if he had not qualified his statement by saying,
*I mean honestly with respect to the ideal and the rules.' The trouble is that
he does not mention where these rules are. I am willing to have them exist,
but were it possible to learn them what sublime artists we would have!

Rules have no existence outside of individuals: otherwise a good professor
would be as great a genius as Racine. Any one of us is capable of repeating
fine maxims, but few can also penetrate their meaning. I am ready to admit
that from a study of the works of Raphael or Titian a more complete set of
rules can be drawn than from the works of Manet or Renoir, but the rules
followed by Manet and Renoir were those which suited their temperaments and
I prefer the most minor of their paintings to all the work of those who are



78 The Legacy of Symbolism

content to imitate the Venus of U rhino or the Madonna of the Goldfinch, These
latter are of no value to anyone, for whether we want to or not, we belong to
our time and we share in its opinions, its feelings, even its delusions. All artists
bear the imprint of their time, but the great artists are those in whom this is
most profoundly marked. Our epoch for instance is better represented by
Courbet than by Flandrin, by Rodin better than by Fremiet. Whether we like
it or not, however insistently we call ourselves exiles, between our period and
ourselves an indissoluble bond is established, and M. Peladan himself cannot
escape it. The aestheticians of the future may perhaps use his books as evidence
if they get it in their heads to prove that no one of our time understood anything
about the art of Leonardo da Vinci.



6 Roger Fry (1866-1934) 4 An Essay in Aesthetics'

An important statement of Modernist aesthetic principles, providing a form of theoretical
platform for Fry's two 'Post-Impressionist' exhibitions, held in London in 1910 and 1912.
These exhibitions and Fry's own writings did much to establish the prevailing pattern ol
English and English-language interpretation of French modern art. First published in New
Quarterly, London, 1909; reprinted in Fry's collected essays, Vision and Design, Lon-
don, 1920, pp. 16-38, from which the present text is taken.

A certain painter, not without some reputation at the present day, once wrote
a little book on the art he practises, in which he gave a definition of that art
so succinct that I take it as a point of departure for this essay.

'The art of painting', says that eminent authority, 'is the art of imitating solid
objects upon a flat surface by means of pigments.' It is delightfully simple, but
prompts the question - is that all? And, if so, what a deal of unnecessary fuss
has been made about it. Now, it is useless to deny that our modern writer has
some very respectable authorities behind him. Plato, indeed, gave a very similar
account of the affair, and himself put the question - is it then worth while?
And, being scrupulously and relentlessly logical, he decided that it was not
worth while, and proceeded to turn the artists out of his ideal republic. For all
that, the world has continued obstinately to consider that painting was worth
while, and though, indeed, it has never quite made up its mind as to what,
exactly, the graphic arts did for it, it has persisted in honouring and admiring
its painters.

Can we arrive at any conclusions as to the nature of the graphic arts, which
will at all explain our feelings about them, which will at least put them into
some kind of relation with the other arts, and not leave us in the extreme
perplexity, engendered by any theory of mere imitation? For, I suppose, it must
be admitted that if imitation is the sole purpose of the graphic arts, it is
surprising that the works of such arts are ever looked upon as more than
curiosities, or ingenious toys, are ever taken seriously by grown-up people.
Moreover, it will be surprising that they have any recognizable affinity with
other arts, such as music or architecture, in which the imitation of actual objects
is a negligible quantity.



Ib Expression and the Primitive 79

To form such conclusions is the aim I have put before myself in this essay.
|Even if the results are not decisive, the inquiry may lead us to a view of the
Ijgraphic arts that will not be altogether unfruitful.

L> I must begin with some elementary psychology, with a consideration of the
Lnature of instincts. A great many objects in the world, when presented to our
yenses, put in motion a complex nervous machinery, which ends in some
|-instinctive appropriate action. We see a wild bull in a field; quite without our

 iconscious interference a nervous process goes on, which, unless we interfere
^forcibly, ends in the appropriate reaction of flight. The nervous mechanism

which results in flight causes a certain state of consciousness, which we call the
emotion of fear. The whole of animal life, and a great part of human life, is
made up of these instinctive reactions to sensible objects, and their accom-
panying emotions. But man has the peculiar faculty of calling up again in his
snind the echo of past experiences of this kind, of going over it again, 'in
imagination' as we say. He has, therefore, the possibility of a double life; one
the actual life, the other the imaginative life. Between these two lives there is
$his great distinction, that in the actual life the processes of natural selection
have brought it about that the instinctive reaction, such, for instance, as flight
from danger, shall be the important part of the whole process, and it is towards
| fthis that the man bends his whole conscious endeavour. But in the imaginative
yjife no such action is necessary, and, therefore, the whole consciousness may be
.focused upon the perceptive and the emotional aspects of the experience. In

 this way we get, in the imaginative life, a different set of values, and a different
-kind of perception.

* * *

That the graphic arts are the expression of the imaginative life rather than a
copy of actual life might be guessed from observing children. Children, if left
to themselves, never, I believe, copy what they see, never, as we say, 'draw
from nature', but express, with a delightful freedom and sincerity, the mental
images which make up their own imaginative lives.

Art, then, is an expression and a stimulus of this imaginative life, which is
separated from actual life by the absence of responsive action. Now this
responsive action implies in actual life moral responsibility. In art we have no
such moral responsibility - it presents a life freed from the binding necessities
of our actual existence.

What then is the justification for this life of the imagination which all human
beings live more or less fully? To the pure moralist, who accepts nothing but ethical
values, in order to be justified, it must be shown not only not to hinder but actually
to forward right action, otherwise it is not only useless but, since it absorbs our
energies, positively harmful. To such a one two views are possible, one the
Puritanical view at its narrowest, which regards the life of the imagination as no
better or worse than a life of sensual pleasure, and therefore entirely reprehensible.
The other view is to argue that the imaginative life does subserve morality. And
this is inevitably the view taken by moralists like Ruskin, to whom the imaginative
life is yet an absolute necessity. It is a view which leads to some very hard special
pleading, even to a self-deception which is in itself morally undesirable.



80 The Legacy of Symbolism

But here comes in the question of religion, for religion is also an affair of
the imaginative life, and, though it claims to have a direct effect upon conduct,
I do not suppose that the religious person if he were wise would justify religion
entirely by its effect on morality, since that, historically speaking, has not been
by any means uniformly advantageous. He would probably say that the religious
experience was one which corresponded to certain spiritual capacities of human
nature, the exercise of which is in itself good and desirable apart from their
effect upon actual life. And so, too, I think the artist might if he chose take a
mystical attitude, and declare that the fullness and completeness of the imagin-
ative life he leads may correspond to an existence more real and more important
than any that we know of in mortal life.

And in saying this, his appeal would find a sympathetic echo in most minds,
for most people would, I think, say that the pleasures derived from art were of
an altogether different character and more fundamental than merely sensual
pleasures, that they did exercise some faculties which are felt to belong to
whatever part of us there may be which is not entirely ephemeral and material.

It might even be that from this point of view we should rather justify actual
life by its relation to the imaginative, justify nature by its likeness to art. I
mean this, that since the imaginative life comes in the course of time to represent
more or less what mankind feels to be the completest expression of its own
nature, the freest use of its innate capacities, the actual life may be explained
and justified by its approximation here and there, however partially and inade-
quately, to that freer and fuller life.

Before leaving this question of the justification of art, let me put it in another
way. The imaginative life of a people has very different levels at different times,
and these levels do not always correspond with the general level of the morality
of actual life. Thus in the thirteenth century we read of barbarity and cruelty
which would shock even us; we may, I think, admit that our moral level, our
general humanity is decidedly higher today, but the level of our imaginative life
is incomparably lower; we are satisfied there with a grossness, a sheer barbarity
and squalor which would have shocked the thirteenth century profoundly. Let
us admit the moral gain gladly, but do we not also feel a loss; do we not feel
that the average businessman would be in every way a more admirable, more
respectable being if his imaginative life were not so squalid and incoherent?
And, if we admit any loss then, there is some function in human nature other
than a purely ethical one, which is worthy of exercise.

Now the imaginative life has its own history both in the race and in the
individual. In the individual life one of the first effects of freeing experience
from the necessities of appropriate responsive action is to indulge recklessly the
emotion of self-aggrandisement. The day-dreams of a child are filled with
extravagant romances in which he is always the invincible hero. Music - which
of all the arts supplies the strongest stimulus to the imaginative life and at the
same time has the least power of controlling its direction - music, at certain
stages of people's lives, has the effect merely of arousing in an almost absurd
degree this egoistic elation . . . But with the teaching of experience and the
growth of character the imaginative life comes to respond to other instincts and



Ib Expression and the Primitive 81

to satisfy other desires, until, indeed, it reflects the highest aspirations and the
deepest aversions of which human nature is capable.

In dreams and when under the influence of drugs the imaginative life passes
out of our own control, and in such cases its experiences may be highly
undesirable, but whenever it remains under our own control it must always be
on the whole a desirable life. That is not to say that it is always pleasant, for
it is pretty clear that mankind is so constituted as to desire much besides
pleasure, and we shall meet among the great artists, the great exponents, that
is, of the imaginative life, many to whom the merely pleasant is very rarely a
part of what is desirable. But this desirability of the imaginative life does
distinguish it very sharply from actual life, and this is the direct result of that
first fundamental difference, its freedom from necessary external conditions.
Art, then, is, if I am right, the chief organ of the imaginative life; it is by art
that it is stimulated and controlled within us, and, as we have seen, the
imaginative life is distinguished by the greater clearness of its perception, and
the greater purity and freedom of its emotion.

First with regard to the greater clearness of perception. The needs of our
actual life are so imperative, that the sense of vision becomes highly specialized
in their service. With an admirable economy we learn to see only so much as
is needful for our purposes; but this is in fact very little, just enough to recognize
and identify each object or person; that done, they go into an entry in our
mental catalogue and are no more really seen. In actual life the normal person
really only reads the labels as it were on the objects around him and troubles
no further. Almost all the things which are useful in any way put on more or
less this cap of invisibility. It is only when an object exists in our lives for no
other purpose than to be seen that we really look at it, as for instance at a China
ornament or a precious stone, and towards such even the most normal person
adopts to some extent the artistic attitude of pure vision abstracted from necessity.

Now this specialization of vision goes so far that ordinary people have almost
no idea of what things really look like, so that oddly enough the one standard
that popular criticism applies to painting, namely, whether it is like nature or
not, is one which most people are, by the whole tenor of their lives, prevented
from applying properly. The only things they have ever really looked at being
other pictures; the moment an artist who has looked at nature brings to them
a clear report of something definitely seen by him, they are wildly indignant at
its untruth to nature. This has happened so constantly in our own time that
there is no need to prove it. One instance will suffice. Monet is an artist whose
chief claim to recognition lies in the fact of his astonishing power of faithfully
reproducing certain aspects of nature, but his really naive innocence and
sincerity were taken by the public to be the most audacious humbug, and it
required the teaching of men like Bastien-Lepage, who cleverly compromised
between the truth and an accepted convention of what things looked like, to
bring the world gradually round to admitting truths which a single walk in the
country with purely unbiased vision would have established beyond doubt.

But though this clarified sense perception which we discover in the imagin-
ative life is of great interest, and although it plays a larger part in the graphic



82 The Legacy of Symbolism

arts than in any other, it might perhaps be doubted whether, interesting, curious,
fascinating as it is, this aspect of the imaginative life would ever by itself make
art of profound importance to mankind. But it is different, I think, with the
emotional aspect. We have admitted that the emotions of the imaginative are
generally weaker than those of actual life. The picture of a saint being slowly
flayed alive, revolting as it is, will not produce the same physical sensations of
sickening disgust that a modern man would feel if he could assist at the actual
event; but they have a compensating clearness of presentment to the conscious-
ness. The more poignant emotions of actual life have, I think, a kind of numbing
effect analogous to the paralysing influence of fear in some animals; but even
if this experience be not generally admitted, all will admit that the need for
responsive action hurries us along and prevents us from ever realizing fully what
the emotion is that we feel, from coordinating it perfectly with other states. In
short, the motives we actually experience are too close to us to enable us to
feel them clearly. They are in a sense unintelligible. In the imaginative life, on
the contrary, we can both feel the emotion and watch it. When we are
really moved at the theatre we are always both on the stage and in the
auditorium.

Yet another point about the emotions of the imaginative life - since they
require no responsive action we can give them a new valuation. In real life we
must to some extent cultivate those emotions which lead to useful action, and
we are bound to appraise emotions according to the resultant action. So that,
for instance, the feelings of rivalry and emulation do get an encouragement
which perhaps they scarcely deserve, whereas certain feelings which appear to
have a high intrinsic value get almost no stimulus in actual life. For instance,
those feelings to which the name of the cosmic emotion has been somewhat
unhappily given find almost no place in life, but, since they seem to belong to
certain very deep springs of our nature, do become of great importance in the
arts.

Morality, then, appreciates emotion by the standard of resultant action. Art
appreciates emotion in and for itself.

This view of the essential importance in art of the expression of the emotions
is the basis of Tolstoy's marvellously original and yet perverse and even
exasperating book, What is Art?, and I willingly confess, while disagreeing with
almost all his results, how much I owe to him.

He gives an example of what he means by calling art the means of communi-
cating emotions. He says, let us suppose a boy to have been pursued in the
forest by a bear. If he returns to the village and merely states that he was
pursued by a bear and escaped, that is ordinary language, the means of
communicating facts or ideas; but if he describes his state first of heedlessness,
then of sudden alarm and terror as the bear appears, and finally of relief when
he gets away, and describes this so that his hearers share his emotions, then his
description is a work of art.

Now in so far as the boy does this in order to urge the villagers to go out
and kill the bear, though he may be using artistic methods, his speech is not a
pure work of art; but if of a winter evening the boy relates his experience for



I



Ib Expression and the Primitive 83

the sake of the enjoyment of his adventure in retrospect, or better still, if he
makes up the whole story for the sake of the imagined emotions, then his speech
becomes a pure work of art. But Tolstoy takes the other view, and values the
emotions aroused by art entirely for their reaction upon actual life, a view which
he courageously maintains even when it leads him to condemn the whole of
Michelangelo, Raphael, and Titian, and most of Beethoven, not to mention
nearly everything he himself has written, as bad or false art.

Such a view would, I think, give pause to any less heroic spirit. He would
wonder whether mankind could have always been so radically wrong about a
function that, whatever its value be, is almost universal. And in point of fact
he will have to find some other word to denote what we now call art. Nor does
Tolstoy's theory even carry him safely through his own book, since, in his
examples of morally desirable and therefore good art, he has to admit that these
are to be found, for the most part, among works of inferior quality. Here, then,
is at once the tacit admission that another standard than morality is applicable.
We must therefore give up the attempt to judge the work of art by its reaction
on life, and consider it as an expression of emotions regarded as ends in
themselves. And this brings us back to the idea we had already arrived at, of
art as the expression of the imaginative life.

If, then, an object of any kind is created by man not for use, for its fitness
to actual life, but as an object of art, an object subserving the imaginative life,
what will its qualities be? It must in the first place be adapted to that
disinterested intensity of contemplation, which we have found to be the effect
of cutting off the responsive action. It must be suited to that heightened power
of perception which we found to result therefrom.

And the first quality that we demand in our sensations will be order, without
which our sensations will be troubled and perplexed, and the other quality will
be variety, without which they will not be fully stimulated.

It may be objected that many things in nature, such as flowers, possess these
two qualities of order and variety in a high degree, and these objects do
undoubtedly stimulate and satisfy that clear disinterested contemplation which
is characteristic of the aesthetic attitude. But in our reaction to a work of art
there is something more - there is the consciousness of purpose, the conscious-
ness of a peculiar relation of sympathy with the man who made this thing in
order to arouse precisely the sensations we experience. And when we come to
the higher works of art, where sensations are so arranged that they arouse in
us deep emotions, this feeling of a special tie with the man who expressed them
becomes very strong. We feel that he has expressed something which was latent
in us all the time, but which we never realized, that he has revealed us to
ourselves in revealing himself. And this recognition of purpose is, I believe, an
essential part of the aesthetic judgement proper.

The perception of purposeful order and variety in an object gives us the
feeling which we express by saying that it is beautiful, but when by means of
sensations our emotions are aroused we demand purposeful order and variety
in them also, and if this can only be brought about by the sacrifice of sensual
beauty we willingly overlook its absence.



84 The Legacy of Symbolism

Thus, there is no excuse for a china pot being ugly, there is every reason
why Rembrandt's and Degas' pictures should be, from the purely sensual point
of view, supremely and magnificently ugly.

This, I think, will explain the apparent contradiction between two distinct
uses of the word beauty, one for that which has sensuous charm, and one for
the aesthetic approval of works of imaginative art where the objects presented
to us are often of extreme ugliness. Beauty in the former sense belongs to works
of art where only the perceptual aspect of the imaginative life is exercised,
beauty in the second sense becomes as it were supersensual, and is concerned
with the appropriateness and intensity of the emotions aroused. When these
emotions are aroused in a way that satisfies fully the needs of the imaginative
life we approve and delight in the sensations through which we enjoy that
heightened experience because they possess purposeful order and variety in
relation to those emotions.

One chief aspect of order in a work of art is unity; unity of some kind is
necessary for our restful contemplation of the work of art as a whole, since if
it lacks unity we cannot contemplate it in its entirety, but we shall pass outside
it to other things necessary to complete its unity.

In a picture this unity is due to a balancing of the attractions of the eye about
the central line of the picture. The result of this balance of attractions is that
the eye rests willingly within the bounds of the picture. [ . . . ]
* * *

Let us now see how the artist passes from the stage of merely gratifying our
demand for sensuous order and variety to that where he arouses our emotions.
I will call the various methods by which this is effected the emotional elements
of design.

The first element is that of the rhythm of the line with which the forms are
delineated.

The drawn line is the record of a gesture, and that gesture is modified by
the artist's feeling which is thus communicated to us directly.

The second element is mass. When an object is so represented that we
recognize it as having inertia, we feel its power of resisting movement, or
communicating its own movement to other bodies, and our imaginative reaction
to such an image is governed by our experience of mass in actual life.

The third element is space. The same-sized square on two pieces of paper
can be made by very simple means to appear to represent either a cube two or
three inches high, or a cube of hundreds of feet, and our reaction to it is
proportionately changed.

The fourth element is that of light and shade. Our feelings towards the same
object become totally different according as we see it strongly illuminated against
a black background or dark against light.

A fifth element is that of colour. That this has a direct emotional effect is
evident from such words as gay, dull, melancholy in relation to colour.

I would suggest the possibility of another element, though perhaps it is only
a compound of mass and space: it is that of the inclination to the eye of a
plane, whether it is impending over or leaning away from us.



Ib Expression and the Primitive 85

Now it will be noticed that nearly all these emotional elements of design are

connected with essential conditions of our physical existence: rhythm appeals

to all the sensations which accompany muscular activity; mass to all the infinite

adaptations to the force of gravity which we are forced to make; the spatial

judgement is equally profound and universal in its application to life; our feeling

about inclined planes is connected with our necessary judgements about the

| conformation of the earth itself; light again, is so necessary a condition of our

existence that we become intensely sensitive to changes in its intensity. Colour

is the only one of our elements which is not of critical or universal importance

to life, and its emotional effect is neither so deep nor so clearly determined as

the others. It will be seen, then, that the graphic arts arouse emotions in us by

I playing upon what one may call the overtones of some of our primary physical

I needs. They have, indeed, this great advantage over poetry, that they can appeal

I more directly and immediately to the emotional accompaniments of our bare

1 physical existence.

If we represent these various elements in simple diagrammatic terms, this

effect upon the emotions is, it must be confessed, very weak. Rhythm of line,

| for instance, is incomparably weaker in its stimulus of the muscular sense than

4s rhythm addressed to the ear in music, and such diagrams can at best arouse

?only faint ghost-like echoes of emotions of differing qualities; but when these

emotional elements are combined with the presentation of natural appearances,

above all with the appearance of the human body, we find that this effect is

^indefinitely heightened.

When, for instance, we look at Michelangelo's 'Jeremiah', and realize the
irresistible momentum his movements would have, we experience powerful
sentiments of reverence and awe. Or when we look at Michelangelo's 'Tondo'
in the Uffizi, and find a group of figures so arranged that the planes have a
sequence comparable in breadth and dignity to the mouldings of the earth
mounting by clearly-felt gradations to an overtopping summit, innumerable
instinctive reactions are brought into play.

At this point the adversary (as Leonardo da Vinci calls him) is likely to retort,
'You have abstracted from natural forms a number of so-called emotional
elements which you yourself admit are very weak when stated with diagrammatic
purity; you then put them back, with the help of Michelangelo, into the natural
forms whence they were derived, and at once they have value, so that after all
it appears that the natural forms contain these emotional elements ready made
up for us, and all that art need do is to imitate Nature.'

But, alas! Nature is heartlessly indifferent to the needs of the imaginative life;
God causes His rain to fall upon the just and upon the unjust. The sun neglects
to provide the appropriate limelight effect even upon a triumphant Napoleon
or a dying Caesar. Assuredly we have no guarantee that in nature the emotional
elements will be combined appropriately with the demands of the imaginative
life, and it is, I think, the great occupation of the graphic arts to give us first
of all order and variety in the sensuous plane, and then so to arrange the
sensuous presentment of objects that the emotional elements are elicited with
an order and appropriateness altogether beyond what Nature herself provides.



w:



86 The Legacy of Symbolism

Let me sum up for a moment what I have said about the relation of art to
Nature, which is, perhaps, the greatest stumbling-block to the understanding of
the graphic arts.

I have admitted that there is beauty in Nature, that is to say, that certain
objects constantly do, and perhaps any object may, compel us to regard it with
that intense disinterested contemplation that belongs to the imaginative life, and
which is impossible to the actual life of necessity and action; but that in objects
created to arouse the aesthetic feeling we have an added consciousness of purpose
on the part of the creator, that he made it on purpose not to be used but to
be regarded and enjoyed; and that this feeling is characteristic of the aesthetic
judgement proper.

When the artist passes from pure sensations to emotions aroused by means
of sensations, he uses natural forms which, in themselves, are calculated to move
our emotions, and he presents these in such a manner that the forms themselves
generate in us emotional states, based upon the fundamental necessities of our
physical and physiological nature. The artist's attitude to natural form is,
therefore, infinitely various according to the emotions he wishes to arouse. He
may require for his purpose the most complete representation of a figure, he
may be intensely realistic, provided that his presentment, in spite of its closeness
to natural appearance, disengages clearly for us the appropriate emotional
elements. Or he may give us the merest suggestion of natural forms, and rely
almost entirely upon the force and intensity of the emotional elements involved
in his presentment.

We may, then, dispense once for all with the idea of likeness to Nature, of
correctness or incorrectness as a test, and consider only whether the emotional
elements inherent in natural form are adequately discovered, unless, indeed, the
emotional idea depends at any point upon likeness, or completeness of repre-
sentation.



7 Wassily Kandinsky (1866-1944) from Concerning
the Spiritual in Art

Kandinsky was born in Moscow and trained in Munich, where he co-founded the group
Der Biaue Reiter and where his major treatise was first published late in 1911 as Uber
das Geistige in der Kunst (Piper Verlag, dated 1912). His theories rest on a series of
assumptions which were relatively widespread in modern artistic circles around the turn
of the century: that there is a qualitative hierarchy in human experience (a belief central
to the doctrine of Theosophy, to which both Kandinsky and Mondrian were attracted);
that works of art are united by their possession of an essential expressive or 'spiritual'
value; and that this value is a function of art's autonomy with respect to naturalistic
appearances. In this text Kandinsky develops a defence of art's 'essential' spiritual
function into a programme for abstract painting conceived as an index of social and
spiritual progress. First English translation 1914; the present version is taken from the
translation of the second 1912 edition, in K. C. Lindsay and P. Vergo (eds. and trans.),
Kandinsky: Complete Writings on Art, London, 1982, pp. 127-61.



Ib Expression and the Primitive 87
14 General

I Introduction

Every work of art is the child of its time, often it is the mother of our emotions.
Thus, every period of culture produces its own art, which can never be
repeated. Any attempt to give new life to the artistic principles of the past can
at best only result in a work of art that resembles a stillborn child. For example,
it is impossible for our inner lives, our feelings, to be like those of the ancient
Greeks. Efforts, therefore, to apply Greek principles, e.g., to sculpture, can only
pipduce forms similar to those employed by the Greeks, a work that remains
#ulless for all time. This sort of imitation resembles the mimicry of the ape.
To all outward appearances, the movements of apes are exactly like those of
human beings. The ape will sit holding a book in front of its nose, leafing
though with a thoughtful expression on its face, but the inner meaning of these
gestures is completely lacking.

h/There exists, however, another outward similarity of artistic forms that is
rooted in a deeper necessity. The similarity of inner strivings within the whole
spiritual-moral atmosphere - striving after goals that have already been pursued,
,h$ afterward forgotten - this similarity of the inner mood of an entire period
can lead logically to the use of forms successfully employed to the same ends
in an earlier period. Our sympathy, our understanding, our inner feeling for
^primitives arose partly in this way. Just like us, those pure artists wanted
to capture in their works the inner essence of things, which of itself brought
about a rejection of the external, the accidental.

-, tds important point of inner contact is, however, for all its importance, only
appoint. Our souls, which are only now beginning to awaken after the long reign
^materialism, harbor seeds of desperation, unbelief, lack of purpose. The whole
nightmare of the materialistic attitude, which has turned the life of the universe
into an evil, purposeless game, is not yet over. The awakening soul is still deeply
Under the influence of this nightmare. Only a weak light glimmers, like a tiny
i^im in an enormous circle of blackness. This weak light is no more than an
intimation that the soul scarcely has the courage to perceive, doubtful whether
this light might not itself be a dream, and the circle of blackness, reality. This
doubt, and the still-oppressive suffering caused by a materialistic philosophy
create a sharp distinction between our souls and those of the 'primitives.' Our
souls, when one succeeds in touching them, give out a hollow ring, like a
k? UtifUl VaSC discovered cracked in the depths of the earth. For this reason
tpe movement toward the primitive, which we are experiencing at this moment,
Caftonly be, with its present borrowed forms, of short duration.
JUThese two similarities between modern art and the forms of bygone periods
%e, as can easily be seen, diametrically opposed. The first is external and thus
m no future. The second is internal and therefore conceals the seeds of the
future within itself. After the period of materialistic trials to which the soul
.-lad apparently succumbed, yet which it rejected as an evil temptation, the soul
emerges, refined by struggle and suffering. Coarser emotions such as terror, joy,



1^"



88 The Legacy of Symbolism

sorrow, etc., which served as the content of art during this period of trial, will
now hold little attraction fo v r the artist. He will strive to awaken as yet nameless
feelings of a finer nature. He himself leads a relatively refined and complex
existence, and the work he produces will necessarily awaken finer emotions in
the spectator who is capable of them, emotions that we cannot put into words.



II Movement

The spiritual life can be accurately represented by a diagram of a large acute
triangle divided into unequal parts, with the most acute and smallest division
at the top. The farther down one goes, the larger, broader, more extensive, and
deeper become the divisions of the triangle.

The whole triangle moves slowly, barely perceptibly, forward and upward, so
that where the highest point is 'today'; the next division is 'tomorrow,' i.e.,
what is today comprehensible only to the topmost segment of the triangle and
to the rest of the triangle is gibberish, becomes tomorrow the sensible and
emotional content of the life of the second segment.

At the apex of the topmost division there stands sometimes only a single man.
His joyful vision is like an inner, immeasurable sorrow. Those who are closest
to him do not understand him and in their indignation, call him deranged: a
phoney or a candidate for the madhouse. [. . .]

In every division of the triangle, one can find artists. Every one of them who
is able to see beyond the frontiers of his own segment is the prophet of his
environment, and helps the forward movement of the obstinate cartload of
humanity. But if he does not possess the necessary sharp eye, or if he misuses
or even closes it from unworthy motives or for unworthy purposes, then he
is fully understood and celebrated by all his companions within his own
segment. The bigger this segment is (and the lower down, therefore, it lies),
the greater is the mass of people who find the artist's language comprehensible.
It is obvious that every such segment hungers - consciously or (much more
often) completely unconsciously - after its corresponding spiritual bread. This
bread is given it by its artists, and tomorrow the next segment will reach for
that same bread.



Ill Spiritual Turning-point

The spiritual triangle moves slowly forward and upward. Today, one of the
largest of the lower divisions has grasped the elementary slogans of the materi-
alistic 'credo.' As regards religion, its inhabitants bear various titles. They call
themselves Jews, Catholics, Protestants, etc. In fact, they are atheists, a fact that
a few of the most daring or most stupid openly admit. 'Heaven' is empty. 'God
is dead.' Politically, these inhabitants are republicans or democrats. The fear,
distaste, and hatred they felt yesterday for these political views are today directed
at the term anarchy, about which they know nothing save the terrifying name.



1b Expression and the Primitive 89

Economically, these people are socialists. They sharpen the sword of justice to
deal the fatal blow to the capitalist hydra and cut off the head of evil.

Since the inhabitants of this large division of the triangle have never managed
to solve a problem for themselves and have always been pulled along in the cart
of humanity by their self-sacrificing fellow men standing far above them, they
know nothing of the effort of pulling, which they have never observed except
from a great distance. For this reason, they imagine this effort to be very easy,
believing in infallible remedies and prescriptions of universal application.

The next and lower division is dragged blindly upward by the one just described.
But it hangs grimly onto its former position, struggling in fear of the unknown,
of being deceived.

,., The higher.divisions, religiously speaking, are not only blindly atheistic, but
are able to justify their godlessness with the words of others (for example,
Virchow's saying, unworthy of an educated man: 'I have dissected many corpses,
but never yet discovered a soul'). Politically they are even more often republi-
cans, are familiar with various parliamentary usages, and read the leading articles
on politics in the newspapers. Economically, they are socialists of various shades,
supporting their 'convictions' with a wealth of quotations (everything from
Schweitzer's Emma to Lassalle's Iron Law and Marx's Capital, and much more).
U: Jn these higher divisions, other disciplines gradually emerge that were missing
om those just described: science and art, to which belong also literature and music.
^Scientifically, these people are positivists, recognizing only what can be
weighed and measured. They regard anything else as potentially harmful non-
sense, the same nonsense they yesterday called today's 'proven' theories.
^1 Jjj^art they are naturalists, which permits them to recognize and even prize
personality, individuality, and temperament in the artist, up to a certain limit
designated by others and in which, for this very reason, they believe unswervingly.

|n tjiese higher compartments there exists, despite the visible order and certainty
and infallible principles, a hidden fear, a confusion, a vacillation, an uncertainty
- as in the heads of passengers aboard a great, steady ocean liner when black
iquds gather over the sea, the dry land is hidden in mist, and the bleak wind
lj^ps up the water into black mountains. And this is thanks to their education.
r or they know that the man who is today revered as intellectual, statesman, or
artist was yesterday a ridiculed self-seeker, charlatan, or incompetent, unworthy
Pf serious consideration.

.ri.Afld the higher one ascends the spiritual triangle, the more obvious becomes
tws sharp-edged fear, this insecurity. First, one finds here and there eyes capable
^*?? m g for themselves, heads capable of putting two and two together. People
^h these gifts ask themselves, 'If this wisdom of the day before yesterday has
f^en overthrown by that of yesterday, and the latter by that of today, then
Spuld j t not also be somehow possible that the wisdom of today could be
Supplanted by that of tomorrow?' And the bravest of them reply, 'It is within
*e bounds of possibility.'

MrSecqnd, one finds eyes capable of seeing what is 'not yet explained' by
?no0ern-day sci ence. Such people ask themselves: 'Will science ever reach a



90 The Legacy of Symbolism

solution to this problem if it continues along the same path it has been following
until now? And if it reaches one, will we be able to rely on its answer?'

In these compartments can also be fpund professional intellectuals, who can
remember how established facts, recognized by the academies, were first greeted
by those same academies. Here, too, can be found art historians, who write
books full of praise and deep sentiments - about an art that yesterday was
regarded as senseless. By means of these books, they remove the hurdles over
which art has long since jumped, and set up new ones, which this time are
supposed to stay permanently and firmly in place. Engaged in this occupation,
they fail to notice that they are building their barriers behind art rather than
in front of it. If they notice it tomorrow, then they will quickly write more
books in order to remove their barriers one stage further. And this occupation
will continue unchanged until it is realized that the-external principles of art
can only be valid for the past and not for the future. No theory derived from
these principles can account for the path ahead, which lies in the realm of the
nonmaterial. One cannot crystallize in material form what does not yet exist in
material form. The spirit that will lead us into the realms of tomorrow can only
be recognized through feeling (to which the talent of the artist is the path). Theory
is the lantern that illuminates the crystallized forms of yesterday and before.

And if we climb still higher, we see even greater confusion, as if in a great
city, built solidly according to all architectural and mathematical rules, that is
suddenly shaken by a mighty force. The people who live in this division indeed
live in just such a spiritual city, where such forces are at work, and with which
the spiritual architects and mathematicians have not reckoned. [. . .]

And higher still we find that there is no more fear. The work done here boldly
shakes the pinnacles that men have set up. Here, too, we find professional
intellectuals who examine matter over and over again and finally cast doubt
upon matter itself, which yesterday was the basis of everything, and upon which
the whole universe was supported. The electron theory - i.e., the theory of moving
electricity, which is supposed completely to replace matter, has found lately
many keen proponents, who from time to time overreach the limits of caution
and thus perish in the conquest of this new stronghold of science, like heedless
soldiers, sacrificing themselves for others at the desperate storming of some
beleaguered fortress. But 'there is no fortress so strong that it cannot be taken.'

On the other hand, such facts as the science of yesterday greeted with the usual
word 'swindle' are on the increase, or are merely becoming more generally
known. Even the newspapers, those habitually most obedient servants of success
and of the plebs, who base their business on 'giving the people what they want,'
find themselves in many cases obliged to limit or even to suppress altogether
the ironic tone of their articles about the latest 'miracles.' Various educated
men, pure materialists among them, devote their powers of scientific investiga-
tion to those puzzling facts that can no longer be denied or kept quiet.

On the other hand, the number of people who set no store by the methods of
materialistic science in matters concerning the 'nonmaterial', or matter that is



Ib Expression and the Primitive 91

not perceptible to our senses, is at last increasing. And just as art seeks help

from the primitives, these people turn for help to half-forgotten times, with

their half-forgotten methods. [ . . . ]

* * *

When religion, science, and morality are shaken (the last by the mighty hand

of Nietzsche), when the external supports threaten to collapse, then man's gaze

turns away from the external toward himself.

Literature, music, and art are the first and most sensitive realms where this
spiritual change becomes noticeable in real form. These spheres immediately
reflect the murky present; they provide an intimation of that greatness which
first becomes noticeable only to a few, as just a tiny point, and which for the
masses does not exist at all.

They reflect the great darkness that appeared with hardly any warning. They
themselves become dark and murky. On the other hand, they turn away from
the soulless content of modern life, toward materials and environments that give
a free hand to the nonmaterial strivings and searchings of the thirsty soul.

''0 * *



IV The Pyramid

And so; gradually the different arts have set forth on the path of saying what
they are best able to say, through means that are peculiar to each.

And in spite of, or thanks to, this differentiation, the arts as such have never
in recent times been closer to one another than in this latest period of spiritual
transformation.

In all that we have discussed above lie hidden the seeds of the struggle toward
the nonnaturalistic, the abstract, toward inner nature. Consciously or uncon-
sciously, they obey the words of Socrates: 'Know thyself!' Consciously or
unconsciously, artists turn gradually toward an emphasis on their materials,
examining them spiritually, weighing in the balance the inner worth of those
elements out of which their art is best suited to create.



 B Painting



:#



V Effects of Color



Letting one's eyes wander over a palette laid out with colors has two main
f"' results:

1 There occurs a purely physical effect, i.e., the eye itself is charmed by
the beauty and other qualities of the color. The spectator experiences a feeling
of satisfaction, of pleasure, like a gourmet who has a tasty morsel in his mouth.
Or the eye is titillated, as is one's palate by a highly spiced dish. It can also
be calmed or cooled again, as one's finger can when it touches ice. These are
all physical sensations and as such can only be of short duration. They are also
superficial, leaving behind no lasting impression if the soul remains closed. Just



92 The Legacy of Symbolism

as one can only experience a physical feeling of cold on touching ice (which
one forgets after having warmed one's fingers again), so too the physical effect
of color is forgotten when one's eyes are turned away. And as the physical
sensation of the coldness of the ice, penetrating deeper, can give rise to other,
deeper sensations and set off a whole chain of psychic experiences, so the
superficial effect of color can also develop into a [deeper] form of experience.

Only familiar objects will have a wholly superficial effect upon a moderately
sensitive person. Those, however, that we encounter for the first time immedi-
ately have a spiritual effect upon us. A child, for whom every object is new,
experiences the world in this way: it sees light, is attracted by it, wants to grasp
it, burns its finger in the process, and thus learns fear and respect for the flame.
And then it learns that light has not only an unfriendly, but also a friendly
side: banishing darkness and prolonging the day, warming and cooking, delight-
ing the eye. One becomes familiar with light by collecting these experiences
and storing away this knowledge in the brain. The powerful, intense interest in
light vanishes, and its attribute of delighting the eye is met with indifference.
Gradually, in this way, the world loses its magic. One knows that trees provide
shade, that horses gallop quickly, and that cars go even faster, that dogs bite,
that the moon is far away, and that the man one sees in the mirror is not real.

The constantly growing awareness of the qualities of different objects and
beings is only possible given a high level of development in the individual. With
further development, these objects and beings take on an inner value, eventually
an inner sound. So it is with color, which if one's spiritual sensitivity is at a
low stage of development, can only create a superficial effect, an effect that
soon disappears once the stimulus has ceased. Yet, even at this stage, this
extremely simple effect can vary. The eye is more strongly attracted by the
brighter colors, and still more by the brighter and warmer: vermilion attracts
and pleases the eye as does flame, which men always regard covetously. Bright
lemon yellow hurts the eye after a short time, as a high note on the trumpet
hurts the ear. The eye becomes disturbed, cannot bear it any longer, and seeks
depth and repose in blue or green.

At a higher level of development, however, there arises from this elementary
impression a more profound effect, which occasions a deep emotional response.
In this case we have:

2 The second main consequence of the contemplation of color, i.e., the
psychological effect of color. The psychological power of color becomes appar-
ent, calling forth a vibration from the soul. Its primary, elementary physical
power becomes simply the path by which color reaches the soul.

Whether this second consequence is in fact a direct one, as might be supposed
from these last few lines, or whether it is achieved by means of association,
remains perhaps questionable. Since in general the soul is closely connected to
the body, it is possible that one emotional response may conjure up another,
corresponding form of emotion by means of association. For example, the color
red may cause a spiritual vibration like flame, since red is the color of flame.
A warm red has a stimulating effect and can increase in intensity until it induces
a painful sensation, perhaps also because of its resemblance to flowing blood.



IA



Ib Expression and the Primitive 93

This color can thus conjure up the memory of another physical agent, which
necessarily exerts a painful effect upon the soul.

If this were the case, it would be easy to find an associative explanation for
the other physical effects of color, i.e., its effects not only upon our sight, but
also upon our other senses. One might assume that, e.g., bright yellow produces
a sour effect by analogy with lemons.

It is, however, hardly possible to maintain this kind of explanation. As far as
tasting colors is concerned, many examples are known where this explanation
does not apply. A Dresden doctor tells how one of his patients, whom he
describes as 'spiritually, unusually highly developed,' invariably found that a
certain sauce had a 'blue' taste, i.e., it affected him like the color blue. One
might perhaps assume another similar, and yet different, explanation; that in
the case of such highly developed people the paths leading to the soul are so
direct, and the impressions it receives are so quickly produced, that an effect
immediately communicated to the soul via the medium of taste sets up vibrations
along the corresponding paths leading away from the soul to the other sensory
organs (in this case, the eye). This effect would seem to be a sort of echo or
resonance, as in the case of musical instruments, which without themselves being
touched, vibrate in sympathy with another instrument being played. Such highly
sensitive people are like good, much-played violins, which vibrate in all their
parts and fibers at every touch of the bow.

;*,. If one accepts this explanation, then admittedly, sight must be related not
nly to taste, but also to all the other senses. Which is indeed the case. Many

f colors have an uneven, prickly appearance, while others feel smooth, like velvet,
so that one wants to stroke them (dark ultramarine, chrome-oxide green,
madder). Even the distinction between cold and warm tones depends upon this
sensation. There are also colors that appear soft (madder), others that always
strike one as hard (cobalt green, green-blue oxide), so that one might mistake
them for already dry when freshly squeezed from the tube.

The expression 'the scent of colors 1 is common usage.
i- Finally, our hearing of colors is so precise that it would perhaps be impossible
to find anyone who would try to represent his impression of bright yellow by
means of the bottom register of the piano, or describe dark madder as being
like a soprano voice.

This explanation (that is, in terms of association) is, however, insufficient in
many instances that are for us of particular importance. Anyone who has heard
of color therapy knows that colored light can have a particular effect upon the
entire body. Various attempts to exploit this power of color and apply it to
different nervous disorders have again noted that red light has an enlivening
and stimulating effect upon the heart, while blue, on the other hand, can lead
to temporary paralysis. If this sort of effect can also be observed in the case of
animals, and even plants, then any explanation in terms of association completely
falls down. These facts in any case prove that color contains within itself a
little-studied but enormous power, which can influence the entire human body
as a physical organism.



94 The Legacy of Symbolism

If association does not seem a sufficient explanation in this case, then it cannot
satisfy us as regards the effect of color upon the psyche. In general, therefore,
color is a means of exerting a direct influence upon the soul. Color is the
keyboard. The eye is the hammer. The soul is the piano, with its many strings.

The artist is the hand that purposefully sets the soul vibrating by means of
this or that key.

Thus it is clear that the harmony of colors can only be based upon the
principle of purposefully touching the human soul.

This basic tenet we shall call the principle of internal necessity.



8 Wassily Kandinsky (1966-1944) The Cologne Lecture

Kandinsky here gives a summary account of his own work and of its development. He
had been invited to lecture on his work at the opening of an exhibition in Cologne in
1914, and responded by sending a typescript text. A transcription of the original
manuscript was published in J. Eichner, Kandinsky und Gabhele Munter, Von Ursprungen
Moderner Kunst, Munich, 1957. The present version is taken from the translation in
Lindsay and Vergo, op. cit, pp. 394-400.

[ . . . ] I can in general characterize the three periods of my development ... in
the following manner:

I remember the first, or (as I called it) dilettante, period as the simultaneous
effect of two different impulses. These two different impulses were, as my later
development shows, fundamentally different.

1 Love of nature.

2 Indefinite stirrings of the urge to create.

This love of nature consisted principally of pure joy in and enthusiasm for
the element of color. I was often so strongly possessed by a strongly sounding,
perfumed patch of blue in the shadow of a bush that I would paint a whole
landscape merely in order to fix this patch. Of course, such studies turned out
badly, and I used to search after the kind of 'motifs' of which each constituent
part would affect me equally strongly. Of course, I never found any. Then I
would try to make more effective those parts of the canvas which produced a
lesser effect. It was out of these exercises that my later ability developed . . .

At the same time I felt within myself incomprehensible stirrings, the urge to
paint a picture. And I felt dimly that a picture can be something other than a
beautiful landscape, an interesting and picturesque scene, or the portrayal of a
person. Because I loved colors more than anything else, I thought even then,
however confusedly, of color composition, and sought that objective element
which could justify the [choice of] colors.

This was the transition to my time of study, and to the second period of my
search.

... It soon appeared to me that past ages, having no longer any real existence,
could provide me with freer pretexts for that use of color which I felt within



Ib Expression and the Primitive 95

myself. [. . .] I was far less free in my treatment of the 'laws of drawing.' E.g.,
I regarded it as necessary to keep people's heads more or less in a straight line,
as one sees them on the street. [. . .]

Only very slowly did I come to free myself from this prejudice. In Composition
2, one can see the free use of color without regard for the demands of
perspective. I always found it unpleasant, however, and often distasteful, to
allow the figures to remain within the bounds of physiological laws and at the
same time indulge in compositional distortions. It seemed to me that if one
physical realm is destroyed for the sake of pictorial necessity, then the artist
has the artistic right and the artistic duty to negate the other physical realms
as well. I saw with displeasure in other people's pictures elongations that
contradicted the structure of the body, or anatomical distortions, and knew well
that this would not and could not be for me the solution to the question of
representation. Thus, objects began gradually to dissolve more and more in my
pictures. This can be seen in nearly all the pictures of 1910.

As yet, objects did not want to, and were not to, disappear altogether from
my pictures. First, it is impossible to conjure up maturity artificially at any
particular time. And nothing is more damaging and more sinful than to seek
one's forms by force. One's inner impulse, i.e., the creating spirit, will inexorably
create at the right moment the form it finds necessary. One can philosophize
about form; it can be analyzed, even calculated. It must, however, enter into
the work of art of its own accord, and moreover, at that level of completeness
which corresponds to the development of the creative spirit. Thus, I was obliged
to wait patiently for the hour that would lead my hand to create abstract form.

Secondly (and this is closely bound up with my inner development), I did
not want to banish objects completely. I have in many places spoken at length
about the fact that objects, in themselves, have a particular spiritual sound,
which can and does serve as the material for all realms of art. And I was still
too strongly bound up with the wish to seek purely pictorial forms having this
spiritual sound. Thus, I dissolved objects to a greater or lesser extent within
the same picture, so that they might not all be recognized at once and so that
these emotional overtones might thus be experienced gradually by the spectator,
one after another. Here and there, purely abstract forms entered of their own
accord, which therefore had to produce a purely pictorial effect without the
above-mentioned coloration. In other words, I myself was not yet sufficiently
mature to experience purely abstract form without bridging the gap by means
of objects. If I had possessed this ability, I would already have created absolute
pictures at that time.

In general, however, I already knew quite definitely at that time that I would
conquer absolute painting. Experience bade me have the utmost patience. And
yet, there were many times when it was infinitely difficult to follow this bidding.

[. . .] For a time I concentrated all my efforts upon the linear element, for
I knew internally that this element still requires my attention. The colors, which
I employed later, lie as if upon one and the same plane, while their inner weights
are different. Thus, the collaboration of different spheres entered into my
pictures of its own accord. By this means I also avoided the element of flatness



96 The Legacy of Symbolism

in painting, which can easily lead and has already so often led to the ornamental.
This difference between the inner planes gave my pictures a depth that more
than compensated for the earlier, perspective depth. I distributed my weights
so that they revealed no architectonic center. Often, heavy was at the top and
light at the bottom. Often, I left the middle weak and strengthened the corners.
I would put a crushing weight between parts that weighed little. I would let
cold come to the fore and drive warm into the background. I would treat the
individual color-tones likewise, cooling the warmer tones, warming the cold, so
that even one single color was raised to the level of a composition. It is
impossible, and relatively fruitless, to enumerate all the things that served me
as means to an end. [. . .]

The summer of 1911, which was unusually hot for Germany, lasted desper-
ately long. Every morning on waking, I saw from the window the incandescent
blue sky. The thunderstorms came, let fall a few drops of rain, and passed on.
I had the feeling as if someone seriously ill had to be made to sweat, but that
no remedies were of any use: hardly had a few beads of sweat appeared than
the tortured body would begin to burn all over again. One's skin cracked. One's
breath failed. Suddenly, all nature seemed to me white; white (great silence -
full of possibilities) displayed itself everywhere and expanded visibly. Later, I
remembered this feeling when I observed that white played a special role and
had been treated with particular attention in my pictures. Since that time, I
know what undreamed-of possibilities this primordial color conceals within itself.
I saw how wrongly I had hitherto conceived of this color, for I had regarded
its presence in large masses as necessary merely to emphasize the linear element,
and had been afraid of the reckless quality of its inner strength. This discovery
was of enormous importance for me. I felt, with an exactitude I had never yet
experienced, that the principal tone, the innate, inner character of a color can
be redefined ad infinitum by its different uses, that, e.g., the indifferent can
become more expressive than what is thought of as the most highly expressive.
This revelation turned the whole of painting upside-down and opened up before
it a realm in which one had previously been unable to believe. I.e., the inner,
thousandfold, unlimited values of one and the same quality, the possibility of
obtaining and applying infinite series simply in combination with one single
quality, tore open before me the gates of the realm of absolute art.

A spiritual-logical consequence of this experience was the impulse to make
the external element of form even more concise, to clothe content in much
cooler forms. To my way of thinking, which was at that time still completely
unconscious, the highest tragedy clothed itself in the greatest coolness, that is
to say, I saw that the greatest coolness is the highest tragedy. This is that cosmic
tragedy in which the human element is only one sound, only a single voice,
whose focus is transposed to within a sphere that approaches the divine. One
must employ such expressions with care, and not play with them. Here, however,
I use them consciously, and feel entitled to do so, for at this point I am speaking
not about my own pictures, but about a kind of art that has never yet been
personified and in its abstract being still waits for incarnation.

It was in this spirit, as far as I personally am concerned, that I painted many



Ib Expression and the Primitive 97

pictures (Picture with Zig Zag, Composition 5 and 6, etc.). I was, however, certain
that if I lived long enough, I should enter into the realm I saw before my eyes.
Just as one sees the summit of the mountain from below.

For the same reason, I became more and more strongly attracted by the
unskilled. I abbreviated the expressive element by lack of expression. By the
external position in which I placed it, I would emphasize an element that was
in itself not very clear in its expression. I deprived my colors of their clarity
of tone, dampening them on the surface and allowing their purity and true
nature to glow forth, as if through frosted glass. Improvisation 22 and Composition
5 are painted in this way, as well as, for the most part, Composition 6. [ . . . ]
Composition 2 is painted without theme, and perhaps at that time I would have
been nervous of taking a theme as my starting point. On the other hand, I
calmly chose the Resurrection as the theme for Composition 5, and the Deluge
for the sixth. One needs a certain daring if one is to take such outworn themes
as the starting point for pure painting. It was for me a trial of strength, which
in my opinion has turned out for the best.

The pictures painted since then have neither any theme as their point of
departure, nor any forms of corporeal origin. This occurred without force, quite
naturally, and of its own accord. In these latter years, forms that have arisen
of their own accord right from the beginning have gained an ever-increasing
foothold, and I immersed myself more and more in the manifold value of abstract
|lements. In this way, abstract forms gained the upper hand and softly but
furely crowded out those forms that are of representational origin.
;;*, Thus, I circumnavigated and left behind me the three greatest dangers on the
path I had foreseen. These were:

1 The danger of stylized form, which either comes into the world stillborn,
or else, too weak to live, quickly dies.

2 The danger of ornamental form, the form belonging mainly to external
beauty, which can be, and as a rule is outwardly expressive and inwardly
expressionless.

3 The danger of experimental form, which comes into being by means of
experimentation, i.e., completely without intuition, possessing, like every form,
a certain inner sound, but one that deceitfully simulates internal necessity.

Inner maturity, upon which in general I have firmly relied, but which has
afforded me nonetheless many a bitter hour of hopelessness, has of itself created
the [necessary] formal element.

As has been said often enough, it is impossible to make clear the aim of a
work of art by means of words. Despite a certain superficiality with which this
assertion is leveled and in particular exploited, it is by and large correct, and
remains so even at a time of the greatest education and knowledge of language
and its material. And this assertion - I now abandon the realm of objective
reasoning - is also correct because the artist himself can never either grasp or
recognize fully his own goal.

And finally: the best of words are no use to him whose sensibilities have
remained at an embryonic stage.



98 The Legacy of Symbolism

In conclusion, therefore, I shall embark upon the negative path and explain
as clearly as possible what I do not want. Many assertions of present-day art
criticism are refuted in the process, for such criticism has, alas, until now been
often rebarbative and has shouted falsehoods into the ears of many who were
inclined to hear.

I do not want to paint music.

I do not want to paint states of mind [Seelenzustdnde].

I do not want to paint coloristically or uncoloristically.

I do not want to alter, contest, or overthrow any single point in the harmony
of the masterpieces of the past.

I do not want to show the future its true path.

Apart from my theoretical works, which until now from an objective, scientific
point of view leave much to be desired, I only want to paint good, necessary,
living pictures, which are experienced properly by at least a few viewers.



9 Franz Marc (1880-1916) 'The "Savages" of
Germany' and 'Two Pictures'

Marc was co-editor with Kandinsky of the almanac Der 8/aue Re/ter, in which the present
two texts were originally published in 1912. in his own paintings Marc purveyed a
mystical approach to the natural and animal world, as a form of refusal of the urban and
technical emphases of modern life. In these extracts Marc surveys the various groups
composing the Expressionist avant-garde in Germany and justifies their evident unpopu-
larity in terms of an epochal historical rupture. These translations are taken from
K. Lankheit (ed.), The Blaue Reiter Almanac, English version, London, 1974.



The 'Savages * of Germany

In this time of the great struggle for a new art we fight like disorganized 'savages 1
against an old, established power. The battle seems to be unequal, but spiritual
matters are never decided by numbers, only by the power of ideas.

The dreaded weapons of the 'savages' are their new ideas. New ideas kill better
than steel and destroy what was thought to be indestructible.

Who are these 'savages' in Germany?

For the most part they are both well known and widely disparaged: the Briicke
in Dresden, the Neue Sezession in Berlin, and the Neue Vereinigung in Munich.
* * *

It is impossible to explain the recent works of these 'savages' as a formal
development and new interpretation of impressionism . . . The most beautiful
prismatic colors and the celebrated cubism are now meaningless goals for these
'savages.'

Their thinking has a different aim: To create out of their work symbols for
their own time, symbols that belong on the altars of a future spiritual religion,



Ib Expression and the Primitive 99

symbols behind which the technical heritage cannot be seen.

Scorn and stupidity will be like roses in their path.

Not all the official 'savages' in or out of Germany dream of this kind of art
and of these high aims.

All the worse for them. After easy successes they will perish from their own
superficiality despite all their programs, cubist and otherwise.

But we believe - at least we hope we are justified in believing - that apart
from all these 'savage' groups in the forefront there are many quiet powers in
Germany struggling with the same high, distant goals and that ideas are silently
maturing unknown to the heralds of the battle.

In the dark, without knowing them, we give them our hand.

Two Pictures

It can be sensed that there is a new religion arising in the country, still without
a prophet, recognized by no one.
- Religions die slowly.

But the artistic style that was the inalienable possession of an earlier era
collapsed catastrophically in the middle of the nineteenth century. There has
been no style since. It is perishing all over the world as if seized by an epidemic.
Since then, serious art has been the work of individual artists whose art has
had nothing to do with 'style' because they were not in the least connected with
the style or the needs of the masses. Their works arose rather in defiance of
their times. They are characteristic, fiery signs of a new era that increase daily
everywhere. This book will be their focus until dawn comes and with its natural
light removes from these works the spectral appearance they now have. What
appears spectral today will be natural tomorrow.

Where are such signs and works? How do we recognize the genuine ones?
{ Like everything genuine, its inner life guarantees its truth. All works of art
created by truthful minds without regard for the work's conventional exterior
remain genuine for all times,
v * *

The present isolation of the rare, genuine artist is absolutely unavoidable for the
moment. [ . . . ]

The reasons, we think, are these: nothing occurs accidentally and without
organic reason - not even the loss of artistic style in the nineteenth century.
This fact leads us to the idea that we are standing today at the turning point
of two long epochs, similar to the state of the world fifteen hundred years ago,
When there was also a transitional period without art and religion - a period in
^hich great and traditional ideas died and new and unexpected ones took their
#face. Nature would not wantonly destroy the religion and art of the people
without a great purpose. We are also convinced that we can already proclaim
the first signs of the time.

The first works of a new era are tremendously difficult to define. Who can
see clearly what their aim is and what is to come? But just the fact that they
do exist and appear in many places today, sometimes independently of each



100 The Legacy of Symbolism

other, and that they possess inner truth, makes us certain that they are the first
signs of the coming new epoch - they are the signal fires for the pathfinders.
The hour is unique. Is it too daring to call attention to the small, unique
signs of the time?

10 August Macke (1887-1914) 'Masks'

Macke was associated with Kandinsky and Marc in Munich in 1909-10 and joined with
them in the formation of Der Blaue Reiter. Originally published in the Biaue Reiter
almanac in 1912, the present text furnishes a typical case of the association of
Modernism with the primitive, and of that diversification in the interests of art and art
history which took place in Germany at the turn of the century. This translation from
Lankheit, op. cit.

[. . .] Is life not more precious than food and the body not more precious than
clothing?

Incomprehensible ideas express themselves in comprehensible forms. Com-
prehensible through our senses as star, thunder, flower, as form.

Form is a mystery to us for it is the expression of mysterious powers. Only
through it do we sense the secret powers, the invisible God.'

The senses are our bridge between the incomprehensible and the comprehensible.

To behold plants and animals is: to perceive their secret.

To hear the thunder is: to perceive its secret. To understand the language of
forms means: to be closer to the secret, to live.

To create forms means: to live. Are not children more creative in drawing directly
from the secret of their sensations than the imitator of Greek forms? Are not savages
artists who have forms of their own powerful as the form of thunder?

Thunder, flower, any force expresses itself as form. So does man. He, too,
is driven by something to find words for conceptions, to find clearness in
obscurity, consciousness in the unconscious. This is his life, his creation.

As man changes, so do his forms change.

The relations that numerous forms bear to one another enable us to recognize
the individual form. Blue first becomes visible against red, the greatness of the
tree against the smallness of the butterfly, the youth of the child against the age
of the old man. One and two make three. The formless, the infinite, the zero
remain incomprehensible. God remains incomprehensible.

Man expresses his life in forms. Each form of art is an expression of his inner
life. The exterior of the form of art is its interior.

Each genuine form of art emerges from a living correlation of man to the real
substance of the forms of nature, the forms of art. The scent of a flower, the
joyful leaping of a dog, a dancer, the donning of jewelry, a temple, a painting,
a style, the life of a nation, of an era.

The flower opens at sunrise. Seeing his prey, the panther crouches, and as a
result of seeing it, his strength grows. And the tension of his strength shows
in the length of his leap. The form of art, its style, is a result of tension.



Ib Expression and the Primitive 101

In our complicated and confused era we have forms that absolutely enthrall

ji^veryone in exactly the same way as the fire dance enthralls the African or the

1 mysterious drumming of the fakirs enthralls the Indian. As a soldier, the

J independent scholar stands beside the farmer's son. They both march in review

;; similarly through the ranks, whether they like it or not. At the movies the

H professor marvels alongside the servant girl. In the vaudeville theater the

^utterfly-colored dancer enchants the most amorous couples as intensely as the

solemn sound of the organ in a Gothic cathedral seizes both believer and

unbeliever.

Forms are powerful expressions of powerful life. Differences in expression
come from the material, word, color, sound, stone, wood, metal. One need not
understand each form. One also need not read each language.

The contemptuous gesture with which connoisseurs and artists have to this
day banished all artistic forms of primitive cultures to the fields of ethnology
or applied art is amazing at the very least.

What we hang on the wall as a painting is basically similar to the carved and
painted pillars in an African hut. The African considers his idol the comprehen-
sible form for an incomprehensible idea, the personification of an abstract
concept. For us the painting is the comprehensible form for the obscure,
[J incomprehensible conception of a deceased person, of an animal, of a plant, of
the whole magic of nature, of the rhythmical. [. . .]

Everywhere, forms speak in a sublime language right in the face of European
aesthetics. Even in the games of children, in the hat of a cocotte, in the joy of
a sunny day, invisible ideas materialize quietly.
The joys, the sorrows of man, of nations, lie behind the inscriptions, paintings,
| temples, cathedrals, and masks, behind the musical compositions, stage spec-
tacles, and dances. If they are not there, if form becomes empty and groundless,
then there is no art.



11 Emil Nolde (1867-1956) 'On Primitive Art'

The painter Nolde was a member of the Brucke from 1906 to 1908. His work is central
to the characterization of a specifically German form of Expressionism. In the paintings
by which he is best known, 'primitive' figure types are used to evoke emotional and
religious themes. The present text was incorporated in Nolde's autobiographical Jahre
der Kampfe [Years of Struggle] 1912-1914, Berlin, Rembrandt, 1934, pp. 172^8, with
a note to the effect that it had been written in 1912 to introduce an intended book 'on
the artistic expressions of primitive peoples' on which Nolde was working at the time.
The present translation is made from the 1934 edition.



1 'The most perfect art was Greek art. Raphael is the greatest of all masters
in painting.' Such were the doctrines of every art teacher only twenty or
thirty years ago.

2 Since then, much has changed. We do not care for Raphael, and are less
enthusiastic about the statues of the so-called golden age of Greece. Our
predecessors' ideals are not ours. Works signed by great names over the



102 The Legacy of Symbolism

centuries appeal to us less. In the hurry and bustle of their times, worldly-
wise artists created works for Popes and palaces. It is the ordinary people
who laboured in their workshops and of whose lives scarcely anything is now
known, whose very names have not come down to us, that we love and
respect today in their plain, large-scale carvings in the cathedrals of Naum-
burg, Magdeburg and Bamberg.

3 Our museums are getting large and crammed and are growing rapidly. I am
not keen on these vast collections, deadening by virtue of their sheer mass.
A reaction against such excess must surely come soon.

4 Not long ago only a few artistic periods were thought suitable for museums.
Then they were joined by exhibitions of Coptic and early Christian art,
Greek terracottas and vases, Persian and Islamic art. But why is Indian,
Chinese and Javanese art still classified under ethnology or anthropology?
And why is the art of primitive peoples not considered art at all?

5 What is it about these primitive forms of expression that appeals so much
to us artists?

6 In our own time, every earthenware vessel or piece of jewellery, every utensil
or garment, has to be designed on paper before it is made. Primitive peoples,
however, create their works with the material itself in the artist's hand, held
in his fingers. They aspire to express delight in form and the love of creating
it. Absolute originality, the intense and often grotesque expression of power and
life in very simple forms - that may be why we like these works of native art.

12 Oskar Kokoschka (1886-1980) 'On the Nature of
Visions'

Kokoschka's brief text condenses many of those themes which pervaded the Austro-
German Expressionist avant-garde in the years before the First World War. Not yet
inflected by politics, as Expressionism was to be by the war, Kokoschka's preoccupation
is with that constant of German Idealism: the Spirit. He offers a vitalism in which the
soul, notably the soul of the artist - free, untramelled, and marked by a kind of fierce
innocence - is in direct harmony with the forces of nature and the universe. Tellingly,
his metaphors tend to the Biblical. Originally delivered as a lecture in Vienna, 26 January
1912, the text appeared in English translation by Heidi Medlinger and John Thwaites in
Edith Hoffmann, Kokoschka. Life and Work, London, 1947, pp. 285-7, from which the
present version is taken.

The state of awareness of visions is not one in which we are either remembering
or perceiving. It is rather a level of consciousness at which we experience visions
within ourselves.

This experience cannot be fixed; for the vision is moving, an impression
growing and becoming visual, imparting a power to the mind. It can be evoked
but never defined.

Yet the awareness of such imagery is a part of living. It is life selecting from
the forms which flow towards it or refraining, at will.

A life which derives its power from within itself will focus the perception of



Ib Expression and the Primitive 103

such images. And yet this free visualizing in itself - whether it is complete or
hardly yet perceptible, or undefined in either space or time - this has its own
power running through. The effect is such that the visions seem actually to
modify one's consciousness, at least in respect of everything which their own
form proposes as their pattern and significance. This change in oneself, which
follows on the vision's penetration of one's very soul, produces the state of
awareness, of expectancy. At the same time there is an outpouring of feeling
into the image which becomes, as it were, the soul's plastic embodiment. This
state of alertness of the mind or consciousness has, then, a waiting, receptive
quality. It is like an unborn child, as yet unfelt even by the mother, to whom
nothing of the outside world slips through. And yet whatever affects his mother,
all that impresses her down to the slightest birthmark on the skin, all is
implanted in him. As though he could use her eyes, the unborn receives through
her his visual impressions, even while he is himself unseen. <

The life of the consciousness is boundless. It interpenetrates the world and
is woven through all its imagery. Thus it shares those characteristics of living
which our human existence can show. One tree left living in an arid land would
carry in its seed the potency from whose roots all the forests of the earth might
spring. So with ourselves; when we no longer inhabit our perceptions they do

^not go out of existence; they continue as though with a power of their own,
awaiting the focus of another consciousness. There is no more room for death;

|, for though the vision disintegrates and scatters, it does so only to reform in

I another mode.

Therefore we must harken closely to our inner voice. We must strive through
||he penumbra of words to the core within. 'The Word became flesh and dwelt
among us.' And then the inner core breaks free - now feebly and now violently

I? from the words within which it dwells like a charm. 4 It happened to me
According to the Word.'

If we will surrender our closed personalities, so full of tension, we are in a
position to accept this magical principle of living, whether in thought, intuition,
or in our relationships. For in fact we see every day beings who are absorbed
in one another, whether in living or in teaching, aimless or with direction. So
it is with every created thing, everything we can communicate, every constant
in the flux of living; each one has its own principle which shapes it, keeps life
in it, and maintains it in our consciousness. Thus it is preserved, like a rare
species, from extinction. We may identify it with 'me' or 'you' according to
our estimate of its scale or its infinity. For we set aside the self and personal
existence as being fused into a larger experience. All that is required of us is
to RELEASE CONTROL. Some part of ourselves will bring us into the unison.
The inquiring spirit rises from stage to stage, until it encompasses the whole
of Nature. All laws are left behind. One's soul is a reverberation of the universe.
Then too, as I believe, one's perception reaches out towards the Word, towards
awareness of the vision.

As I said at first, this awareness of visions can never fully be described, its
history can never be delimited, for it is a part of life itself. Its essence is a
flowing and a taking form. It is love, delighting to lodge itself in the mind.



104 The Legacy of Symbolism

This adding of something to ourselves - we may accept it or let it pass; but as
soon as we are ready it will come to us by impulse, from the very breathing of
our life. An image will take shape for us suddenly, at the first look, as the first
cry of a newborn child emerging from its mother's womb.

Whatever the orientation of a life, its significance will depend on this ability
to conceive the vision. Whether the image has a material or an immaterial
character depends simply on the angle from which the flow of psychic energy
is viewed, whether at ebb or flood.

It is true that the consciousness is not exhaustively defined by these images
moving, these impressions which grow and become visual, imparting a power
to the mind which we can evoke at will. For of the forms which come into the
consciousness some are chosen while others are excluded arbitrarily.

But this awareness of visions which I endeavor to describe is the viewpoint
of all life as though it were seen from some high place; it is like a ship which
was plunged into the seas and flashes again as a winged thing in the air.

Consciousness is the source of all things and of all conceptions. It is a sea
ringed about with visions.

My mind is the tomb of all those things which have ceased to be the true
Hereafter into which they enter. So that at last nothing remains; all that is
essential of them is their image within myself. The life goes out of them into
that image as in the lamp the oil is drawn up through the wick for nourishing
the flame.

So each thing, as it communicates itself to me, loses its substance and passes
into the HEREAFTER WHICH IS MY mind. I incorporate its image which I can
evoke without the intermediacy of dreams. 'Whenever two or three are gathered
together in My name, I am in their midst' [Matt. 18:20]. And, as though it
could go out to men, my vision is maintained, fed, as the lamp is by its oil,
from the abundance of their living. If I am asked to make all this plain and
natural the things themselves must answer for me, as it were, bearing their own
witness. For I have represented them, I have taken their place and put on their
semblance through my visions. It is the psyche which speaks.

I search, inquire, and guess. And with what sudden eagerness must the lamp
wick seek its nourishment, for the flame leaps before my eyes as the oil feeds
it. It is all my imagination, certainly, what I see there in the blaze. But if I
have drawn something from the fire and you have missed it, well, I should like
to hear from those whose eyes are still untouched. For is this not my vision?
Without intent I draw from the outside world the semblance of things; but in
this way I myself become part of the world's imaginings. Thus in everything
imagination is simply that which is natural. It is nature, vision, life.



13 Alexander Shevchenko (1888-1948)
'Neo-Primitivism'

The painter Shevchenko was one of the several members of the Russian avant-garde
who combined an interest in the artistic culture of the peasantry with an informed



Ib Expression and the Primitive 105

assimilation of French cubism. He contributed to the 'Donkey's tail' group exhibition in
March 1912, and his essay was published as a pamphlet in Moscow during the following
year. Its full title is 'Neo-Primitivism: Its Theory, Its Potentials, Its Achievements'. The
present translation is from the French version by Anne Durufle, in T. Andersen Art et
Poesies Russes 1900-1930. Textes choisis, Paris Centre Pompidou, 1979. (A lubokis a
form of vernacular Russian woodcut.)

We who hold neo-primitivism to be the artist's religion say:

Physical nature in the true sense no longer exists. It has become the foundation
of apartment blocks, and the asphalt of pavements and streets. Physical nature
is nothing but a memory, like a tale about something marvellous that has long
since disappeared.

The Factory-Town dominates everything.

Perpetual movement, endless coming and going, nightmarish and confused
visions of the city follow one after the other. In the daylight which is obscured
by houses, in the light created by the electric suns of the night, life appears
completely different to us, full of other new forms.

The world has been transformed into a monstrous, fantastic, perpetually
moving machine; into an enormous automatic organism, inanimate, a gigantic
whole constructed on a strict correspondence and balance of parts.

We and the entire world are parts of the whole.

Robot-like, we have become habituated to life - getting up, going to bed,
eating and working to set times; and this sense of rhythm and mechanical
harmony is reflected in our entire life, cannot but be reflected in our mode of
thought, in our spiritual life, in art.

A simple, physical copy of nature can no longer satisfy us.

We are used to seeing surrounding nature modified, embellished by the hands
of man the creator, and we can only demand the same of art.

Such is the creation of the century in which we live.

Naturalistic painting does not exist for us, just as nature does not exist without
cleared, sanded or asphalted roads, without water-mains and artificial light,
without telephone or tramway.

We are endeavouring to find new paths for our art, but we do not reject the
old forms altogether, and of these we acknowledge above all primitive art, magic
tales of the ancient Orient.

The simple and innocent beauty of the luhok, the austerity of primitive art,
the mechanical precision of construction, the stylistic nobility and beautiful
colours gathered together by the creative hand of the master artist, that is our
watchword and slogan.

Life without movement is nothing, and that is why we always try not to
restrict the form of objects to a single plane, but to communicate their movement
by representing their intermediate forms.

Beauty only resides in the harmony of simple combinations of forms and
colours. Mannered beauty borders on the illusory sophistication of the market,
a product of the corruption of popular taste.



Ik



106 The Legacy of Symbolism

Primitives, icons, lubki, trays, signboards, fabrics of the Orient . . . these are
the models of real value and of pictorial beauty.

The words 'Art' (that is to say fiction) and 'Nature' (that is to say reality),
intersect to become 'the creative will of the painter 1 , which takes its materials
from divergent sources. That is why we do not aim for a naturalistic resemblance
to nature in our paintings.

Nature is a raw material, which only excites in our souls this or that emotion
at the moment when we carry out what we have conceived of within the plan
of the painting.

One should copy neither art nor life, but instead observe them and study
them both ceaselessly. In art, the observation and the study of nature must have
as a point of departure a subject of art itself. We take as the starting-point of
our art the lubok, primitive art, and the icon, for there we find a more
precise, more direct perception of life and one which is, furthermore, purely
pictorial.

Just like the primitivists and the painters of the East, we consider that the
most valuable and productive work is that which is guided by direct perception.
This opens up greater possibilities to the artist to reveal his own conception of
the world, and does not distract attention with unnecessary details, which too
often happens when one works from nature.
* * *

The word Neo-primitivism itself is a word which both characterizes the
evolution of pictorial realizations, their origin in primitive art, and likewise
testifies that they belong to our era.

There are not and there cannot be phenomena arising from nothing.

Ideas are not born but reborn, and so everything that is normal is successive
and develops from preceding forms.

Such is our school which, taking primitive art as its source, develops in the
contemporary era.

Generally it is admissible to describe as primitive, not only the simplicity,
the clumsiness of past artists, but also folk art, for which there is a specific
name, the lubok. The word primitive directly reveals an Oriental origin, for
today it reflects the entire spectrum of Oriental art -Japanese, Chinese, Korean,
Indo-Persian art . . .

In our school, this notion reveals the character of painting (not of the subject),
the manner of execution, the use of pictorial traditions of the Orient.

This initiation to the Orient is an inner and spiritual one. But this is not a
simple imitation, of which one usually says 'it is in an Oriental style'; for
example, Stelletski, whose works in no way speak of old Russia, of Byzantium,
of icons, does not achieve this. This is nothing but historicism, the examining
of lofty ideas in the manner of a dilettante, an imitation lacking perception,
whereas the icons are completely suffused by the Orient and by Byzantium and
at the same time remain completely original.

Neo-primitivism is a profoundly national phenomenon.

Russia and the Orient have been indissolubly linked since the Tartar invasions,
and the spirit of the Tartars, the spirit of the Orient, is embedded in our lives



Ib Expression and the Primitive 107

to such a degree that it is sometimes difficult to distinguish where the national
character trait ends and where the influence of the Orient begins.

All human culture has in general come from Asia, not the other way round
as certain people assert.

Our entire Asiatic culture and the foreign masters, the architects, weavers,
artists, and all those from the Occident carrying within them a spark of European
civilization, fell immediately in our barbarous country under the influence of
the Tartar culture, of the Orient, of our more original, more passionate culture,
and the Occidental civilization was reduced to dust before the Oriental culture.

Take our ancient Russian painting. It suffices to compare our grass writing
with the tapestries of the Orient, our 'spiritual and moral painting' and its direct
extension - the popular images and the lubki - with Indo-Persian painting, to
discover quite clearly their common origin, their spiritual affinity.

In other countries, the influence of the Orient is no less evident, no less
grandiose; the forms of Occidental art fashioned themselves entirely from
Byzantine forms, which had been borrowed in their turn from the even older
art of Georgia and Armenia.

Thus one comes full circle, a progression of the arts from us, the Orient, the
Caucasus, towards Byzantium; then to Italy, borrowing from there techniques
of oil painting and the easel; then returning to us.

Hence the epithets like 'Frenchified Painting' in which, if we take our
investigation further, we find the splendour of our Barbary once again, the
primitive art of the Orient, more so than the Occident with its simple,
naturalistic, sometimes quite absurd imitation of nature.

, All of this can in a sufficient measure justify our enthusiasm for the art of the
Orient. It has become evident that there is no other reason to use the products
of the Occident, which received them from the Orient, all the more so since
after their long circular voyage they have had plenty of time to spoil and rot.

There is no longer any reason since we have daily and direct contact with
Asia.

We are called Barbarians, Asiatics.

Yes, we are Asia and we are proud of it because 'Asia is the cradle of Nations 1 ,
a good measure of Tartar blood flows in our veins and we salute the Orient
which is to come, ultimate origin, cradle of culture, of all the arts.

Hence Neo-primitivism which takes the Orient as its origin is not the
repetition, the popularization of the Oriental which inevitably renders all art
forms banal; no, it is entirely original. The Orient is reflected in Neo-primitiv-
ism to a great extent, for instance in the interpretation, the traditions; yes, but
our own national art plays a large role. (Just as when children create art.) This
primitive art which is unique in its genre, is always profound and true, created
where our Asiatic origin can be found in all its plenitude.

Nor is Neo-primitivism a stranger to Occidental forms and we declare openly:

Asia has given us all the depth of its culture, its primitive nature, and Europe
has in its turn added some traits of its own civilization.

Thus Neo-primitivism is born of the fusion of Oriental traditions and the
forms of the Occident. [ . . . ]



108 The Legacy of Symbolism

14 Benedetto Croce (1866-1952) 'What Is Art?'

The Italian philosopher Croce was an influential exponent of the view that art is to be
identified with intuition, rather than with any physical object or range of objects. There
are clear links between his aesthetic theory and the work of such Modernist critics as
Roger Fry and Clive Bell. Croce's Guide to Aesthetics was originally published as
Brevario di estetica in 1913. The present extract is taken from the opening chapter in
the translation by Patrick Romanell, Indianapolis, 1965.

[ . . . ] The question as to what art is - let me answer it immediately and in the
simplest manner: art is vision or intuition. The artist produces an image or
picture. The person who enjoys art turns his eyes in the direction which the
artist has pointed out to him, peers through the hole which has been opened
for him, and reproduces in himself the artist's image. 'Intuition,' 'vision,'
'contemplation,' 'imagination,' 'fancy,' 'invention, 1 'representation,' and so forth,
are words which continually reappear as almost synonymous in discussions on
art. All of them give rise in our minds to the same concept or to the same set
of concepts - a sign of universal consent.

But this answer of mine, that art is intuition, acquires significance as well as
strength from all that it implicitly denies and from which art is distinguished.
What are the negations it, includes? I shall indicate the chief ones, or at least
those most important for us at our present moment of culture.

The answer denies, above all, that art is a physical fact, as, for example, certain
particular colors or combinations of colors, forms of the body, sounds or
combinations of sounds, phenomena of heat or electricity - in brief, anything
which goes under the name of 'physical.' [. . .]

... to overcome the strange and harsh sound of the truth in question or to
become familiar with it, we should take into consideration that the proof of the
unreality of the physical world has not only been established in an irrefutable
way and is conceded by all philosophers (who are neither crass materialists nor
involved in the strident contradictions of materialism), but that the proof itself
is being acknowledged by the physicists themselves - as evident in the traces
of philosophy which they mix in with their science - when they conceive
physical phenomena as manifestations of principles which go beyond experience,
such as the atoms or the ether, or as the manifestation of an Unknowable.
Besides, the very Matter of the materialists is a supermaterial principle. Thus,
physical facts, by their internal logic and by common consent, make themselves
known not as something truly real, but as a construction of our intellect for purposes
of science. Consequently, the question as to whether art is a physical fact should
rationally assume another meaning, namely, whether art may be constructed
physically.

This is certainly possible, and we actually do so whenever, on diverting our
attention from the sense of a poem, or on giving up its enjoyment, we begin,
say, to count the words of which the poem is composed and divide them into
syllables and letters. Or whenever, on diverting our attention from the aesthetic



Ib Expression and the Primitive 109

effect of a statue, we measure it and weigh it. To do so is, no doubt, of the
greatest utility to packers of statues, as to count words is useful to printers who
have to 'compose' pages of poetry! But it is utterly useless to the contemplator
or student of art, to whom it is not useful or permissible 'to divert his attention'
from his proper object. Not even, therefore, in this second sense is art a physical
fact, because when we undertake to penetrate its nature and its mode of
operation, it is of no avail to make a physical thing out of it.

Another negation implicit in the definition of art as intuition is that if art is
intuition, and if intuition signifies theory in the original sense of contemplation,
then art cannot be a utilitarian act. For, inasmuch as a utilitarian act aims always
at arriving at a pleasure and, hence, at removing a pain, art considered in terms
of its own nature has nothing to do with the useful, or with pleasure and pain,
as such.

It will be admitted in effect, without too much opposition, that a pleasure as
pleasure, any pleasure whatever, is not in itself artistic. The pleasure from a
drink of water which quenches our thirst is not artistic. Neither is a walk in
the open air which stretches our limbs and makes our blood circulate more
rapidly, nor is the attainment of a coveted post which results in lending security
to our practical life, and so forth. Even in the relations which develop between
ourselves and works of art, the difference between pleasure and art is self-
evident. For the figure represented may be dear to us and awaken the most
delightful memories, but the picture may be ugly, nevertheless. On the other
hand, the picture may be beautiful, but the figure represented abominable to
our soul. Or the picture itself, which we approve as beautiful, may provoke
later a fit of rage and envy, owing to its being a work of an enemy or a rival,
to whom it will bring certain advantages and renewed vigor. Our practical
interests, with their correlative pleasures and pains, are blended, become con-
fused now and then, and disquiet our aesthetic interest, but never become united
with it.

At most, to defend on more valid grounds the definition of art as the
pleasurable, one might argue that art is not the pleasurable in general but a
special form of it. However, this restriction is no longer a defense but rather
an actual abandonment of that thesis. For assuming that art is a special form
of the pleasurable, it follows that its distinctive character would not be supplied
by the pleasurable as such, but by whatever distinguishes the artistic from other
forms of the pleasurable. And it is to that distinctive element apart from the
pleasurable, or different from it, to which it would be fitting to address the
inquiry. [. . .]

A third negation effected with the help of the theory of art as intuition is
the denial of art as a moral act. In other words, it denies that art is that form
of practical activity which, though necessarily associated with the useful and
with pleasure and pain, is not immediately utilitarian and hedonistic, operating
as it does on a higher spiritual plane. Even so, as theoretical activity, intuition
is against anything practical. In fact, as has been observed from time immemo-
rial, art does not originate from an act of will. Good will, which constitutes the
honest man, does not constitute the artist. Moreover, since art is not born from



110 The Legacy of Symbolism

an act of wili, it likewise is not subject to any moral evaluation, not because an
exemption privilege is accorded to it, but simply because no way is available to
apply moral distinctions to it. An artistic image can depict a morally praise-
worthy or blameworthy action. But the image itself, as such, is neither praise-
worthy nor blameworthy, morally. Not only is there no penal code which can
condemn an image to prison or to death, but no moral judgment passed by a
reasonable person could ever address itself to it as its object. Otherwise, to judge
Dante's Francesca immoral or Shakespeare's Cordelia moral (these perform a
mere artistic function, being like musical notes within Dante's and Shakespeare's
souls) would be just as valid as to judge a square moral or a triangle immoral.

Furthermore, the moralistic theory of art is also represented in the history of
aesthetic doctrines and is not altogether dead even today, although it is much
discredited in current opinion. However, it is discredited not only for its internal
defect, but, in addition, to some extent, on account of the moral shortcomings
of some present tendencies which facilitate, thanks to psychological jargon, that
refutation which should be made - and which we are here doing - solely on
logical grounds. From the moralistic doctrine is derived art's pre-established
goal to serve as a guide to the good, inspire the abhorrence of evil, correct and
improve manners and morals. And from the same source comes the demand
that artists contribute to the public education of the lower classes, the reinforcing
of the national or warlike spirit of a people, the spreading of the ideals of a
modest and industrious life, and so on.

All of which are things that art cannot do, any more than can geometry, which,
notwithstanding, does not lose any of its respectability on this account; and in
view of this, one does not see why art should lose any of its, either. [ . . . ]

[. . .] The moralistic doctrine has also its true side. For if art is beyond
morals, the artist is not, since he is neither beyond nor this side of it, but under
its dominion. Insofar as he is a man, the artist cannot shirk the duties of man
and should consider art itself - which is not and never will be morals - as a
mission, to be practised like a priesthood.

Furthermore (and this is the last, and perhaps the most important, of the
general negations which it suits my purposes to mention here), with the
definition of art as intuition goes the denial that it has the character of conceptual
knowledge. Conceptual knowledge in its pure form (which is that of the
philosophical) is always oriented toward reality and aims to establish the real as
distinguished from the unreal, or to diminish unreality in status by including
it within reality as a subordinate part of itself. In contrast, intuition refers
precisely to the lack of distinction between reality and unreality - to the image
itself - with its purely ideal status as mere image.

The contrast being made here between intuitive or sensuous and conceptual
or intellectual knowledge, between aesthetics and noetics, is aimed at restoring
the autonomy of this simpler and elementary form of knowledge, which has
been compared with the dream (dream, certainly not sleep) of the theoretical
life, with respect to which philosophy would be the waking state. Accordingly,
whoever before a work of art asks whether what the artist has expressed be
metaphysically or historically true or false is asking a meaningless question, and



Ib Expression and the Primitive 111

falls into the error analogous to the one of the man who wants to bring before
the tribunal of morality the ethereal images of fancy.

The question is meaningless because the distinction of true and false always
concerns an assertion about reality, that is, a judgment, and thus is not applicable
to the presentation of an image or to a mere subject - which is not the subject
in a proposition, lacking as it does attribute or predicate. It is useless to object
that the individual character of the image has no meaning without a reference
to the universal, of which that image is its individuation. For here we certainly
are not denying that the universal, like the spirit of God, is everywhere and
animates everything from within itself. But we are denying that the universal
is logically explicit or thought out in intuition as such. And likewise is it useless
to appeal to the principle of the unity of the spirit, which is not weakened but
rather strengthened by our precise distinction between fancy and thought, because
only from distinction is opposition born, and concrete unity from opposition.

Ideality (as this property which distinguishes intuition from concept, art from
philosophy and history, from assertion of the universal, and from perception or
narration of events, has also been called) is the quintessence of art. As soon as
reflection or judgment develops out of that state of ideality, art vanishes and
dies. It dies in the artist, who changes from artist and becomes his own critic;
it dies in the spectator or listener, who from rapt contemplator of art changes
into a thoughtful observer of life.
 * *

In reality, intuition is production of an image. But it is not production of an
incoherent accumulation of images obtained by reconjuring up ancient images,
letting them succeed each other at will, or combining them in the same arbitrary
fashion, such as joining the neck of a horse to the human head, as is done in
a child's game. In order to express this distinction between intuition and fantasy,
the olden poetics made use, especially, of the concept of unity and required that
any artistic work produced be simplex et unum\ or it utilized the allied concept
of unity in variety, according to which the several images were to come to a
focus and blend into a complex image. To meet the same need, the aesthetics
of the nineteenth century worked out the distinction (which is found in not a
few of its philosophers) between fancy (corresponding to the artistic faculty
proper) and imagination (corresponding to the extra-artistic faculty). To collect,
select, divide, and combine images presupposes within the spirit the production
and the possession of the single images themselves. Fancy is a producer, whereas
imagination is a parasite, fit for incidental occasions but incapable of begetting
organization and life. [. . .]

The artistic image (it has been said) is such, when it attaches an intelligible
to a sensible, and represents an idea. Now 'intelligible' and idea' cannot have
any other meaning (nor have they had any other for the defenders of this theory)
than concept, even though it is the concrete concept or idea, which is peculiar
to lofty philosophical speculation and differs from abstract concepts and from
those representative of the sciences. But, in any case, the concept or idea unites
the intelligible with the sensible in every instance, and not solely in art. For
the new conception of the concept, inaugurated by Kant and immanent (so to



112 The Legacy of Symbolism



Ib Expression and the Primitive 113



speak) in all modern thought, heals the breach between the sensible and the
intelligible worlds, conceiving as it does the concept as judgment, judgment as
a priori synthesis, and a priori synthesis as the word which becomes flesh, as
history. Thus, contrary to intention, that definition of art reduces fancy to logic,
and art to philosophy. At best, it proves effective against the abstract conception
of science, but not really as regards the problem of art. (Incidentally, Kant's
Critique of Judgment - aesthetic and teleological - had precisely such historical
function of correcting whatever of abstract still remained in the Critique of Pure
Reason.) To require a sensible element for the concept, besides that one which
it already possesses inherently as concrete concept, and besides the words by
means of which it expresses itself, would be a superfluous thing. To be sure,
if we insist on this requirement, we avoid the conception of art as philosophy
or as history, but only to fall into the conception of art as allegory.

The insurmountable difficulties of allegory are well known; so is its barren
and anti-artistic character known and universally felt. Allegory is the extrinsic
union, or the conventional and arbitrary juxtaposition of two spiritual facts - a
concept or thought and an image - whereby it is posited that this image must
represent that concept. Moreover, not only does recourse to allegory fail to
explain the integral character of the artistic image, but, what is more, it
deliberately sets up a duality. For given the juxtaposition of thought and image,
thought remains thought and image remains image, there being no relation
between them. So much so that, whenever we contemplate the image, we forget
the concept without any loss, but, on the contrary, to our gain; and whenever
we think the concept, we dispel, likewise to our advantage, the superfluous and
annoying image.

Allegory met with much favor in the Middle Ages, with its mixture of
Germanic and Romanic elements, barbarism and culture, bold fancy and subtle
reflection. However, this was owing to a theoretical prejudice, and not to the
actual reality of medieval art itself, which, wherever it is art, ejects allegorism
from itself or resolves it from within. This need to resolve allegoristic dualism
leads, in fact, to refining the theory of intuition as allegory of the idea to the
other theory, that of intuition as symbol. For in symbol the idea is no longer
thinkable by itself, separable from the symbolizing representation, nor is the
latter representable by itself effectively without the idea symbolized.

As Vischer the aesthetician (upon whom must fall the blame, if upon anybody,
for a comparison so prosaic regarding a subject so poetic and metaphysical) used
to declare, the idea is all dissolved in the representation, just as a lump of sugar
dissolved in a glass of water continues and functions in each molecule of water,
yet is no longer recognizable as a lump of sugar. Only, the idea which has
disappeared and has become all representation, the idea which it is not possible
any longer to grasp as idea (except by extracting it, like sugar from sweetened
water), is no longer idea. It is only the sign of the yet-to-be-discovered principle
of the unity of the artistic image. Certainly, art is symbol, all symbol, that is,
all significant. But symbol of what? Signifying what? Intuition is truly artistic,
is truly intuition and not a chaotic accumulation of images, only when it has a
vital principle which animates it and makes for its complete unity. [. . .]



15 Clive Bell (1881-1964) 'The Aesthetic Hypothesis'

Bell assisted Fry with the second of his Post-Impressionist' exhibitions in 1912, and
the two critics were to be closely identified with the propagandizing of modern art in
England for the next two decades. The present text is taken from the first chapter of
Art, first published in London in 1914 and continuously reprinted for the next twenty
years. Bell's ambitious aim was to provide 'a complete theory of visual art'. On the
other hand his endeavour was clearly shaped by the specific effects of an enthusiasm
for modern French painting. What he produced was a forceful and graspable manifesto
for the broad aesthetic commitments of early twentieth-century Modernism.

The starting-point for all systems of aesthetics must be the personal experience
of a peculiar emotion. The objects that provoke this emotion we call works of
art. All sensitive people agree that there is a peculiar emotion provoked by
works of art. I do not mean, of course, that all works provoke the same emotion.
On the contrary, every work produces a different emotion. But all these emotions
are recognizably the same in kind; so far, at any rate, the best opinion is on
my side. That there is a particular kind of emotion provoked by works of visual
art, and that this emotion is provoked by every kind of visual art, by pictures,
sculptures, buildings, pots, carvings, textiles, &c, &c, is not disputed, I think,
by anyone capable of feeling it. This emotion is called the aesthetic emotion;
and if we can discover some quality common and peculiar to all the objects that
provoke it, we shall have solved what I take to be the central problem of
aesthetics. We shall have discovered the essential quality in a work of art, the
quality that distinguishes works of art from all other classes of objects.

For either all works of visual art have some common quality, or when we
speak of 'works of art' we gibber. Everyone speaks of 'art 1 , making a mental
classification by which he distinguishes the class 'works of art' from all other
classes. What is the justification of this classification? What is the quality
common and peculiar to all members of this class? Whatever it be, no doubt it
is often found in company with other qualities; but they are adventitious - it
is essential. There must be some one quality without which a work of art cannot
exist; possessing which, in the least degree, no work is altogether worthless.
What is this quality? What quality is shared by all objects that provoke our
aesthetic emotions? What quality is common to Sta. Sophia and the windows
at Chartres, Mexican sculpture, a Persian bowl, Chinese carpets, Giotto's
frescoes at Padua, and the masterpieces of Poussin, Piero della Francesca, and
Cezanne? Only one answer seems possible - significant form. In each, lines and
colours combined in a particular way, certain forms and relations of forms, stir
ur aesthetic emotions. These relations and combinations of lines and colours,
these aesthetically moving forms, I call 'Significant Form'; and 'Significant
rorm' is the one quality common to all works of visual art.
* * *

The hypothesis that significant form is the essential quality in a work of art
nas at least one merit denied to many more famous and more striking - it does
elp to explain things. We are all familiar with pictures that interest us and



114 The Legacy of Symbolism

excite our admiration, but do not move us as works of art. To this class belongs
what I call 'Descriptive Painting' - that is, painting in which forms are used
not as objects of emotion, but as means of suggesting emotion or conveying
information. Portraits of psychological and historical value, topographical works,
pictures that tell stories and suggest situations, illustrations of all sorts, belong
to this class. That we all recognize the distinction is clear, for who has not said
that such and such a drawing was excellent as illustration, but as a work of art
worthless? Of course many descriptive pictures possess, amongst other qualities,
formal significance, and are therefore works of art: but many more do not. They
mterest us; they may move us too in a hundred different ways, but they do not
move us aesthetically. According to my hypothesis they are not works of art.
They leave untouched our aesthetic emotions because it is not their forms
but the ideas or information suggested or conveyed bv their forms that affect
us. [...]

Most people who care much about art find that of the work that moves them
most the greater part is what scholars call 'Primitive 1 . Of course there are bad
primitives. [. . .] But such exceptions are rare. As a rule primitive art is good
- and here again my hypothesis is helpful - for, as a rule, it is also free from
descriptive qualities. In primitive art you will find no accurate representation;
you will find only significant form. Yet no other art moves us so profoundly.
Whether we consider Sumerian sculpture or pre-dynastic Egyptian art, or archaic
Greek, or the Wei and T'ang masterpieces, or those early Japanese works of
which I had the luck to see a few superb examples ... at the Shepherd's Bush
Exhibition in 1910, or whether, coming nearer home, we consider the primitive
Byzantine art of the sixth century and its primitive developments amongst the
Western barbarians, or, turning far afield, we consider that mysterious and
majestic art that flourished in Central and South America before the coming of
the white men, in every case we observe three common characteristics - absence
of representation, absence of technical swagger, sublimely impressive form.
Nor is it hard to discover the connection between these three. Formal signific-
ance loses itself in preoccupation with exact representation and ostentatious
cunning.

Naturally, it is said that if there is little representation and less saltimbancery
in primitive art, that is because the primitives were unable to catch a likeness
or cut intellectual capers. The contention is beside the point. There is truth in
it, no doubt, though, were I a critic whose reputation depended on a power of
impressing the public with a semblance of knowledge, I should be more cautious
about urging it than such people generally are. For to suppose that the Byzantine
masters wanted skill, or could not have created an illusion had they wished to
do so, seems to imply ignorance of the amazingly dexterous realism of the
notoriously bad works of that age. Very often, I fear, the misrepresentation of
the primitives must be attributed to what the critics call, 'wilful distortion'. Be
that as it may, the point is that, either from want of skill or want of will,
primitives neither create illusions, nor make display of extravagant accomplish-
ment, but concentrate their energies on the one thing needful - the creation of
form. Thus have thev created the finest works of art that we possess.



Ib Expression and the Primitive 115

Let no one imagine that representation is bad in itself; a realistic form may
be as significant, in its place as part of the design, as an abstract. But if a
representative form has value, it is as form, not as representation. The repre-
sentative element in a work of art may or may not be harmful; always it is
irrelevant. For, to appreciate a work of art we need bring with us nothing from
life, no knowledge of its ideas and affairs, no familiarity with its emotions. Art
transports us from the world of man's activity to a world of aesthetic exaltation.
For a moment we are shut off from human interests; our anticipations and
memories are arrested; we are lifted above the stream of life. [. . .]

To appreciate a work of art we need bring with us nothing but a sense of
form and colour and a knowledge of three-dimensional space. That bit of
knowledge, I admit, is essential to the appreciation of many great works, since
many of the most moving forms ever created are in three dimensions. To see
a cube or a rhomboid as a flat pattern is to lower its significance, and a sense
of three-dimensional space is essential to the full appreciation of most architec-
tural forms. Pictures which would be insignificant if we saw them as flat patterns
are profoundly moving because, in fact, we see them as related planes. If the
representation of three-dimensional space is to be called 'representation', then
I agree that there is one kind of representation which is not irrelevant. Also, I
agree that along with our feeling for line and colour we must bring with us our
knowledge of space if we are to make the most of every kind of form.
Nevertheless, there are magnificent designs to an appreciation of which this
knowledge is not necessary: so, though it is not irrelevant to the appreciation
of some works of art it is not essential to the appreciation of all. What we must
say is that the representation of three-dimensional space is neither irrelevant
nor essential to all art, and that every other sort of representation is irrelevant.

That there is an irrelevant representative or descriptive element in many great
works of art is not in the least surprising. . . . Representation is not of necessity
baneful, and highly realistic forms may be extremely significant. Very often,
however, representation is a sign of weakness in an artist. A painter too feeble
to create forms that provoke more than a little aesthetic emotion will try to eke
that little out by suggesting the emotions of life. To evoke the emotions of life
he must use representation. Thus a man will paint an execution, and, fearing
to miss with his first barrel of significant form, will try to hit with his second
by raising an emotion of fear or pity. But if in the artist an inclination to play
upon the emotions of life is often the sign of a flickering inspiration, in the
spectator a tendency to seek, behind form, the emotions of life is a sign of
defective sensibility always. It means that his aesthetic emotions are weak or,
at any rate, imperfect. Before a work of art people who feel little or no emotion
for pure form find themselves at a loss. They are deaf men at a concert. They
know that they are in the presence of something great, but they lack the power
of apprehending it. They know that they ought to feel for it a tremendous
emotion, but it happens that the particular kind of emotion it can raise is one
that they can feel hardly or not at all. And so they read into the forms of the
work those facts and ideas for which they are capable of feeling emotion, and
feel for them the emotions that they can feel - the ordinary emotions of life.



r



116 The Legacy of Symbolism

When confronted by a picture, instinctively they refer back its forms to the
world from which they came. They treat created form as though it were imitated
form, a picture as though it were a photograph. Instead of going out on the
stream of art into a new world of aesthetic experience, they turn a sharp corner
and come straight home to the world of human interests. For them the
significance of a work of art depends on what they bring to it; no new thing
is added to their lives, only the old material is stirred. A good work of visual
art carries a person who is capable of appreciating it out of life into ecstasy: to
use art as a means to the emotions of life is to use a telescope for reading the
news. You will notice that people who cannot feel pure aesthetic emotions
remember pictures by their subjects; whereas people who can, as often as not,
have no idea what the subject of a picture is. They have never noticed the
representative element, and so when they discuss pictures they talk about the
shapes of forms and the relations and quantities of colours. Often they can
tell by the quality of a single line whether or no a man is a good artist. They
are concerned only with lines and colours, their relations and quantities
and qualities; but from these they win an emotion more profound and far
more sublime than any that can be given bv the description of facts and ideas.

[...]
Significant form stands charged with the power to provoke aesthetic emotion

in anyone capable of feeling it. The ideas of men go buzz and die like gnats;

men change their institutions and their customs as they change their coats; the

intellectual triumphs of one age are the follies of another; only great art remains

stable and unobscure. Great art remains stable and unobscure because the

feelings that it awakens are independent of time and place, because its kingdom

is not of this world. To those who have and hold a sense of the significance of

form what does it matter whether the forms that move them were created in

Paris the day before yesterday or in Babylon fifty centuries ago? The forms of

art are inexhaustible; but all lead by the same road of aesthetic emotion to the

same world of aesthetic ecstasy.



16 Hermann Bahr (1863-1934) from Expressionism

As one might expect from an account of Expressionism published in Munich, though
Bahr broadens the field of reference of the term, his book shows the influence both of
Worringer's ideas and of that concern for the spiritual functions of art which was
associated with Der Blaue Reiter. It provides a vivid repository of themes and tendencies
which were to remain implicit in much modern art theory and criticism for the next thirty
years, to resurface in explicit form in the New York of the 1940s: recourse to sweeping
anthropological generalization; belief in the superior philosophical wisdom of the East;
disparagement of Impressionist painting for its supposed passivity as a form of repre-
sentation; association of modernity with dehumanization; and consequent (neo-romantic)
conviction that recovery of a form of 'presocial' state is the precondition for recovery
of critical virtue and authenticity. Written in 1914, and published as Expressionismus,
Munich, 1916. English translation by R. T. Gribble, London, 1920, from which the
present extracts are taken.



Ib Expression and the Primitive 117

Without Precedent

The various sayings and proclamations of Expressionism only tell us that what
the Expressionist is looking for is without parallel in the past. A new form of
Art is dawning. And he who beholds an Expressionist picture by Matisse or
Picasso, by Pechstein or Kokoschka, by Kandinsky or Marc, or by Italian or
Bohemian Futurists, agrees; he finds them quite unprecedented. The newest
school of painting consists of small sects and groups that vituperate each other,
yet one thing they all have in common. They agree only on this point, that
they all turn away from Impressionism, turn even against it: hence I class all
of them together under the name of Expressionists, although it is a name usually
assumed only by one of the sects, while the others protest at being classed in
the same category. Whenever Impressionism tries to simulate reality, striving
for illusion, they all agree in despising this procedure. They also share in
common the passionate denial of every demand that we make of a picture before
we can accept it as a picture at all. Although we may not be able to understand
a single one of their pictures, of one thing we may be certain, they all do
violence to the sensible world. This is the true reason of the universal indig-
nation they arouse; all that has hitherto been the aim of painting, since painting
first began, is now denied, and something is striven for which has never yet
been attempted. At least so the beholder is likely to think, and the Expressionist
will fully agree with him. Only the beholder maintains that whatever nature
does not sanction, but that on the contrary deliberately goes against nature, can
never be true Art, while the Expressionist insists that just this is Art, is his Art.
And if the beholder retorts vehemently that the painter should express nothing
but what he sees, the Expressionists assure him that they too paint only what
they see. And on this point there is a continual misunderstanding. Each of them
when he speaks of 'seeing' means something totally different. What is meant
by 'seeing'?

Seeing

The history of painting is nothing but the history of vision - or seeing.
Technique changes only when the mode of seeing has changed; it only changes
because the method of seeing has changed. It changes so as to keep pace with
changes of vision as they occur. And the eye changes its method of seeing
according to the relation man assumes towards the world. A man views the
world according to his attitude towards it. [. . .]
* * *

Two influences work on each other, an outer one and one from within us;
each at bottom equally unknown to us. Neither alone suffices. Experience is
born from their co-operation. They differ for each individual according as his
own share is stronger or weaker, the capacity of his eye more or less inde-
pendent; according to the degree of his attention, the extent of his experience,
the power of his thought, the range of his knowledge. As any one of these
conditions changes, necessarily every appearance will change with it. A man is



118 The Legacy of Symbolism

usually unconscious of these various conditions. But it may happen at times
that he feels them strongly, and then it may also happen that he wishes to
change them. As soon as he realizes that his seeing is always the result of some
external influence, as well as of his own inner influence, it depends on whether
he trusts the outer world more - or himself. Every human relation finally
depends on this: once he has arrived at the stage where he can differentiate
between himself and the rest of the world, when he can say T and 'you 1 , when
he can separate outer from inner, he has no alternative but that of flight from
the world into himself, or from himself into the world - or a third choice is
possible, that of halting on the boundary line between the two. These are the
three attitudes man can assume towards the phenomena of appearance.

When at the dawn of time man first awakened, he was startled by the world.
To recover himself, to 'come to', he had to sever himself from nature; in his
later memory this event is echoed and repeated in the impulse to break away
from nature. He hates her; he fears her; she is stronger than he; he can only
save himself from her by flight, or she will again seize and devour him. He
escapes from her into himself. The fact of having the courage to separate from
her, and to defy her, shows him that there must be a secret power in himself,
and to this power he entrusts himself. From its depths he draws his own God
and sets him up against nature. He requires a stronger power than himself, but
stronger also than the world; enthroned above him, and above her, it can destroy
him, but it can likewise protect him against her. Should his offering find favour,
his God will banish the terrors of nature. And thus primeval man draws a magic
circle of worship round himself and pricks it out with the signs of his God:
Art begins, an attempt of man to break the grip of appearance by making his
innermost' appear also; within the outer world, he has created another world
which belongs to him and obeys him. If the former frightens him into mad
flight, alarming and confusing all his senses - the eye, the ear, the groping
hand, the moving foot - the latter pacifies and encourages him by its calm, by
the rhythm and consonance of its rigid, unreal, and unceasing repetition of form.
In primitive ornament change is conquered by rest, the appearance to the eye
by the picture in the mind, the outer world by the inner man, and when the
reality of nature perplexes and disturbs him because he can never fathom her
depths, because she always extends further than he can reach, so that beyond the
uttermost limit there stretches something beyond, and beyond this extends
the threat of yet further vastness - Art frees him by drawing appearance from
the depths and by flattening it out on a plane surface. Primeval man sees lines,
circles, squares, and he sees them all flat, and he does so owing to the inner
need of turning the threat of nature away from himself. His vision is in constant
fear of being overpowered and so it is always on the defensive, it offers
resistance, is ready to hit back. Every fresh outer stimulus alarms the inner
perception, which is always armed and ready, never concedes entrance to nature,
but out of the flux of experience he tears her bit by bit - banishing her from
the depth to the surface - makes her unreal and human till her chaos has been
conquered by his order.



Ib Expression and the Primitive 119

It is not only primeval man who shows us this determined reaction of
repulsion to every stimulus experienced. We recognize this attitude again in one
of the highest phases of human development, in the East. There too man, now
mature and civilised, has overcome nature. Appearance has been seen through
and recognized as illusion, and should the deceiving eye try to entice him into
this folly, he is taught by knowledge to withstand. In the East all beholding is
tempered by an element of comprehending pity, and wherever the wise man
gazes, he sees only that which he knows: the eye takes in the outer stimulus,
but only to unmask it instantly. All seeing, for him, is a looking away from
nature. We, with our eyes, are still incapable even of imagining this state, for
we still see everything, as far as the circle of our civilization reaches, with the
eyes of the Greek.

The Greeks had turned man about: he stood against nature, they turned him
towards her: he hid from her, they taught him to confide himself to her, to go
with her, to be received by her, to become one with her. It must have been a
great moment. [ . . . ]
* * *

In fact, the Impressionist is the consummation of classic development. The
Impressionist, in visualizing, endeavours as much as possible to rule out every
inner response to the outer stimulus. Impressionism is an attempt to leave
nothing to man but his retina. One is apt to say of Impressionists that they do
not 'carry out' a picture; it were better to say, they do not 'carry out'
visualization. The Impressionist leaves out man's participation in appearance,
for fear of falsifying it. [. . .]

Expressionism

This is the vital point - that man should find himself again. Schiller asks: 'Can
man have been destined, for any purpose whatever, to lose himself?' It is the
inhuman attempt of our time to force this loss upon him against his own nature.
We would turn him into a mere instrument; he has become the tool of his own
work, and he has no more sense, since he serves the machine. It has stolen him
away from his soul. And now the soul demands his return. This is the vital
point. All that we experience is but the strenuous battle between the soul and
the machine for the possession of man. We no longer live, we are lived; we
have no freedom left, we may not decide for ourselves, we are finished, man is
unsouled, nature is unmanned. A moment ago we boasted of being her lords
and masters and now she has opened her wide jaws and swallowed us up. Unless
a miracle happens! That is the vital point - whether a miracle can still rescue
this soulless, sunken, buried humanity. Never yet has any period been so shaken
by horror, by such a fear of death. Never has the world been so silent, silent
as the grave. Never has man been more insignificant. Never has he felt so
nervous. Never was happiness so unattainable and freedom so dead. Distress
cries aloud; man cries out for his soul; this whole pregnant time is one great
cry of anguish. Art too joins in, into the great darkness she too calls for help,
she cries to the spirit: this is Expressionism.



t



120 The Legacy of Symbolism

Never has any period found a clearer, a stronger mode of self-expression than
did the period of bourgeois dominance in impressionistic Art. This bourgeois
rule was incapable of producing original music or poetry; all the music or poetry
of its day is invariably either a mere echoing of the past, or a presentiment of
the future; but in Impressionistic painting it has made for itself such a perfect
symbol of its nature, of its disorder, that perhaps some day when humanity is
quite freed from its trammels and has attained the serene perspective of historic
contemplation, it may be forgiven, because of these shining tokens. Impression-
ism is the falling away of man from spirit. Impressionism is man lowered to
the position of a gramophone record of the outer world. Impressionists have
been taken to task for not 'carrying out' their pictures; they do not even carry
out their 'seeing', for man of the bourgeois period never 'carries out', never
fulfils life. He halts, breaks off midway in the process of seeing, midway in the
process of life at the very point where man's participation in life begins.
Half-way in the act of seeing these Impressionists stop, just where the eye,
having been challenged, should make its reply: The ear is dumb, the mouth
deaf/ says Goethe; 'but the eye both perceives and speaks.' The eye of the
Impressionist only beholds, it does not speak; it hears the question, but makes
no response. Instead of eyes, Impressionists have another set of ears, but no
mouth, for a man of the bourgeois period is nothing but an ear, he listens to
the world, but does not breathe upon it. He has no mouth, he is incapable of
expressing himself, incapable of pronouncing judgment upon the world, of
uttering the law of the spirit. The Expressionist, on the contrary, tears open
the mouth of humanity; the time of its silence, the time of its listening is over
- once more it seeks to give the spirit's reply.

Expressionism is as yet but a gesture. It is not a question of this or that
Expressionist, much less of any particular work of his. Nietzsche says: 'The
first and foremost duty of Art should be to beautify life . . . Thereupon she
must conceal or transmute all ugliness - and only after this gigantic task has
been achieved can she turn to the special so-called Art of Art-production, which
is but the appendage. A man who is conscious of possessing a superfluity of
these beautifying and concealing and transmuting powers, will finally seek to
disburden himself of this superabundance in works of Art; the same under
special conditions applies to a whole nation. But at present we generally start
at the wrong end of Art, we cling to her tail and reiterate the tag, that works
of Art contain the whole of Art, and that by these we may repair and transform
life . . . simpletons that we are!' Under this bourgeois rule the whole of man has
become an appendage. Impressionism makes a splendid tail! The Expressionist,
however, does not throw out a peacock's wheel, he does not consider the single
production, but seeks to restore man to his rightful position; only we have
outgone Nietzsche - or, rather, we have retraced our steps and gone further
back beyond him and have arrived at Goethe: Art is no longer only to 'beautify'
life for us and to 'conceal or transmute ugliness', but Art must bring Life,
produce Life from within, must fulfil the function of Life as man's most proper
deed and action. Goethe says, 'Painting sets before us that which a man could
and should see, and which usually he does not see.' If Expressionism at the



Ib Expression and the Primitive 121

moment behaves in an ungainly, violent manner, its excuse lies in the prevailing
conditions it finds. These really are almost the conditions of crude and primitive
humanity. People little know how near the truth they are when they jeer at
these pictures and say they might be painted by savages. The bourgeois rule
has turned us into savages. Barbarians, other than those feared by Rodbertus,
threaten; we ourselves have to become barbarians to save the future of humanity
from mankind as it now is. As primitive man, driven by fear of nature, sought
refuge within himself, so we too have to adopt flight from a 'civilization' which
is out to devour our souls. The Savage discovered in himself the courage to
become greater than the threat of nature, and in honour of this mysterious inner
redeeming power of his, which, through all the alarms and terrors of storm and
of ravening beasts and of unknown dangers, never deserted him, never let him
give in - in honour of this he drew a circle of guardian signs around him, signs
of defiance against the threat of nature, obstinate signs of demarcation to protect
his possessions against the intrusion of nature and to safeguard his belief in
spirit. So, brought very near the edge of destruction by 'civilization', we discover
in ourselves powers which cannot be destroyed. With the fear of death upon
us, we muster these and use them as spells against 'civilization'. Expressionism
is the symbol of the unknown in us in which we confide, hoping that it will
save us. It is the token of the imprisoned spirit that endeavours to break out
of the dungeon - a tocsin of alarm given out by all panic-stricken souls. This
is what Expressionism is.



r

I Part II

The Idea of the
Modern World



I



II

Introduction



The first decade of the twentieth century had witnessed an attempt to synthesize
elements from a range of late-nineteenth-century sources into a new art: an art
that was of the new century yet could stand alongside the achievements of the
classical tradition. One of the main supports of this new art had been the concept
of 'expression'. Expression took on a variety of guises, but the one thing it
needed was a notion of the 'self of the artist, which could thus be expressed.
In turn this Self had to have the attributes of authenticity. These were
characteristically sought in hitherto marginalized and neglected places - from
which the avant-garde artists drew a kind of 'natural' force. It remains a central
paradox of the new art that it sought its authenticity in a remote Nature, but
that this repeated incantation to Nature was made under urban circumstances.
Nature cults, peasant decorations, primitive fetishes and so on signified what
they did to people who lived in cities. It cannot be overstressed that the
ideologies of the Universal, of transhistorical forms and transcultural sensi-
bilities, of the directly expressive and the authentic, meant what they did to a
relatively small group of urban sophisticates. The artists of the avant-garde were
able to deploy these notions, and the artefacts they both drew r upon and issued
in, to justify their own critical distance from the values and priorities of their
own industrialized, urbanized societies. The adequacy of art however, is predi-
cated upon its avoidance of escapism. The expressive devices had to match the
real experience. And as the passage into the new century deepened, so the
modern condition bore down upon the avant-garde.

The impact of the modern condition was being felt across Europe. So too
the avant-garde had become thoroughly internationalized by the time world war
broke out. Undoubtedly Paris remained pre-eminent, and the development of
Cubism ensured that this remained the case. None the less an avant-garde in
the visual arts developed also in the German-speaking world in centres such as
Berlin, Munich, Dresden and Vienna. Here it was possessed of a characteristic
inflection towards the expressive and subjective, linked in turn to concerns
within a German philosophical and cultural tradition, which differentiated it
from the more rationalist and classicizing tendencies that seem never to have
been far below the surface of French art. A third emphasis is to be found in
those urban centres which came relatively late to modernization in Italy and



126 The Idea of the Modern World

Russia, marked by an attempt to embrace, in art, the distinctive rhythms of the
modern as it shot through those hitherto relatively backward societies. Sche-
matically, then, we may want to say that in the decade before the First World
War, Cubism, Expressionism and Futurism mark different facets of a European
avant-garde's reception of the modern into an established artistic tradition whose
example was predominantly French. Against the technical constraints obtaining
within that tradition - a preoccupation with surface, and with the consequences
of loosening colour and structure from depiction - there was room for the
culturally relative experience to make its distinctive mark. In a sense, that is
the underlying point: that the modern was not yet 'total' and as such could be
measured, and its meaning assessed, against that which it was not. Across
Europe, the sharply felt experience of the modern could still be silhouetted
against a sense of tradition, of values rooted in the relatively unchanging
conditions of a life lived by the soil and the seasons.

Convention distinguishes three related moments in the dynamic of the mod-
ern: modernization, modernity and Modernism. The first term denotes those
processes of scientific and technological advance which caused the world to
manifest itself differently than it had hitherto. In particular modernization refers
to the growing impact of the machine, and not least in this period of the internal
combustion engine, with all that its development implied in terms of the
engineering and chemical industries. It is hard retrospectively to capture the
extent of the transformation that was taking place. In developing societies in
Europe at the turn into the twentieth century the new was ousting the old at
a pace for which there was no historical precedent. Modernity refers to the
social and cultural condition of these objective changes: the character of life
under changed circumstances. Modernity was a form of experience, an
awareness of change and of adaptation to change. But it was also a form of
effect on the person: a character these changes and adaptations gave one. It
was, so to speak, both a social and an inner experience. The condition of
modernity exists in a shifting, symbiotic relationship with Modernism: the
deliberate reflection upon and distillation of - in a word, the representation
of - that inchoate experience of the new. The boundaries between these
concepts are not easy to draw. There is a sense in which experience cannot
be grasped until it is represented; though at the extreme it would be absurd
to say that the modern condition could not be experienced without a modern
art to read the experience against.

The response to the modern condition seems to have been experienced in two
linked but ostensibly opposed registers. On the one hand, a profound pessimism
at the growth of populations and their concentration in large cities was fuelled
by the apparently increasing control of human life by the machine. For all that
was being gained, there was a sense that life was losing a depth, a dimension
of freedom, and that human beings were becoming imprisoned in what the
German sociologist Max Weber saw as the iron cage' of modernity (see IlAl-2).
Modernization was a Europe-wide phenomenon, and change was often experi-
enced most sharply at its fringes, where the pace of that change had been at
first delayed but was now dramatically accelerated by the need to catch up. It






II Introduction 127

is as a change of this sort that we should hear the 'distant thunder' of the
Russian poet Alexander Blok (IIa5).

On the other hand, these same changes which brought about a mix of
alienation and apocalypse in some, produced the opposite response in others:
an almost hysterical exhilaration. The most emphatic reaction of this kind came
from the Italian poet Marinetti, writing in the first instance from the European
fringe. Like Blok, Marinetti was a successful Symbolist poet. Unlike him,
however, Marinetti broke decisely with the legacy of Symbolism in order to
formulate a new response to the age (II A6). In the parable recounted in his
founding Manifesto, he and his Symbolist friends descend from the aestheticized
decadence of the studio to the street, where they commandeer automobiles and
career off through the night. Marinetti's car crashes, and he is pulled by workers
from a factory's drainage ditch, but not before its evil waters have acted upon
him like a baptism. Through the motor car and the factory, speed and
machinery, Marinetti has been granted a compelling vision of the modern, and
the task of the artist is simultaneously made plain. In the years immediately
before the First World War the impulse captured by Marinetti in the prophetic
term 'Futurism' was felt across the continent, from London to Moscow (see
texts IIA7, 8, 9, 11 and 12).

Marinetti was not the only source for this attempt to focus upon dynamism
and change as the marks of the modern. Until the invention of the steam-engine,
no one had travelled quicker than the fastest horse could run. Now people were
racing motor cars across continents and taking to the air. As brute facts these
must have been evident to all. But there were also philosophical attempts to
map human consciousness in terms of flux, change and sensation. In a paradox-
ical move, the triumphs of technology and science fostered an idealist response
to their significance. The principal voice of this response was Henri Bergson's
(IIA4). The apparent pertinence of his ideas to common experience resulted in
his suffering an uncommon fate for a philosopher: he became famous, and was
much read - not least by the Futurist Umberto Boccioni (IIA7).

However different they may have been, the variant responses of depression
and exhilaration are two sides of the same coin. At bottom both are responses
to the effects of modernization. There is a third response, however, which is
positioned adjacent to these two. Its principal concern is to seek the cause of
the modern world's being as it is. Although during this period before the First
World War its bearing on the development of art is slight, in the period which
followed it was to become a dominant motif. Viewed from this third position,
modernization is not, fundamentally, a technological fact, despite the visibility
of machinery and architecture. It is a social fact, and is marked by the production
of new social relations - relations between people, and more particularly between
classes of people; not just relations between people and things. In the last resort
We are talking about capitalist modernization. By this token the twin responses
of depression and exhilaration remain within the register of terms in which, so
to speak, the culture thought of itself. They are part, that is to say, of the
ideology of modernization: the acute and contradictory forms of bourgeois
response to bourgeois society. But a wholesale challenge to that social order was



128 The Idea of the Modern World

mounted in the name of the class which the bourgeoisie both feared and needed:
which it simultaneously attempted to draw into the fold through ideologies of
a shared nation, race or culture, yet largely excluded from the material (and
indeed spiritual) wealth generated by the capitalist mode of production. This
class was the working class, and its programme - or at least the programme
advanced in its name - was socialism.

If we have seen from the one side a series of variant demands that art express
modernity, within the socialist tradition there was a mounting demand that art
be committed to the struggle to change that modernity. Building on Marx's
comment that whereas philosophers had hitherto merely sought to understand
the world intellectually the point was to change it practically, many voices on
the Left articulated a role for art as the servant of an emancipatory social
movement whose main force lay in the sphere of politics. Here then are the
seeds of a century-long conflict (Ha3).

This conflict was heightened by the specific nature of the turn taken by
avant-garde art in the years before the war. Expressionism and Futurism are
both evidently forms of response to the circumstances of urban modernity;
negative and positive undoubtedly, but the modern world and its pressures
remain legible in the work of artists as diverse as Kirchner and Boccioni. With
Cubism, however, the situation is different. Particularly in its 'analytic' phase,
Cubism is an hermetic art. The still life and the single portrait figure - the
characteristic Cubist subject matter - give few clues to the storm of modernity
blowing outside the studio. This apparent disregard is only emphasized by the
submergence of even these subjects beneath a surface of shifting planes which
assert themselves as the picture's primary object of attention. By a strange
inversion, it seems as if the modern picture, rather than depicting the machines
and buildings which made up the modern world, had internalized its modernity.
The picture, it was easy to think, had become a thing in itself. Strictly speaking,
it was not: it remained a signifier. But its signification was to remain largely
unintelligible to those who failed to grasp the premises from which the new
pictorial language was derived.

Notwithstanding this difficulty, Cubism rapidly established itself as the
paradigm for subsequent avant-garde art. Cubism's achievement, by virtue of
its unprecedented technical innovation, was that it succeeded in imbuing the
form of the art with modernity. After that, it mattered less what particular
subject an artist addressed. Some of the potency of this shift in technical
priorities arises in regard to its consistency with a wider impulse which is
traceable across many disciplines. It seems that the characteristic inflection of
this modern impulse has been a fixing upon the materiality, the opacity, of the
medium through which the world is represented. This marks a crucial change.
For once this emphasis upon the means of representation is achieved, then
whenever those means remain unchanged in a changing world, art will in its
turn remain archaic - and as such be inadequate to the task of representing the
modern - whatever subjects it chooses to depict. The perception that how one
achieves the representation stands logically prior to what it represents, implies
that the means of art require transformation in ways which parallel the changes



II Introduction 129

modernization itself had wrought upon the world at large (see section IlB
passim).

Cubism's technical innovations were rapidly assimilated by avant-garde artists.
However, the question as to what Cubism meant, how it was to be thought of
and understood, remained a focus for conflict. The autonomous decoration of
a surface; penetration below surface appearance to the constants of 'true' reality;
a modern Realism of 'conception', transforming the terms, but none the less
retaining the critical interest, of a tradition derived from Courbet; a Kantian
transcendental idealism in which the picture could achieve what language could
not, namely representation of the ding an stch; a Nietzschean imposition of a
new beauty, moulding the masses to the artist's own Truth; a Bergsonian
epistemology of flux. Each of these was canvassed within five years of the
emergence of a recognizably new style around 1910 (see IlBl-10 passim).

Although no one account established itself definitively, some, such as
Kahnweiler's Kantian approach (IlBlO), appeared to be more serviceable than
others. The reasons for this are complex and undoubtedly relate to the wider
social circumstances in which avant-garde art came to function, both as a
relatively autonomous specialized practice and as a kind of luxury commodity.
Whatever the precise reasons may be, their cumulative effect was to prise apart
the two aspects of Cubism which in retrospect seem most central to its critical
force: its continued referentiality and its preoccupation with the autonomous
picture surface. This had the effect of driving a wedge between a concern for
art's realism in respect of wider social forms, and its own reality as a signifying
practice. The gulf thus opened, and sustained, it must be said, by the operation
of more powerful ideological and political investments as the century has gone
on, has rarely been bridged since.

Here then is set up a tension, a tension between poles which artists have
sometimes striven to reconcile, while other artists at other times have hardened
them into mutually exclusive alternatives. On the one side there is the impulse
to an art whose first duty is to decode the modern world and perhaps even to
participate in changing it. On the other is that art whose principal response to
the modern condition has been the conclusion that art must transform itself.
This problem of the relation of an 'autonomous' art to wider social change has
remained constitutive of all ambitious art in the modern period. In this second
section, debates over Cubism and the conditions of modernity can be seen both
to replay aspects of the dialectic noted in the previous chapter between the
theorists of 'modern life', Naturalism and Symbolism, and to anticipate the
conflict over Modernism and Realism which has played so prominent a role
s mce. In that sense these years, pre-eminently the years of Cubism, mark a
turning-point, a hinge, as it were, between the modern art of the nineteenth
Century and what was to become the condition of modern art in the twentieth.



IlA

Modernity



1 Georg Simmel (1858-1918) 'The Metropolis and
Mental Life'

Simmel, one of the founders of modern sociology, worked for most of his life at the
University of Berlin. His writings ranged over philosophy, history and psychology, as
well as sociology. Here he is particularly concerned with the effects of the impersonality
and regimentation of the modern city on individual subjectivity. Originally published as
Die Grossstadte und das Geistesleben', pp. 185-206 in Die Grossstadt: Vortrage und
Aufsatze zur Stadteaustellung Jahrbuch der Gehe-Stiftung zu Dresden 9, Winter 1902-
3. The present extract is taken from the translation in Kurt H. Wolff (ed), The Sociology
of Georg Simmel, Glencoe, 1950.

The deepest problems of modern life derive from the claim of the individual
to preserve the autonomy and individuality of his existence in the face of
overwhelming social forces, of historical heritage, of external culture, and of the
technique of life. The fight with nature which primitive man has to wage for
his bodily existence attains in this modern form its latest transformation. The
eighteenth century called upon man to free himself of all the historical bonds
in the state and in religion, in morals and in economics. Man's nature, originally
good and common to all, should develop unhampered. In addition to more
liberty, the nineteenth century demanded the functional specialization of man
and his work; this specialization makes one individual incomparable to another,
and each of them indispensable to the highest possible extent. However, this
specialization makes each man the more directly dependent upon the supplemen-
tary activities of all others. Nietzsche sees the full development of the individual
conditioned by the most ruthless struggle of individuals; socialism believes in
the suppression of all competition for the same reason. Be that as it may, in
all these positions the same basic motive is at work: the person resists to being
leveled down and worn out by a social-technological mechanism. An inquiry
into the inner meaning of specifically modern life and its products, into the
soul of the cultural body, so to speak, must seek to solve the equation which
structures like the metropolis set up between the individual and the super-
individual contents of life. Such an inquiry must answer the question of how
the personality accommodates itself in the adjustments to external forces.



Ha Modernity 131

The psychological basis of the metropolitan type of individuality consists in
the intensification of nervous stimulation which results from the swift and unin-
terrupted change of outer and inner stimuli. Man is a differentiating creature.
His mind is stimulated by the difference between a momentary impression and
the one which preceded it. Lasting impressions, impressions which differ only
slightly from one another, impressions which take a regular and habitual course
and show regular and habitual contrasts - all these use up, so to speak, less
consciousness than does the rapid crowding of changing images, the sharp
discontinuity in the grasp of a single glance, and the unexpectedness of
onrushing impressions. These are the psychological conditions which the me-
tropolis creates. With each crossing of the street, with the tempo and multiplicity
of economic, occupational and social life, the city sets up a deep contrast with
small town and rural life with reference to the sensory foundations of psychic
life. The metropolis exacts from man as a discriminating creature a different
amount of consciousness than does rural life. Here the rhythm of life and sensory
mental imagery flows more slowly, more habitually, and more evenly. Precisely
in this connection the sophisticated character of metropolitan psychic life
becomes understandable - as over against small town life which rests more upon
deeply felt and emotional relationships. [. . .]

[ . . . ] In the sphere of the economic psychology of the small group it is of
importance that under primitive conditions production serves the customer who
orders the good, so that the producer and the consumer are acquainted. The
modern metropolis, however, is supplied almost entirely by production for
the market, that is, for entirely unknown purchasers who never personally enter
the producer's actual field of vision. Through this anonymity the interests of
each party acquire an unmerciful matter-of-factness; and the intellectually
calculating economic egoisms of both parties need not fear any deflection because
of the imponderables of personal relationships. [. . .]

In certain seemingly insignificant traits, which lie upon the surface of life,
the same psychic currents characteristically unite. Modern mind has become
more and more calculating. The calculative exactness of practical life which the
money economy has brought about corresponds to the ideal of natural science:
to transform the world into an arithmetic problem, to fix every part of the
world by mathematical formulas. [. . .] The technique of metropolitan life is
unimaginable without the most punctual integration of all activities and mutual
relations into a stable and impersonal time schedule. Here again the general
conclusions of this entire task of reflection become obvious, namely, that
from each point on the surface of existence - however closely attached to the
surface alone - one may drop a sounding into the depth of the psyche so that
all the most banal externalities of life finally are connected with the ultimate
decisions concerning the meaning and style of life. Punctuality, calculability,
exactness are forced upon life by the complexity and extension of metro-
politan existence and are not only most intimately connected with its money
economy and intellectualistic character. These traits must also color the con-
tents of life and favor the exclusion of those irrational, instinctive, sovereign
traits and impulses which aim at determining the mode of life from within,



132 The Idea of the Modern World

instead of receiving the general and precisely schematized form of life from
without [ . . . ]

The same factors which have thus coalesced into the exactness and minute
precision of the form of life have coalesced into a structure of the highest
impersonality; on the other hand, they have promoted a highly personal sub-
jectivity. There is perhaps no psychic phenomenon which has been so uncon-
ditionally reserved to the metropolis as has the blase attitude. The blase attitude
results first from the rapidly changing and closely compressed contrasting
stimulations of the nerves. From this, the enhancement of metropolitan intel-
lectuality, also, seems originally to stem. Therefore, stupid people who are not
intellectually alive in the first place usually are not exactly blase. A life in
boundless pursuit of pleasure makes one blase because it agitates the nerves to
their strongest reactivity for such a long time that thev finally cease to react at
all. [...]

This physiological source of the metropolitan blase attitude is joined by
another source which flows from the money economy. The essence of the blase
attitude consists in the blunting of discrimination. This does not mean that the
objects are not perceived, as is the case with the half-wit, but rather that the
meaning and differing values of things, and thereby the things themselves, are
experienced as insubstantial. They appear to the blase person in an evenly flat
and gray tone; no one object deserves preference over any other. This mood is
the faithful subjective reflection of the completely internalized money economy.

Whereas the subject of this form of existence has to come to terms with it
entirely for himself, his self-preservation in the face of the large city demands
from him a no less negative behavior of a social nature. This mental attitude
of metropolitans toward one another we may designate, from a formal point of
view, as reserve. If so many inner reactions were responses to the continuous
external contacts with innumerable people as are those in the small town, where
one knows almost everybody one meets and where one has a positive relation
to almost everyone, one would be completely atomized internally and come to
an unimaginable psychic state. Partly this psychological fact, partly the right to
distrust which men have in the face of the touch-and-go elements of metropoli-
tan life, necessitates our reserve. As a result of this reserve we frequently do
not even know by sight those who have been our neighbors for years. And it
is this reserve which in the eyes of the small-town people makes us appear to
be cold and heartless. Indeed, if I do not deceive myself, the inner aspect of
this outer reserve is not only indifference but, more often than we are aware,
it is a slight aversion, a mutual strangeness and repulsion, which will break into
hatred and fight at the moment of a closer contact, however caused. The whole
inner organization of such an extensive communicative life rests upon an
extremely varied hierarchy of sympathies, indifferences, and aversions of the
briefest as well as of the most permanent nature. The sphere of indifference in
this hierarchy is not as large as might appear on the surface. Our psychic activity
still responds to almost every impression of somebody else with a somewhat
distinct feeling. The unconscious, fluid and changing character of this impress-



11a Modernity 133

j0ii seems to result in a state of indifference. Actually this indifference would
be just as unnatural as the diffusion of indiscriminate mutual suggestion would
j>e unbearable. From both these typical dangers of the metropolis, indifference
a nd indiscriminate suggestibility, antipathy protects us. A latent antipathy and
the preparatory stage of practical antagonism effect the distances and aversions
without which this mode of life could not at all be led. The extent and the
jflixture of this style of life, the rhythm of its emergence and disappearance,
the forms in which it is satisfied - all these, with the unifying motives in the
narrower sense, form the inseparable whole of the metropolitan style of life.
What appears in the metropolitan style of life directly as dissociation is in reality
only one of its elemental forms of socialization.

This reserve with its overtone of hidden aversion appears in turn as the form
or the cloak of a more general mental phenomenon of the metropolis: it grants
to the individual a kind and an amount of personal freedom which has no
analogy whatsoever under other conditions. [ . . . ]

[. . .] Today metropolitan man is 'free' in a spiritualized and refined sense,
in contrast to the pettiness and prejudices which hem in the small-town man.
For the reciprocal reserve and indifference and the intellectual life conditions
of large circles are never felt more strongly by the individual in their impact
upon his independence than in the thickest crowd of the big city. This is because
the bodily proximity and narrowness of space makes the mental distance only
the more visible. It is obviously only the obverse of this freedom if, under
certain circumstances, one nowhere feels as lonely and lost as in the metropolitan
crowd. For here as elsewhere it is by no means necessary that the freedom of
man be reflected in his emotional life as comfort.

It is not only the immediate size of the area and the number of persons which,
because of the universal historical correlation between the enlargement of the
circle and the personal inner and outer freedom, has made the metropolis the
locale of freedom. It is rather in transcending this visible expanse that any given
city becomes the seat of cosmopolitanism. The horizon of the city expands in
a manner comparable to the way in which wealth develops; a certain amount
of property increases in a quasi-automatical way in ever more rapid progression.
As soon as a certain limit has been passed, the economic, personal, and
intellectual relations of the citizenry, the sphere of intellectual predominance of
the city over its hinterland, grow r as in geometrical progression. Every gain in
dynamic extension becomes a step, not for an equal, but for a new and larger
extension. From every thread spinning out of the city, ever new threads grow
as if by themselves, just as within the city the unearned increment of ground
rent, through the mere increase in communication, brings the owner automat-
ically increasing profits. At this point, the quantitative aspect of life is trans-
formed directly into qualitative traits of character. [. . .]

[. . .] In the measure of its expansion, the city offers more and more the
decisive conditions of the division of labor. It offers a circle which through its
size can absorb a highly diverse variety of services. At the same time, the
concentration of individuals and their struggle for customers compel the indi-
vidual to specialize in a function from which he cannot be readily displaced by



134 The Idea of the Modern World

another. It is decisive that city life has transformed the struggle with nature for
livelihood into an inter-human struggle for gain, which here is not granted by
nature but by other men. For specialization does not flow only from the
competition for gain but also from the underlying fact that the seller must
always seek to call forth new and differentiated needs of the lured customer.
In order to find a source of income which is not yet exhausted, and to find a
function which cannot readily be displaced, it is necessary to specialize in one's
services. This process promotes differentiation, refinement, and the enrichment
of the public's needs, which obviously must lead to growing personal differences
within this public.

All this forms the transition to the individualization of mental and psychic
traits which the city occasions in proportion to its size. [. . .]

The most profound reason, however, why the metropolis conduces to the urge
for the most individual personal existence - no matter whether justified and
successful - appears to me to be the following: the development of modern
culture is characterized by the preponderance of what one may call the 'objective
spirit' over the 'subjective spirit.' This is to say, in language as well as in law,
in the technique of production as well as in art, in science as well as in the
objects of the domestic environment, there is embodied a sum of spirit. The
individual in his intellectual development follows the growth of this spirit very
imperfectly and at an ever increasing distance. If, for instance, we view the
immense culture which for the last hundred years has been embodied in things
and in knowledge, in institutions and in comforts, and if we compare all this
with the cultural progress of the individual during the same period - at least
in high status groups - a frightful disproportion in growth between the two
becomes evident. Indeed, at some points we notice a retrogression in the culture
of the individual with reference to spirituality, delicacy, and idealism. This
discrepancy results essentially from the growing division of labor. For the
division of labor demands from the individual an ever more one-sided accom-
plishment, and the greatest advance in a one-sided pursuit only too frequently
means dearth to the personality of the individual. In any case, he can cope less
and less with the overgrowth of objective culture. The individual is reduced to
a negligible quantity, perhaps less in his consciousness than in his practice and
in the totality of his obscure emotional states that are derived from this practice.
The individual has become a mere cog in an enormous organization of things
and powers which tear from his hands all progress, spirituality, and value in
order to transform them from their subjective form into the form of a purely
objective life. It needs merely to be pointed out that the metropolis is the
genuine arena of this culture which outgrows all personal life. Here in buildings
and educational institutions, in the wonders and comforts of space-conquering
technology, in the formations of community life, and in the visible institutions
of the state, is offered such an overwhelming fullness of crystallized and
impersonalized spirit that the personality, so to speak, cannot maintain itself
under its impact. On the one hand, life is made infinitely easy for the personality
in that stimulations, interests, uses of time and consciousness are offered to it
from all sides. They carry the person as if in a stream, and one needs hardly



Ha Modernity 135

to swim for oneself. On the other hand, however, life is composed more and
more of these impersonal contents and offerings which tend to displace the
genuine personal colorations and incomparabilities. This results in the individ-
ual's summoning the utmost in uniqueness and particular ization, in order to
preserve his most personal core. He has to exaggerate this personal element in
order to remain audible even to himself. The atrophy of individual culture
through the hypertrophy of objective culture is one reason for the bitter hatred
which the preachers of the most extreme individualism, above all Nietzsche,
harbor against the metropolis. But it is, indeed, also a reason why these preachers
are so passionately loved in the metropolis and why they appear to the
metropolitan man as the prophets and saviors of his most unsatisfied yearnings.
* * *



2 Max Weber (1864-1920) 'Asceticism and the Spirit
of Capitalism'

from The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. Weber's pioneering study
examined the effects of an ideological formation (protestant religion) on the constitution
.of an economic order (modern capitalism). The present text addresses the constraining
Effects on modern culture of the heritage of puritanism, striking a profoundly pessimistic
f note in its appraisal of modernity. Originally published in the Archiv fur Soziaiwissen-
schaft und Sozialpolitik, XX and XXI, 1904-5. First English translation by the American
Sociologist Talcott Parsons, London and New York, 1930, from which the present
extract is taken.

'"h
One of the fundamental elements of the spirit of modern capitalism, and not
only of that but of all modern culture: rational conduct on the basis of the idea
of the calling, was born . . . from the spirit of Christian asceticism. [. . .] The
idea that modern labour has an ascetic character is of course not new. Limitation
to specialized work, with a renunciation of the Faustian universality of man
which it involves, is a condition of any valuable work in the modern world;
hence deeds and renunciation inevitably condition each other today. This
fundamentally ascetic trait of middle-class life, if it attempts to be a way of life
at all, and not simply the absence of any, was what Goethe wanted to teach, at
the height of his wisdom, in the Wanderjahren, and in the end which he gave
to the life of his Faust. For him the realization meant a renunciation, a departure
from an age of full and beautiful humanity, which can no more be repeated in
the course of our cultural development than can the flower of the Athenian
Culture of antiquity.

The Puritan wanted to work in a calling; we are forced to do so. For when
asceticism was carried out of monastic cells into everyday life, and began to
dominate worldly morality, it did its part in building the tremendous cosmos
of the modern economic order. This order is now bound to the technical and
economic conditions of machine production which to-day determine the lives
of all the individuals who are born into this mechanism, not only those directly



136 The Idea of the Modern World

concerned with economic acquisition, with irresistible force. Perhaps it will so
determine them until the last ton of fossilized coal is burnt. In Baxter's view
the care for external goods should only lie on the shoulders of the 'saint like a
light cloak, which can be thrown aside at any moment'. But fate decreed that
the cloak should become an iron cage.

Since asceticism undertook to remodel the world and to work out its ideals
in the world, material goods have gained an increasing and finally an inexorable
power over the lives of men as at no previous period in history. To-day the
spirit of religious asceticism - whether finally, who knows? - has escaped from
the cage. But victorious capitalism, since it rests on mechanical foundations,
needs its support no longer. The rosy blush of its laughing heir, the Enlight-
enment, seems also to be irretrievably fading, and the idea of duty in one's
calling prowls about in our lives like the ghost of dead religious beliefs. Where
the fulfilment of the calling cannot directly be related to the highest spiritual
and cultural values, or when, on the other hand, it need not be felt simply as
economic compulsion, the individual generally abandons the attempt to justify
it at all. In the field of its highest development, in the United States, the pursuit
of wealth, stripped of its religious and ethical meaning, tends to become
associated with purely mundane passions, which often actually give it the
character of sport.

No one knows who will live in this cage in the future, or whether at the end
of this tremendous development entirely new prophets will arise, or there will
be a great rebirth of old ideas and ideals, or, if neither, mechanized petrification,
embellished with a sort of convulsive self-importance. For of the last stage of
this cultural development, it might well be truly said: 'Specialists without spirit,
sensualists without heart; this nullity imagines that it has attained a level of
civilization never before achieved.'



3 Vladimir Ilyich Lenin (1870-1924) Tarty
Organization and Party Literature'

In the changed circumstances after the Russian revolution of 1905 Lenin addressed
the issue of the autonomy of art and literature, insisting instead on its implication in
modern life in the class struggle between bourgeoisie and proletariat. Although he is
speaking in the first instance solely about 'party' literature, hostile critics have seen the
argument as paving the way for totalitarian control of the arts. Frequently reprinted,
the essay was originally published in Novaya Zhizn, no. 12, Moscow, 13 November
1905. The present translation is taken from Lenin on Literature and Art, Moscow, 1967.

The new conditions for Social-Democratic work in Russia which have arisen
since the October Revolution have brought the question of party literature
to the fore. The distinction between the illegal and the legal press, that melan-
choly heritage of the epoch of feudal, autocratic Russia, is beginning to
disappear. [. . .]



IIa Modernity 137

So long as there was a distinction between the illegal and the legal press, the
question of the party and non-party press was decided extremely simply and in
an extremely false and abnormal way. The entire illegal press was a party press,
being published by organizations and run by groups which in one way or another
^ere linked with groups of practical party workers. The entire legal press was
non-party - since parties were banned - but it 'gravitated' towards one party
ar another. Unnatural alliances, strange 'bed-fellows' and false cover-devices
w ere inevitable. The forced reserve of those who wished to express party views
merged with the immature thinking or mental cowardice of those who had not
risen to these views and who were not, in effect, party people.

An accursed period of Aesopian language, literary bondage, slavish speech,
and ideological serfdom! The proletariat has put an end to this foul atmosphere
which stifled everything living and fresh in Russia. But so far the proletariat
has won only half freedom for Russia.

The revolution is not yet completed. While tsarism is no longer strong enough
to defeat the revolution, the revolution is not yet strong enough to defeat tsarism.
And we are living in times when everywhere and in everything there operates
this unnatural combination of open, forthright, direct and consistent party spirit
with an underground, covert, 'diplomatic' and dodgy 'legality'. This unnatural
combination makes itself felt even in our newspaper . . .

Be that as it may, the half-way revolution compels all of us to set to work
at once organizing the whole thing on new lines. Today literature, even that
^published 'legally', can be nine-tenths party literature. It must become party
literature. In contradistinction to bourgeois customs, to the profitmaking, com-
linercialized bourgeois press, to bourgeois literary careerism and individualism,
'aristocratic anarchism' and drive for profit, the socialist proletariat must put
forward the principle of party literature, must develop this principle and put it
into practice as fully and completely as possible.

What is this principle of party literature? It is not simply that, for the socialist
proletariat, literature cannot be a means of enriching individuals or groups; it
cannot, in fact, be an individual undertaking, independent of the common cause
of the proletariat. Down with non-partisan writers! Down with literary super-
men! Literature must become part of the common cause of the proletariat, 'a
cog and a screw' of one single great Social-Democratic mechanism set in motion
by the entire politically-conscious vanguard of the entire working class. Lit-
erature must become a component of organized, planned and integrated Social-
Democratic Party work.

'Ail comparisons are lame,' says a German proverb. So is my comparison of
Hterature with a cog, of a living movement with a mechanism. And I daresay
there will even be hysterical intellectuals to raise a howl about such a compari-
son, which degrades, deadens, 'bureaucratizes' the free battle of ideas, freedom
of criticism, freedom of literary creation, etc., etc. Such outcries, in point of
fact, would be nothing more than an expression of bourgeois-intellectual indi-
vidualism. There is no question that literature is least of all subject to mechanical
adjustment or levelling, to the rule of the majority over the minority. There is
no question, either, that in this field greater scope must undoubtedly be allowed



138 The Idea of the Modern World

for personal initiative, individual inclination, thought and fantasy, form and
content. All this is undeniable; but all this simply shows that the literary side
of the proletarian party cause cannot be mechanically identified with its other
sides. This, however, does not in the least refute the proposition, alien and
strange to the bourgeoisie and bourgeois democracy, that literature must by all
means and necessarily become an element of Social-Democratic Party work,
inseparably bound up with the other elements. Newspapers must become the
organs of the various party organizations, and their writers must by all means
become members of these organizations. Publishing and distributing centres,
bookshops and reading-rooms, libraries and similar establishments - must all be
under Party control. The organized socialist proletariat must keep an eye on all
this work, supervise it in its entirety, and, from beginning to end, without any
exception, infuse into it the life-stream of the living proletarian cause, thereby
cutting the ground from under the old, semi-Oblomov, semi-shopkeeper Russian
principle: the writer does the writing, the reader does the reading.

We are not suggesting, of course, that this transformation of literary work,
which has been defiled by the Asiatic censorship and the European bourgeoisie,
can be accomplished all at once. Far be it from us to advocate any kind of
standardized system, or a solution by means of a few decrees. Cut-and-dried
schemes are least of all applicable here. What is needed is that the whole of
our Party, and the entire politically-conscious Social-Democratic proletariat
throughout Russia, should become aware of this new problem, specify it clearly
and everywhere set about solving it. Emerging from the captivity of the feudal
censorship, we have no desire to become, and shall not become, prisoners of
bourgeois-shopkeeper literary relations. We want to establish, and we shall
establish, a free press, free not simply from the police, but also from capital,
from careerism, and what is more, free from bourgeois-anarchist individualism.

These last words may sound paradoxical, or an affront to the reader. What!
some intellectual, an ardent champion of liberty, may shout. What, you want
to impose collective control on such a delicate, individual matter as literary
work! You want workmen to decide questions of science, philosophy, or
aesthetics by a majority of votes! You deny the absolute freedom of absolutely
individual ideological work!

Calm yourselves, gentlemen! First of all, we are discussing party literature
and its subordination to party control. Everyone is free to write and say whatever
he likes, without any restrictions. But every voluntary association (including the
party) is also free to expel members who use the name of the party to advocate
anti-party views. Freedom of speech and the press must be complete. But then
freedom of association must be complete too. I am bound to accord you, in the
name of free speech, the full right to shout, lie and write to your heart's content.
But you are bound to grant me, in the name of freedom of association, the right
to enter into, or withdraw from, association with people advocating this or that
view. The party is a voluntary association, which would inevitably break up,
first ideologically and then physically, if it did not cleanse itself of people
advocating anti-party views. And to define the border-line between party and
anti-party there is the party programme, the party's resolutions on tactics and



Ha Modernity 139

its rules and, lastly, the entire experience of international Social-Democracy,
the voluntary international associations of the proletariat, which has constantly
brought into its parties individual elements and trends not fully consistent, not
completely Marxist and not altogether correct and which, on the other hand,
has constantly conducted periodical 'cleansings' of its ranks. So it will be with
us too, supporters of bourgeois 'freedom of criticism', within the Party. We are
now becoming a mass party all at once, changing abruptly to an open organiz-
ation, and it is inevitable that we shall be joined by many who are inconsistent
(from the Marxist standpoint), perhaps we shall be joined even by some
Christian elements, and even by some mystics. We have sound stomachs and
we are rock-like Marxists. We shall digest those inconsistent elements. Freedom
of thought and freedom of criticism within the Party will never make us forget
about the freedom of organizing people into those voluntary associations known
as parties.

Secondly, we must say to you bourgeois individualists that your talk about
absolute freedom is sheer hypocrisy. There can be no real and effective 'freedom'
in a society based on the power of money, in a society in which the masses of
working people live in poverty and the handful of rich live like parasites. Are
you free in relation to your bourgeois publisher, Mr Writer, in relation to your
bourgeois public, which demands that you provide it with pornography in frames
$nd paintings, and prostitution as a 'supplement' to 'sacred' scenic art? This
absolute freedom is a bourgeois or an anarchist phrase (since, as a world outlook,
anarchism is bourgeois philosophy turned inside out). One cannot live in society
and be free from society. The freedom of the bourgeois writer, artist or actress
$ simply masked (or hypocritically masked) dependence on the money-bag, on
irruption, on prostitution.

And we socialists expose this hypocrisy and rip off the false labels, not in
order to arrive at a non-class literature and art (that will be possible only in a
Socialist extra-class society), but to contrast this hypocritically free literature,
which is in reality linked to the bourgeoisie, with a really free one that will be
openly linked to the proletariat.

It will be a free literature, because the idea of socialism and sympathy with
the working people, and not greed or careerism, will bring ever new forces to
its ranks. It will be a free literature, because it will serve, not some satiated
heroine, not the bored 'upper ten thousand' suffering from fatty degeneration,
but the millions and tens of millions of working people - the flower of the
country, its strength and its future. It will be a free literature, enriching the
last word in the revolutionary thought of mankind with the experience and
living work of the socialist proletariat, bringing about permanent interaction
between the experience of the past (scientific socialism, the completion of the
development of socialism from its primitive, Utopian forms) and the experience
of the present (the present struggle of the worker comrades).

To work, then, comrades! We are faced with a new and difficult task. But it
|S a noble and grateful one - to organize a broad, multiform and varied literature
inseparably linked with the Social-Democratic working-class movement. All
Social-Democratic literature must become Party literature. Every newspaper,



i







140 The Idea of the Modern World

journal, publishing house, etc., must immediately set about reorganizing its
work, leading up to a situation in which it will, in one form or another, be
integrated into one Party organization or another. Only then will 'Social-Demo-
cratic' literature really become worthy of that name, only then will it be able
to fulfil its duty and, even within the framework of bourgeois society, break
out of bourgeois slavery and merge with the movement of the really advanced
and thoroughly revolutionary class.



4 Henri Bergson (1859-1941) from Creative Evolution

Bergson achieved an extensive intellectual influence, particularly in France, in the years
preceding the First World War. In particular, his ideas on memory, the elan vital, and
the subjective construction of reality, pervaded the avant-garde, having an impact on
Cubism and, more explicitly, Futurism. Originally published Paris 1907; authorized
English translation, from which the present extract is taken, by Arthur Mitchell, London,
1911.

. . . fabricating consists in carving out the form of an object in matter. What is
the most important is the form to be obtained. As to the matter, we choose
that which is most convenient; but, in order to choose it, that is to say, in order
to go and seek it among many others, we must have tried, in imagination at
least, to endow every kind of matter with the form of the object conceived. In
other words, an intelligence which aims at fabricating is an intelligence which
never stops at the actual form of things nor regards it as final, but, on the
contrary, looks upon all matter as if it were carvable at will. Plato compares the
good dialectician to the skilful cook who carves the animal without breaking its
bones, by following the articulations marked out by nature. An intelligence
which always proceeded thus would really be an intelligence turned toward
speculation. But action, and in particular fabrication, requires the opposite
mental tendency: it makes us consider every actual form of things, even the
form of natural things, as artificial and provisional; it makes our thought efface
from the object perceived, even though organized and living, the lines that
outwardly mark its inward structure; in short, it makes us regard its matter as
indifferent to its form. The whole of matter is made to appear to our thought
as an immense piece of cloth in which we can cut out what we will and sew it
together again as we please. Let us note, in passing, that it is this power that
we affirm when we say that there is a space, that is to say, a homogeneous and
empty medium, infinite and infinitely divisible, lending itself indifferently to
any mode of decomposition whatsoever. A medium of this kind is never
perceived; it is only conceived. What is perceived is extension coloured, resistant,
divided according to the lines which mark out the boundaries of real bodies or
of their real elements. But when we think of our power over this matter, that
is to say, of our faculty of decomposing and recomposing it as we please, we
project the whole of these possible decompositions and recompositions behind
real extension in the form of a homogeneous space, empty and indifferent, which



IIa Modernity 141

is supposed to underlie it. This space is therefore, pre-eminently, the plan of
our possible action on things, although, indeed, things have a natural tendency,
as we shall explain further on, to enter into a frame of this kind. It is a view
taken by mind. The animal has probably no idea of it, even when, like us, it
perceives extended things. It is an idea that symbolizes the tendency of the
human intellect to fabrication. [...] Suffice it to say that the intellect is
characterized by the unlimited power of decomposing according to any law and of
recomposing into any system. [. . .]

Instinct is sympathy. If this sympathy could extend its object and also reflect
upon itself, it would give us the key to vital operations - just as intelligence,
developed and disciplined, guides us into matter. For - we cannot too often
! repeat it - intelligence and instinct are turned in opposite directions, the former
towards inert matter, the latter towards life. Intelligence, by means of science,
which is its work, will deliver up to us more and more completely the secret
of physical operations; of life it brings us, and moreover only claims to bring
us, a translation in terms of inertia. It goes all round life, taking from outside
the greatest possible number of views of it, drawing it into itself instead of
entering into it. But it is to the very inwardness of life that intuition leads us,
- by intuition I mean instinct that has become disinterested, self-conscious,
capable of reflecting upon its object and of enlarging it indefinitely.

That an effort of this kind is not impossible, is proved by the existence in
man of an aesthetic faculty along with normal perception. Our eye perceives
the features of the living being, merely as assembled, not as mutually organized.
The intention of life, the simple movement that runs through the lines, that
binds them together and gives them significance, escapes it. This intention is
just what the artist tries to regain, in placing himself back within the object by
a kind of sympathy, in breaking down, by an effort of intuition, the barrier that
space puts up between him and his model. It is true that this aesthetic intuition,
like external perception, only attains the individual. But we can conceive an
inquiry turned in the same direction as art, which would take life in general for
its object, just as physical science, in following to the end the direction pointed
out by external perception, prolongs the individual facts into general laws. No
doubt this philosophy will never obtain a knowledge of its object comparable
to that which science has of its own. Intelligence remains the luminous nucleus
around which instinct, even enlarged and purified into intuition, forms only a
vague nebulosity. But, in default of knowledge properly so called, reserved to
pure intelligence, intuition may enable us to grasp what it is that intelligence
fails to give us, and indicate the means of supplementing it. On the one hand,
it will utilize the mechanism of intelligence itself to show how intellectual
moulds cease to be strictly applicable; and on the other hand, by its own work,
it will suggest to us the vague feeling, if nothing more, of what must take the
place of intellectual moulds. Thus, intuition may bring the intellect to recognize
that life does not quite go into the category of the many nor yet into that of
the one; that neither mechanical causality nor finality can give a sufficient
interpretation of the vital process. Then, by the sympathetic communication



142 The Idea of the Modern World

which it establishes between us and the rest of the living, by the expansion of
our consciousness which it brings about, it introduces us into life's own domain
which is reciprocal interpenetration, endlessly continued creation. But, though
it thereby transcends intelligence, it is from intelligence that has come the push
that has made it rise to the point it has reached. Without intelligence, it would
have remained in the form of instinct, riveted to the special object of its practical
interest, and turned outward by it into movements of locomotion.

How theory of knowledge must take account of these two faculties, intellect
and intuition, and how also, for want of establishing a sufficiently clear
distinction between them, it becomes involved in inextricable difficulties, crea-
ting phantoms of ideas to which there cling phantoms of problems, we shall
endeavour to show a little further on. We shall see that the problem of
knowledge, from this point of view, is one with the metaphysical problem, and
that both one and the other depend upon experience. On the one hand, indeed,
if intelligence is charged with matter and instinct with life, we must squeeze
them both in order to get the double essence from them; metaphysics is therefore
dependent upon theory of knowledge. But, on the other hand, if consciousness
has thus split up into intuition and intelligence, it is because of the need it had
to apply itself to matter at the same time as it had to follow the stream of life.
The double form of consciousness is then due to the double form of the real,
and theory of knowledge must be dependent upon metaphysics. In fact, each
of these two lines of thought leads to the other; they form a circle, and there
can be no other centre to the circle but the empirical study of evolution. It is
only in seeing consciousness run through matter, lose itself there and find itself
there again, divide and reconstitute itself, that we shall form an idea of the mutual
opposition of the two terms, as also, perhaps, of their common origin. [. . .]

Matter or mind, reality has appeared to us as a perpetual becoming. It makes
itself or it unmakes itself, but it is never something made. Such is the intuition
that we have of mind when we draw aside the veil which is interposed between
our consciousness and ourselves. This, also, is what our intellect and senses
themselves would show us of matter, if they could obtain a direct and disinter-
ested idea of it. But, preoccupied before everything with the necessities of action,
the intellect, like the senses, is limited to taking, at intervals, views that are
instantaneous and by that very fact immobile of the becoming of matter.
Consciousness, being in its turn formed on the intellect, sees clearly of the inner
life what is already made, and only feels confusedly the making. Thus, we pluck
out of duration those moments that interest us, and that we have gathered along
its course. These alone we retain. And we are right in so doing, while action
only is in question. But when, in speculating on the nature of the real, we go
on regarding it as our practical interest requires us to regard it, we become
unable to perceive the true evolution, the radical becoming. Of becoming we
perceive only states, of duration only instants, and even when we speak of duration
and of becoming, it is of another thing that we are thinking. Such is the most
striking of the two illusions we wish to examine. It consists in supposing that we
can think the unstable by means of the stable, the moving by means of the immobile.



II a Modernity 143

.The other illusion is near akin to the first. It has the same origin, being also
j u e to the fact that we import into speculation a procedure made for practice.
li action aims at getting something that we feel the want of, or at creating
something that does not yet exist. In this very special sense, it fills a void, and
g^s from the empty to the full, from an absence to a presence, from the unreal
^ the real. Now the unreality which is here in question is purely relative to
^e direction in which our attention is engaged, for we are immersed in realities
jjid cannot pass out of them; only, if the present reality is not the one we are
seeking, we speak of the absence of this sought-for reality wherever we find the
presence of another. We thus express what we have as a function of what we
want. This is quite legitimate in the sphere of action. But, whether we will or
no, we keep to this way of speaking, and also of thinking, when we speculate
on the nature of things independently of the interest they have for us. Thus
arises the second of the two illusions. [. . .] It is due, like the other, to the
gtatic habits that our intellect contracts when it prepares our action on things.
Just as we pass through the immobile to go to the moving, so we make use of
the void in order to think the full.

I We have met with this illusion already in dealing with the fundamental
problem of knowledge. The question, we then said, is to know why there is
order, and not disorder, in things. But the question has meaning only if we
suppose that disorder, understood as an absence of order, is possible, or
imaginable, or conceivable. Now, it is only order that is real; but, as order can
Uke two forms, and as the presence of the one may be said to consist in the
absence of the other, we speak of disorder whenever we have before us that one
tf the two orders for which we are not looking. The idea of disorder is then
ottirely practical. It corresponds to the disappointment of a certain expectation,
*nd it does not denote the absence of all order, but only the presence of that
order which does not offer us actual interest. So that whenever we try to deny
order completely, absolutely, we find that we are leaping from one kind of order
to the other indefinitely, and that the supposed suppression of the one and the
other implies the presence of the two. [. . .]

5 Alexander Blok (1880-1921) 'Nature and Culture'

Blok was the leading Russian Symbolist poet. In his mystical apprehension of 'the distant
thunder', and the contradiction between the age-old world of the soil and the modern
world of the city and technology, he prefigured the upheavals of the First World War
arid the Russian Revolution. 'Nature and Culture' uses the eruption of Mount Etna in
Sicily as a metaphor for this social cataclysm. It was read as a paper to the Religious-
Philosophical Society in St Petersburg on 30 December 1908. The present translation
by I. Freiman is taken from Alexander Blok, The Spirit of Music, London, 1946.

The telegraph hammers all over Europe, but it tells hardly a word of the glory fc
that once was Messina. The vulgar words of the news-telegrams acquire the
force of ancient Italian chronicles; but from Etna columns of yellow smoke are
escaping. Sicily continues to tremble, and we cannot appease her tremors.



144 The Idea of the Modern World

Is it really necessary to be optimistic in the face of these facts? And is it
really necessary to be a pessimist or a superstitious person in order to point
out that the flag of culture can always be lowered whenever the distant thunder
of approaching storm is heard.

The earth has been shaken by underground ferments more than once. And
more than once have we celebrated our infirmity before the plague, before
hunger and rebellion, before the coward. What sort of frightful vindictiveness
has been accumulated in us down the centuries? Human nature becomes more
and more rigid, mechanized, more and more resembles a gigantic laboratory in
which the vengeance of the elements is prepared. Science flourishes in order to
subjugate the earth; art flourishes in order - like a winged day-dream, a
mysterious aeroplane - to fly away from the earth; industry flourishes in order
that people may part company with the earth.

Every promoter of culture is a demon, cursing the earth and devising wings
in order to fly away from it. The heart of the advocate of progress breathes
vengeance on the earth, on the elements; on the earth's crust not yet sufficiently
hardened; vengeance for all its difficult times and endless spaces, for the rusty
onerous chain of cause and effect, for the injustice of life and the injustice of
death. Persons of culture, advocates of progress, choice intellectuals, foaming at
the mouth, construct machines, move science forward in secret spite, trying to
forget and not to hear the rumbling of the elements, subterranean and terrestrial,
which are stirring, now here now there. Only sometimes they awake and look
around them and see the same earth - cursed, yet with its tranquil moments - and
look upon it as upon some theatrical performance, some absurd, attractive tale.

There are others for whom the earth is not a tale but a wonderful and enduring
fact, who know the elements and know themselves as having come forth from
them. They are 'elemental people'. They are tranquil, like the earth, but for a
while their activity is similar to the first faint rumblings of subterranean jolts.
They know that 'to everything there is a season and a time to every purpose
under the sun: a time to be born and a time to die; a time to plant and a time
to pluck up that which is planted; a time to kill and a time to heal; a time to
break down and a time to build up.' (Ecclesiastes.)

Some practical profession is more necessary and appropriate to them than
industry and culture.

They also live in a dream. But their dream is unlike our dreams, in the same
way as the fields of Russia are unlike the brilliant bustling of the Nevsky avenue.
We see in our dreams and we dream in reality, how we may fly away from the
earth in a plane, how, with the help of radium, we may explore the bowels of
the earth, and of our body, how we may reach the north pole, and, through
the last synthetic energy of our intellect, how we may subordinate the universe
to a single, supreme law.

They, the elemental people, dream and create legends about the earth. They
dream of temples, dispersed over the earth's face; of monasteries, where stands,
behind a curtain, unseen by anyone, the statue of Nikolay, the worker of
miracles; of the wind which sways the rye in the night - 'she who dances
through the rye'; of the planks which rise to the surface from the bottom of a




II a Modernity 145

jeep pond - fragments of foreign ships, because the pond is 'a ventilator of the
geean'. The earth is one with them and they are one with the earth, indistin-
guishable from it. It seems now and then that the hill is animate, and the tree
is animate, and the church is animate, as the peasant himself is animate. Only,
everything in this plain still sleeps but, when it stirs - everything as it stands
trill go: the peasants will go, the groves and the churches will go, and the
incarnate Mothers of God will go forth from the hills, and the lakes will overflow
the banks, and the rivers will flow backwards, and the whole earth will go.
 * *

[, . .J Between the two fires of infuriated vengeance, between two camps, we
are living. Therefore it is so frightful. What kind of fire is it which breaks out
into the light from under the 'crusted lava'? Is it such as devastated Calabria,
or is this - a purifying fire?

Whichever it is, we are living through a terrible crisis. We still do not know
exactly what. events await us, but, in our hearts, the needle of the seismograph
is already deflected. Already we see ourselves, as if against the background of
a glow, flying in a light, rickety aeroplane, high above the earth; but beneath
as is a rumbling and fire-spitting mountain, and down its sides, behind clouds
of ashes, roll streams of red-hot lava.



6 Filippo Tommaso Marinetti (1876-1944) 'The
Foundation and Manifesto of Futurism'

Marinetti was an established Symbolist poet, founder and editor of the journal Poesia
(1905), before rejecting Symbolism in favour of new ideas about the defining charac-
teristics of modern life: simultaneity, dynamism and speed. These became the stylistic
preoccupations of a Futurist movement. Futurism also represented a conscious attempt
to place Italian art in the forefront of the European avant-garde. Politically Marinetti's
nationalism led him into a lifelong relationship with Mussolini's Fascism. The 'Founding
Manifesto' was first published in the newspaper Le Figaro in Paris on 20 February 1909.
It received its first English translation in 1912 in conjunction with the Futurist exhibition
at the Sackville Gallery, London. The present translation, by R. W. Flint, is taken from
his Marinetti's Selected Writings, London, 1971. (The ellipses are integral.)

We had stayed up all night, my friends and I, under hanging mosque lamps
with domes of filigreed brass, domes starred like our spirits, shining like them
with the prisoned radiance of electric hearts. For hours we had trampled our
atavistic ennui into rich oriental rugs, arguing up to the last confines of logic
and blackening many reams of paper with our frenzied scribbling.

An immense pride was buoying us up, because we felt ourselves alone at that
hour, alone, awake, and on our feet, like proud beacons or forward sentries
against an army of hostile stars glaring down at us from their celestial encamp-
ments. Alone with stokers feeding the hellish fires of great ships, alone with
the black spectres who grope in the red-hot bellies of locomotives launched
down their crazy courses, alone with drunkards reeling like wounded birds along
the city walls.



146 The Idea of the Modern World

Suddenly we jumped, hearing the mighty noise of the huge double-decker
trams that rumbled by outside, ablaze with coloured lights, like villages on
holiday suddenly struck and uprooted by the flooding Po and dragged over falls
and through gorges to the sea.

Then the silence deepened. But, as we listened to the old canal muttering its
feeble prayers and the creaking bones of sickly palaces above their damp green
beards, under the windows we suddenly heard the famished roar of automobiles.

'Let's go! 1 I said. 'Friends, away! Let's go! Mythology and the Mystic Ideal
are defeated at last. We're about to see the Centaur's birth and, soon after, the
first flight of Angels! . . . We must shake the gates of life, test the bolts and
hinges. Let's go! Look there, on the earth, the very first dawn! There's nothing
to match the splendour of the sun's red sword, slashing for the first time through
our millennial gloom!'

We went up to the three snorting beasts, to lay amorous hands on their torrid
breasts, I stretched out on my car like a corpse on its bier, but revived at once
under the steering wheel, a guillotine blade that threatened my stomach.

The raging broom of madness swept us out of ourselves and drove us through
streets as rough and deep as the beds of torrents. Here and there, sick lamplight
through window glass taught us to distrust the deceitful mathematics of our
perishing eyes.

I cried, 'The scent, the scent alone is enough for our beasts.'

And like young lions we ran after Death, its dark pelt blotched with pale
crosses as it escaped down the vast violet living and throbbing sky.

But we had no ideal Mistress raising her divine form to the clouds, nor any
cruel Queen to whom to offer our bodies, twisted like Byzantine rings! There
was nothing to make us wish for death, unless the wish to be free at last from
the weight of our courage!

And on we raced, hurling watchdogs against doorsteps, curling them under
our burning tyres like collars under a flatiron. Death, domesticated, met me at
every turn, gracefully holding out a paw, or once in a while hunkering down,
making velvety caressing eyes at me from every puddle.

'Let's break out of the horrible shell of wisdom and throw ourselves like
pride-ripened fruit into the wide, contorted mouth of the wind! Let's give
ourselves utterly to the Unknown, not in desperation but only to replenish the
deep wells of the Absurd!'

The words were scarcely out of my mouth when I spun my car around with
the frenzy of a dog trying to bite its tail, and there, suddenly, were two cyclists
coming towards me, shaking their fists, wobbling like two equally convincing
but nevertheless contradictory arguments. Their stupid dilemma was blocking
my way - Damn! Ouch! ... I stopped short and to my disgust rolled over into
a ditch with my wheels in the air. . . .

O maternal ditch, almost full of muddy water! Fair factory drain! I gulped
down your nourishing sludge; and I remembered the blessed black breast of my
Sudanese nurse. . . . When I came up - torn, filthy, and stinking - from under



Ha Modernity 147

the capsized car, I felt the white-hot iron of joy deliciously pass through my
heart!

A crowd of fishermen with handlines and gouty naturalists were already
swarming around the prodigy. With patient, loving care those people rigged a
tall derrick and iron grapnels to fish out my car, like a big beached shark. Up
jt came from the ditch, slowly, leaving in the bottom, like scales, its heavy
framework of good sense and its soft upholstery of comfort.

They thought it was dead, my beautiful shark, but a caress from me was
enough to revive it; and there it was, alive again, running on its powerful fins!

And so, faces smeared with good factory muck - plastered with metallic waste,
with senseless sweat, with celestial soot - we, bruised, our arms in slings, but
unafraid, declared our high intentions to all the living of the earth:

Manifesto of Futurism

1 We intend to sing the love of danger, the habit of energy and fearlessness.

2 Courage, audacity, and revolt will be essential elements of our poetry.

3 Up to now literature has exalted a pensive immobility, ecstasy, and sleep.
We intend to exalt aggressive action, a feverish insomnia, the racer's stride,

- the mortal leap, the punch and the slap.

4 We affirm that the world's magnificence has been enriched by a new beauty:
the beauty of speed. A racing car whose hood is adorned with great pipes,
like serpents of explosive breath - a roaring car that seems to ride on
grapeshot is more beautiful than the Victory of Samothrace.

5 We want to hymn the man at the wheel, who hurls the lance of his spirit
across the Earth, along the circle of its orbit.

6 The poet must spend himself with ardour, splendour, and generosity, to
swell the enthusiastic fervour of the primordial elements.

7 Except in struggle, there is no more beauty. No work without an aggressive
character can be a masterpiece. Poetry must be conceived as a violent attack
on unknown forces, to reduce and prostrate them before man.

8 We stand on the last promontory of the centuries! . . . Why should we look
back, when what we want is to break down the mysterious doors of the
Impossible? Time and Space died yesterday. We already live in the absolute,
because we have created eternal, omnipresent speed.

9 We will glorify war - the world's only hygiene - militarism, patriotism,
the destructive gesture of freedom-bringers, beautiful ideas worth dying
for, and scorn for woman.

10 We will destroy the museums, libraries, academies of every kind, will fight
moralism, feminism, every opportunistic or utilitarian cowardice.

11 We will sing of great crowds excited by work, by pleasure, and by riot; we
will sing of the multicoloured, polyphonic tides of revolution in the modern
capitals; we will sing of the vibrant nightly fervour of arsenals and shipyards
blazing with violent electric moons; greedy railway stations that devour
smoke-plumed serpents; factories hung on clouds by the crooked lines of
their smoke; bridges that stride the rivers like giant gymnasts, flashing in



148 The Idea of the Modern World

the sun with a glitter of knives; adventurous steamers that sniff the horizon;
deep-chested locomotives whose wheels paw the tracks like the hooves of
enormous steel horses bridled by tubing; and the sleek flight of planes
whose propellers chatter in the wind like banners and seem to cheer like
an enthusiastic crowd.

It is from Italy that we launch through the world this violently upsetting
incendiary manifesto of ours. With it, today, we establish Futurism, because we
want to free this land from its smelly gangrene of professors, archaeologists,
ciceroni and antiquarians. For too long has Italy been a dealer in second-hand
clothes. We mean to free her from the numberless museums that cover her like
so many graveyards.

Museums: cemeteries! . . . Identical, surely, in the sinister promiscuity of so
many bodies unknown to one another. Museums: public dormitories where one
lies forever beside hated or unknown beings. Museums: absurd abattoirs of
painters and sculptors ferociously slaughtering each other with colour-blows and
line-blows, the length of the fought-over walls!

That one should make an annual pilgrimage, just as one goes to the graveyard
on All Souls' Day - that I grant. That once a year one should leave a floral
tribute beneath the Gioconda, I grant you that. . . . But I don't admit that our
sorrows, our fragile courage, our morbid restlessness should be given a daily
conducted tour through the museums. Why poison ourselves? Why rot?

And what is there to see in an old picture except the laborious contortions
of an artist throwing himself against the barriers that thwart his desire to express
his dream completely? . . . Admiring an old picture is the same as pouring our
sensibility into a funerary urn instead of hurling it far off, in violent spasms of
action and creation.

Do you, then, wish to waste all your best powers in this eternal and futile
worship of the past, from which you emerge fatally exhausted, shrunken, beaten
down?

In truth I tell you that daily visits to museums, libraries, and academies
(cemeteries of empty exertion, Calvaries of crucified dreams, registries of aborted
beginnings!) are, for artists, as damaging as the prolonged supervision by parents
of certain young people drunk with their talent and their ambitious wills. When
the future is barred to them, the admirable past may be a solace for the ills of
the moribund, the sickly, the prisoner. . . . But we want no part of it, the past,
we the young and strong Futurists]

So let them come, the gay incendiaries with charred fingers! Here they are! Here
they are! . . . Come on! set fire to the library shelves! Turn aside the canals to
flood the museums! . . . Oh, the joy of seeing the glorious old canvases bobbing
adrift on those waters, discoloured and shredded! . . . Take up your pickaxes,
your axes and hammers and wreck, wreck the venerable cities, pitilessly!

The oldest of us is thirty: so we have at least a decade for finishing our work.
When we are forty, other younger and stronger men will probably throw us in
the wastebasket like useless manuscripts - we want it to happen!



II a Modernity 149

They will come against us, our successors, will come from far away, from
c very quarter, dancing to the winged cadence of their first songs, flexing the
tiooked claws of predators, sniffing doglike at the academy doors the strong
odour of our decaying minds, which will already have been promised to the
literary catacombs.

But we won't be there. ... At last they'll find us - one winter's night - in
open country, beneath a sad roof drummed by a monotonous rain. They'll see
u s crouched beside our trembling aeroplanes in the act of warming our hands
a t the poor little blaze that our books of today will give out when they take
fire from the flight of our images.

, They'll storm around us, panting with scorn and anguish, and all of them,
exasperated by our proud daring, will hurtle to kill us, driven by a hatred the
more implacable the more their hearts will be drunk with love and admiration
for us.

Injustice, strong and sane, will break out radiantly in their eyes.

Art, in fact, can be nothing but violence, cruelty, and injustice.

The oldest of us is thirty: even so we have already scattered treasures, a
thousand treasures of force, love, courage, astuteness, and raw will-power; have
thrown them impatiently away, with fury, carelessly, unhesitatingly, breathless,
and unresting. . . . Look at us! We are still untired! Our hearts know no
dreariness because they are fed with fire, hatred, and speed! . . . Does that amaze
you? It should, because you can never remember having lived! Erect on the
summit of the world, once again we hurl our defiance at the stars!
. You have objections? - Enough! Enough! We know them. . . . W r e've under-
stood! . . . Our fine deceitful intelligence tells us that we are the revival and
extension of our ancestors - Perhaps! ... If only it were so! - But who cares?
'We don't want to understand! . . . Woe to anyone who says those infamous words
to us again!

Lift up your heads!

Erect on the summit of the world, once again we hurl defiance to the stars!



7 Umberto Boccioni (1882-1916) et al. 'Futurist
Painting: Technical Manifesto'

The leader of the group of young artists collected around Marinetti, the painter/sculptor
Boccioni was primarily responsible for this attempt to apply Martnetti's example to the
visual arts, influenced by Bergson, the Manifesto also betrays an involvement with
Divisionism preceding the Futurist's encounter with Parisian Cubism. Originally published
as a leaflet by Poesia in Milan, 11 April 1910 and also signed by Carlo Carra, Luigi
Russolo, Giacomo Balla and Gino Severini. The present translation is taken from the
Sackville Gallery catalogue of 1912.

On the 18th of March, 1910, in the limelight of the Chiarella Theatre of Turin,
we launched our first manifesto to a public of three thousand people - artists,
nien of letters, students and others; it was a violent and cynical cry which



150 The Idea of the Modern World

displayed our sense of rebellion, our deep-rooted disgust, our haughty contempt
for vulgarity, for academic and pedantic mediocrity, for the fanatical worship
of all that is old and worm-eaten.

We bound ourselves there and then to the movement of Futurist Poetry which
was initiated a year earlier by F. T. Marinetti in the columns of the Figaro.

The battle of Turin has remained legendary. We exchanged almost as many
knocks as we did ideas, in order to protect from certain death the genius of
Italian Art.

And now during a temporary pause in this formidable struggle we come out
of the crowd in order to expound with technical precision our programme tor
the renovation of painting, of which our Futurist Salon at Milan was a dazzling
manifestation.

Our growing need of truth is no longer satisfied with Form and Colour as
they have been understood hitherto.

The gesture which we would reproduce on canvas shall no longer be a fixed
moment in universal dynamism. It shall simply be the dynamic sensation itself.

Indeed, all things move, all things run, all things are rapidly changing. A
profile is never motionless before our eyes, but it constantly appears and
disappears. On account of the persistency of an image upon the retina, moving
objects constantly multiply themselves; their form changes like rapid vibrations,
in their mad career. Thus a running horse has not four legs, but twenty, and
their movements are triangular.

All is conventional in art. Nothing is absolute in painting. What was truth
for the painters of yesterday is but a falsehood today. We declare, for instance,
that a portrait must not be like the sitter, and that the painter carries in himself
the landscapes which he would fix upon his canvas.

To paint a human figure you must not paint it; you must render the whole
of its surrounding atmosphere.

Space no longer exists: the street pavement, soaked by rain beneath the glare
of electric lamps, becomes immensely deep and gapes to the very centre of the
earth. Thousands of miles divide us from the sun; yet the house in front of us
fits into the solar disk.

Who can still believe in the opacity of bodies, since our sharpened and
multiplied sensitiveness has already penetrated the obscure manifestations of the
medium? Why should we forget in our creations the doubled power of our sight,
capable of giving results analogous to those of the X-rays?

It will be sufficient to cite a few examples, chosen amongst thousands, to
prove the truth of our arguments.

The sixteen people around you in a rolling motor bus are in turn and at the
same time one, ten, four, three; they are motionless and they change places;
they come and go, bound into the street, are suddenly swallowed up by the
sunshine, then come back and sit before you, like persistent symbols of universal
vibration.

How often have we not seen upon the cheek of the person with whom we
are talking the horse which passes at the end of the street.

Our bodies penetrate the sofas upon which we sit, and the sofas penetrate



r



II a Modernity 151

our bodies. The motor bus rushes into the houses which it passes, and in their
turn the houses throw themselves upon the motor bus and are blended with it.

The construction of pictures has hitherto been foolishly traditional. Painters
have shown us the objects and the people placed before us. We shall hence-
forward put the spectator in the centre of the picture.

As in every realm of the human mind, clear-sighted individual research has
swept away the unchanging obscurities of dogma, so must the vivifying current
of science soon deliver painting from academism.

We would at any price re-enter into life. Victorious science has nowadays
disowned its past in order the better to serve the material needs of our time;
we would that art, disowning its past, were able to serve at last the intellectual
needs which are within us.

Our renovated consciousness does not permit us to look upon man as the
centre of universal life. The suffering of a man is of the same interest to us as
the suffering of an electric lamp, which, with spasmodic starts, shrieks out the
most heartrending expressions of colour. The harmony of the lines and folds
of modern dress works upon our sensitiveness with the same emotional and
symbolical power as did the nude upon the sensitiveness of the old masters.

In order to conceive and understand the novel beauties of a Futurist picture,
the soul must be purified; the eye must be freed from its veil of atavism and
culture, so that it may at last look upon Nature and not upon the museum as
the one and only standard.

As soon as ever this result has been obtained, it will be readily admitted that
brown tints have never coursed beneath our skin; it will be discovered that
yellow shines forth in our flesh, that red blazes, and that green, blue and violet
dance upon it with untold charms, voluptuous and caressing.

How is it possible still to see the human face pink, now that our life, redoubled
by noctambulism, has multiplied our perceptions as colourists? The human face
is yellow, red, green, blue, violet. The pallor of a woman gazing in a jeweller's
window is more intensely iridescent than the prismatic fires of the jewels that
fascinate her like a lark.

The time has passed for our sensations in painting to be whispered. We wish
them in future to sing and re-echo upon our canvases in deafening and
triumphant flourishes.

Your eyes, accustomed to semi-darkness, will soon open to more radiant
visions of light. The shadows which we shall paint shall be more luminous than
the high-lights of our predecessors, and our pictures, next to those of the
museums, will shine like blinding daylight compared with deepest night.

We conclude that painting cannot exist today without Divisionism. This is
no process that can be learned and applied at will. Divisionism, for the modern
painter, must be an innate complementanness which we declare to be essential
and necessary.

Our art will probably be accused of tormented and decadent cerebralism. But
we shall merely answer that we are, on the contrary, the primitives of a new
sensitiveness, multiplied hundredfold, and that our art is intoxicated with
spontaneity and power.



152 The Idea of the Modern World

WE DECLARE:

1 That all forms of imitation must be despised, all forms of originality glorified.

2 That it is essential to rebel against the tyranny of the terms 'harmony' and
'good taste' as being too elastic expressions, by the help of which it is easy
to demolish the works of Rembrandt, of Goya and of Rodin.

3 That the art critics are useless or harmful.

4 That all subjects previously used must be swept aside in order to express
our whirling life of steel, of pride, of fever and of speed.

5 That the name of 'madman' with which it is attempted to gag all innovators
should be looked upon as a title of honour.

6 That innate complementariness is an absolute necessity in painting, just as
free metre in poetry or polyphony in music.

7 That universal dynamism must be rendered in painting as a dynamic
sensation.

8 That in the manner of rendering Nature the first essential is sincerity and
purity.

9 That movement and light destroy the materiality of bodies.

WE FIGHT:

1 Against the bituminous tints by which it is attempted to obtain the patina
of time upon modern pictures.

2 Against the superficial and elementary archaism founded upon flat tints, and
which, by imitating the linear technique of the Egyptians, reduces painting
to a powerless synthesis, both childish and grotesque.

3 Against the false claims to belong to the future put forward by the seces-
sionists and the independents, who have installed new academies no less trite
and attached to routine than the preceding ones.

4 Against the nude in painting, as nauseous and as tedious as adultery in
literature.

We wish to explain this last point. Nothing is immoral in our eyes; it is the
monotony of the nude against which we fight. We are told that the subject is
nothing and that everything lies in the manner of treating it. That is agreed;
we too, admit that. But this truism, unimpeachable and absolute fifty years ago,
is no longer so today with regard to the nude, since artists obsessed with the
desire to expose the bodies of their mistresses have transformed the Salons into
arrays of unwholesome flesh!

We demand, for ten years, the total suppression of the nude in painting.



8 Robert Delaunay (1885-1941) 4 On the

Construction of Reality in Pure Painting'

Delaunay was associated with the 'public' group of Cubists (including Leger, Gleizes
and Metzinger), who addressed themes related to modern life more explicitly than either




Ha Modernity 153

geaque  r Picasso. He went on to develop a virtually abstract, colour-based art, derived
from his Cubism. For this he was credited by the critic Guillaume Apollinaire with having
origin ated the sui generis movement of 'Orphism'. This 'aesthetic declaration' by Delau-
nay was published in full by Apollinaire in the course of his own article, 'Reality, Pure
painting', in Der Sturm, Berlin, December 1912. The present translation, by Susan
Suleiman, is taken from Leroy C. Breunig (ed.), Apollinaire on Art, London, 1972.

Realism is the eternal quality in art; without it there can be no permanent
beauty, because it is the very essence of beauty.

Let us seek purity of means in painting, the clearest expression of beauty.

In impressionism - and 1 include in that term all the tendencies that reacted
to it: neo-impressionism, precubism, cubism, neocubism, in other words, every-
thing that represents technique and scientific procedure - we find ourselves face
fo face with nature, far from all the correctness of 'styles,' whether Italian,
Gothic, African, or any other.

From this point of view, impressionism is undeniably a victory, but an
incomplete one. The first stammer of souls brimming over in the face of nature,
and still somewhat stunned by this great reality. Their enthusiasm has done
fway with all the false ideas and archaic procedures of traditional painting
(draftsmanship, geometry, perspective) and has dealt a deathblow to the neo-
classical, pseudo-intellectual, and moribund Academy.

This movement of liberation began with the impressionists. They had had
firecursors: El Greco, a few English painters, and our own revolutionary Delacroix.
It was a great period of preparation in the search for the only reality: 'light,' which
finally brought all these experiments and reactions together in impressionism.
1 ; One of the major problems of modern painting today is still the way in which
jfche light that is necessary to all vital expressions of beauty functions. It was
Seurat who discovered the 'contrast of complementaries' in light.
.Seurat was the first theoretician of light. Contrast became a means of
expression. His premature death broke the continuity of his discoveries. Among
the impressionists, he may be considered the one who attained the ultimate in
means of expression.

His creation remains the discovery of the contrast of complementary colors.
(Optical blending by means of dots, used by Seurat and his associates, was only
a technique; it did not yet have the importance of contrasts used as a means
of construction in order to arrive at pure expression.)

He used this first means to arrive at a specific representation of nature. His
paintings are kinds of fleeting images.

:! Simultaneous contrast was not discovered, that is to say, achieved, by the most
daring impressionists; yet it is the only basis of pure expression in painting today.

Simultaneous contrast ensures the dynamism of colors and their construction
lT * the painting; it is the most powerful means to express reality.

Means of expression must not be personal; on the contrary, they must be
Within the comprehension of every intuition of the beautiful, and an artist's
metier must be of the same nature as his creative conception.

The simultaneity of colors through simultaneous contrasts and through all the
(uneven) quantities that emanate from the colors, in accordance with the way



154 The Idea of the Modern World

they are expressed in the movement represented - that is the only reality one
can construct through painting.

We are no longer dealing here either with effects (neo-impressionism within
impressionism), or with objects (cubism within impressionism), or with images
(the physics of cubism within impressionism).

We are attaining a purely expressive art, one that excludes all the styles of
the past (archaic, geometric) and is becoming a plastic art with only one purpose:
to inspire human nature toward beauty. Light is not a method, it slides toward
us, it is communicated to us by our sensibility. Without the perception of light

- the eye - there can be no movement. In fact, it is our eyes that transmit the
sensations perceived in nature to our soul. Our eyes are the receptacles of the
present and, therefore, of our sensibility. Without sensibility, that is, without
light, we can do nothing. Consequently, our soul finds its most perfect sensation
of life in harmony, and this harmony results only from the simultaneity with
which the quantities and conditions of light reach the soul (the supreme sense)
by the intermediary of the eyes.

And the soul judges the forms of the image of nature by comparison with
nature itself - a pure criticism - and it governs the creator. The creator takes
note of everything that exists in the universe through entity, succession,
imagination, and simultaneity.

Nature, therefore, engenders the science of painting.

The first paintings were simply a line encircling the shadow of a man made
by the sun on the surface of the earth.

But how far removed we are, with our contemporary means, from these effigies

- we who possess light (light colors, dark colors, their complementaries, their
intervals, and their simultaneity) and all the quantities of colors emanating from
the intellect to create harmony.

Harmony is sensibility ordered by the creator, who must try to render the
greatest degree of realistic expression, or what might be called the subject; the
subject is harmonic proportion, and this proportion is composed of various
simultaneous elements in a single action. The subject is eternal in the work of
art, and it must be apparent to the initiated in all its order, all its science.

Without the subject, there are no possibilities. This does not, however, mean
a literary and, therefore, anecdotic subject; the subject of painting is exclusively
plastic, and it results from vision. It must be the pure expression of human
nature.

The eternal subject is to be found in nature itself; the inspiration and clear
vision characteristic of the wise man, who discovers the most beautiful and
powerful boundaries. [ . . . ]



9 Percy Wyndham Lewis (1882-1957) 'Our Vortex'

Wyndham Lewis led the radical, 'Vorticist' wing of the English avant-garde before the
First World War f in opposition to the more traditionally oriented Bloomsbury group
around Fry and Bell. He was the co-founder and editor of Blast, the journal of the Vorticist



Ha Modernity 155

group, published both in emulation of and in competition with Futurist manifestations.
The present text was originally published in the first issue of Blast, London, June 1914.

I Our vortex is not afraid of the Past: it has forgotten its existence.
Our vortex regards the Future as as sentimental as the Past.

The Future is distant, like the Past, and therefore sentimental.

The mere element 'Past' must be retained to sponge up and absorb our
melancholy.

Everything absent, remote, requiring projection in the veiled weakness of the
mind, is sentimental

The Present can be intensely sentimental - especially if you exclude the mere
element 4 Past\

Our vortex does not deal in reactive Action only, nor identify the Present
with numbing displays of vitality.

The new vortex plunges to the heart of the Present.

The chemistry of the Present is different to that of the Past. With this
different chemistry we produce a New Living Abstraction.

The Rembrandt Vortex swamped the Netherlands with a flood of dreaming.

The Turner Vortex rushed at Europe with a wave of light.

We wish the Past and Future with us, the Past to mop up our melancholy,
the Future to absorb our troublesome optimism.

With our Vortex the Present is the only active thing.

Life is the Past and the Future.

The Present is Art.

II Our Vortex insists on water-tight compartments.

There is no Present - there is Past and Future, and there is Art.

Any moment not weakly relaxed and slipped back, or, on the other hand,
dreaming optimistically, is Art.

'Just Life' or soi-disant 'Reality' is a fourth quantity, made up of the Past,
the Future and Art.

This impure Present our Vortex despises and ignores.

For our Vortex is uncompromising.

We must have the Past and the Future, Life simple, that is, to discharge
ourselves in, and keep us pure for non-life, that is Art.

The Past and Future are the prostitutes Nature has provided.

Art is periodic escapes from this Brothel.

Artists put as much vitality and delight into this saintliness, and escape out,
as most men do their escapes into similar places from respectable existence.

The Vorticist is at his maximum point of energy when stillest.

The Vorticist is not the Slave of Commotion, but its Master.

The Vorticist does not suck up to Life.

He lets Life know its place in a Vorticist Universe!

III In a Vorticist Universe we don't get excited at what we have invented.
If we did it would look as though it had been a fluke.

It is not a fluke.



156 The Idea of the Modern World

We have no Verbotens.

There is one Truth, ourselves, and everything is permitted.

But we are not Templars.

We are proud, handsome and predatory.

We hunt machines, they are our favourite game.

We invent them and then hunt them down.

This is a great Vorticist age, a great still age of artists.

IV As to the lean belated Impressionism at present attempting to eke out a
little life in these islands:

Our Vortex is fed up with your dispersals, reasonable chicken-men.

Our Vortex is proud of its polished sides.

Our Vortex will not hear of anything but its disastrous polished dance.

Our Vortex desires the immobile rhythm of its swiftness.

Our Vortex rushes out like an angry dog at your Impressionistic fuss.

Our Vortex is white and abstract with its red-hot swiftness.



10 Franz Marc (1880-1916) 'Foreword' to the
planned second volume of Der Blaue Reiter

Though a second edition of the original almanac was published in 1914, the planned
second volume was aborted because of the war. In Marc's proposed editorial statement
the assertive primitivism of the pre-war years takes a darker cast from contemporary
events. The present translation is taken from K. Lankheit (ed.), Blaue Reiter Almanac,
London, 1974.

Once more and many times more we are trying to divert the attention of ardent
men from the nice and pretty illusion inherited from the olden days toward
existence, horrible and resounding.

Whenever the leaders of the crowds turn right, we turn left; when they point
to a goal, we turn our backs; whatever they warn us against we hurry toward.

The world is crammed to suffocation. On every stone man has put the brand
of his cleverness. Every word is leased or invested. What can man do for
salvation but give up everything and flee? What but draw a dividing line between
yesterday and today?

This is the great task of our time - the only one worth living and dying for.
Not the slightest contempt for the great past is involved in this. We want
something else. We do not want to live as carefree heirs or to live on the past.
Even if we wanted to live like that, we could not. The inheritance is used up,
and substitutes are making the world base.

Therefore we venture forth into new fields, and we are shocked to find that
everything is still untrodden, unspoken, uncultivated, unexplored. The world
lies virginal before us; our steps are shaky. If we dare to walk, we must cut the
umbilical cord that ties us to our maternal past.

The world is giving birth to a new time; there is only one question: has the
time now come to separate ourselves from the old world? Are we ready for the



Ha Modernity 157

vita nuova? This is the terrifying question of our age. It is the question that
will dominate this book. Everything in this volume is related to this question
and to nothing else. By it alone should we measure its form and its value.

11 Fernand Leger (1881-1955) 'Contemporary
Achievements in Painting'

Leger's Cubism was oriented towards modern life and the achievement of a modern
form of painting adequate to the experience of such a life. Paradoxically, it was the
freeing of painting from the necessity to depict modernity that was seen to underwrite
the promise of modernity's being properly represented. First published in the journal
Soirees de Pahs in 1914. The present translation, by Alexander Anderson, is taken
from F. Leger, The Function of Painting, New York, 1973.

Contemporary achievements in painting are the result of the modern mentality
and are closely bound up with the visual aspect of external things that are
creative and necessary for the painter.

Before tackling the purely technical questions, I am going to try to explain
why contemporary painting is representative, in the modern sense of the word,
of the new visual state imposed by the evolution of the new means of production.

A work of art must be significant in its own time, like any other intellectual
manifestation. Because painting is visual, it is necessarily the reflection of
external rather than psychological conditions. Every pictorial work must possess
this momentary and eternal value that enables it to endure beyond the epoch
of its creation.

If pictorial expression has changed, it is because modern life has necessitated
it. The existence of modern creative people is much more intense and more
complex than that of people in earlier centuries. The thing that is imagined is
less fixed, the object exposes itself less than it did formerly. When one crosses
a landscape by automobile or express train, it becomes fragmented; it loses in
descriptive value but gains in synthetic value. The view through the door of
the railroad car or the automobile windshield, in combination with the speed,
has altered the habitual look of things. A modern man registers a hundred times
niore sensory impressions than an eighteenth-century artist; so much so that
our language, for example, is full of diminutives and abbreviations. The com-
pression of the modern picture, its variety, its breaking up of forms, are the
result of all this. It is certain that the evolution of the means of locomotion
and their speed have a great deal to do with the new way of seeing. Many
superficial people raise the cry 'anarchy' in front of these pictures because they
cannot follow the whole evolution of contemporary life that painting records.
They believe that painting has abruptly broken the chain of continuity, when,
On the contrary, it has never been so truly realistic, so firmly attached to its
own period as it is today. A kind of painting that is realistic in the highest
se nse is beginning to appear, and it is here to stay.

A new criterion has appeared in response to a new state of things. Innumerable
Samples of rupture and change crop up unexpectedly in our visual awareness.



158 The Idea of the Modern World

I will choose the most striking examples. The advertising billboard, dictated by
modern commercial needs, that brutally cuts across a landscape is one of the
things that has most infuriated so-called men of . . . good taste. [. . .]
* * *

In spite of this resistance, the old-fashioned costume of the towns has had to
evolve with everything else. The black suit, which contrasts with the bright
feminine outfits at fashionable gatherings, is a clear manifestation of an evolution
in taste. Black and white resound and clash, and the visual effect of present-day
fashionable parties is the exact opposite of the effect that similar social gatherings
in the eighteenth century, for example, would have produced. The dress of that
period was all in the same tones, the whole aspect was more decorative, less
strongly contrasted, and more uniform.

Evolution notwithstanding, the average bourgeois has retained his ideas of
tone on tone, the decorative concept. The red parlor, the yellow bedroom, will,
especially in the provinces, continue to be the last word in good form for a
long time. Contrast has always frightened peaceful and satisfied people; they
eliminate it from their lives as much as possible, and as they are disagreeably
startled by the dissonances of some billboard or other, so their lives are organized
to avoid all such uncouth contact. This milieu is the last one an artist should
frequent; truth is shrouded and feared; all that remains is manners, from which
an artist can seek in vain to learn something.

In earlier periods, the utilization of contrasts could never be fully exploited
for several reasons. First, the necessity for strict subservience to a subject that
had to have a sentimental value.

Never, until the impressionists, had painting been able to shake off the spell
of literature. Consequently, the utilization of plastic contrasts had to be diluted
by the need to tell a story, which painters have now recognized as completely
unnecessary.

From the day the impressionists liberated painting, the modern picture set
out at once to structure itself on contrasts; instead of submitting to a subject,
the painter makes an insertion and uses a subject in the service of purely plastic
means. All the artists who have shocked public opinion in the last few years
have always sacrificed the subject to the pictorial effect. [ . . . ]

This liberation enables the contemporary painter to use these means in dealing
with the new visual state that I have just described. He must prepare himself
in order to confer a maximum of plastic effect on means that have not yet been
so used. He must not become an imitator of the new visual objectivity, but be
a sensibility completely subject to the new state of things.

He will not be original just because he will have broken up an object or placed
a red or yellow square in the middle of his canvas; he will be original by virtue
of the fact that he has caught the creative spirit of these external manifestations.

As soon as one admits that only realism in conception is capable of realizing,
in the most plastic sense of the word, these new effects of contrast, one must
abandon visual realism and concentrate all the plastic means toward a specific goal.

Composition takes precedence over all else; to obtain their maximum express-
iveness, lines, forms, and colors must be employed with the utmost possible



Ha Modernity 159

logic. It is the logical spirit that will achieve the greatest result, and by the
logical spirit in art, I mean the power to order one's sensibility and to
concentrate one's means in order to yield the maximum effect in the result.

It is true that if I look at objects in their surroundings, in the real atmosphere,
J do not perceive any line bounding the zones of color, of course; but this
belongs to the realm of visual realism and not to the wholly modern one
of realism in conception. To try deliberately to eliminate specific means of
expression such as outlines and forms except for their significance in terms of
color is childish and retrograde. The modern picture can have lasting value and
escape death not by excluding some means of expression because of a prejudice
for one alone but, on the contrary, by concentrating all the possible means of
plastic expression on a specific goal. Modern painters have understood that;
before them, a drawing had one special value, and a painting had another. From
now on, everything is brought together, in order to attain essential variety along
with maximum realism. A painter who calls himself modern, and who rightly
considers perspective and sentimental value to be negative methods, must be
able to replace them in his pictures with something other than, for instance, an
unending harmony of pure tones.
 * *

By employing all the pictorial means of expression, composition through
multiplicative contrast not only allows a greater range of realistic experience,
but also ensures variety; in fact, instead of opposing two means of expression
in an immediate cumulative relationship, you compose a picture so that groups
pi similar forms are opposed by other contrary groupings. If you distribute your
color in the same way, that is, by adding similar tones, coloring each of these
groupings of forms in contrast with the tones of an equivalent addition, you
obtain collective sources of tones, lines, and colors acting against other contrary
and dissonant sources. Contrast = dissonance, and hence a maximum expressive
effect. I will take as an example a commonplace subject: the visual effect of
curled and round puffs of smoke rising between houses. You want to convey
their plastic value. Here you have the best example on which to apply research
into multiplicative intensities. Concentrate your curves with the greatest possible
variety without breaking up their mass; frame them by means of the hard, dry
relationship of the surfaces of the houses, dead surfaces that will acquire
movement by being colored in contrast to the central mass and being opposed
by live forms; you will obtain a maximum effect.

This theory is not an abstraction but is formulated according to observations
of natural effects that are verified every day. I purposely did not take a so-called
Modern subject because I do not know what is an ancient or modern subject;
all I know is what is a new interpretation. But locomotives, automobiles, if you
insist, advertising billboards, are all good for the application of a form of
Movements; all this research comes, as I have said, from the modern environ-
ment. But you can advantageously substitute the most banal, worn-out subject,
like a nude in a studio and a thousand others, for locomotives and other modern
engines that are difficult to pose in one's studio. All that is method; the only
interesting thing is how it is used.



160 The Idea of the Modern World



II a Modernity 161



12 Henri Gaudier-Brzeska (1891-1915)
'Gaudier-Brzeska Vortex' and 'Vortex
Gaudier-Brzeska (Written from the Trenches)'

French by birth, Gaudier lived in England from the end of 1910, first being peripherally
associated with the journal Rhythm, and then with the Vorticist group around Wyndham
Lewis. Both texts reprinted here are marked by a rejection of the Greek/classical
tradition in favour of a primitivist directness of expression. Intellectually both are marked
by Bergson and Nietzsche. The first essay was published in Blast in June 1914, before
the outbreak of war; the second, in effect a letter from the Front, was published in
Blast 2 in autumn 1915, after Gaudier-Brzeska's death in action.

Gaudier-Brzeska Vortex

Sculptural energy is the mountain.

Sculptural feeling is the appreciation of masses in relation.

Sculptural ability is the defining of these masses by planes.

The PALEOLITHIC VORTEX resulted in the decoration of the Dordogne
caverns.

Early stone-age man disputed the earth with animals.

His livelihood depended on the hazards of the hunt - his greatest victory the
domestication of a few species.

Out of the minds primordially preoccupied with animals Fonts-de-Gaume
gained its procession of horses carved in the rock. The driving power was life
in the absolute - the plastic expression the fruitful sphere.

The sphere is thrown through space, it is the soul and object of the vortex -

The intensity of existence had revealed to man a truth of form - his manhood
was strained to the highest potential - his energy brutal - HIS OPULENT
MATURITY WAS CONVEX.

The acute fight subsided at the birth of the three primary civilizations. It
always retained more intensity East.

The HAMITE VORTEX of Egypt, the land of plenty -

Man succeeded in his far reaching speculations - Honour to the divinity!

Religion pushed him to the use of the VERTICAL which inspires awe. His
gods were self made, he built them in his image, and RETAINED AS MUCH
OF THE SPHERE AS COULD ROUND THE SHARPNESS OF THE
PARALLELOGRAM.

He preferred the pyramid to the mastaba.

The fair Greek felt this influence across the middle sea.

The fair Greek saw himself only. HE petrified his own semblance.

HIS SCULPTURE WAS DERIVATIVE his feeling for form secondary. The
absence of direct energy lasted for a thousand years.

The Indians felt the hamitic influence through Greek spectacles. Their
extreme temperament inclined towards asceticism, admiration of non-desire as
a balance against abuse produced a kind of sculpture without new form
perception - and which is the result of the peculiar.



Yortex of Blackness and Silence

PLASTIC SOUL IS INTENSITY OF LIFE BURSTING THE PLANE.

The Germanic barbarians were verily whirled by the mysterious need of
acquiring new arable lands. They moved restlessly, like strong oxen stampeding.

The SEMITIC VORTEX was the lust of war. The men of Elam, of Assur,
f Bebel and the Kheta, the men of Armenia and those of Canaan had to slay
each other cruelly for the possession of fertile valleys. Their gods sent them
the vertical direction, the earth, the SPHERE.

They elevated the sphere in a splendid squatness and created the HORIZON-
TAL.

From Sargon to Amir-nasir-pal men built man-headed bulls in horizontal
flight-walk. Men flayed their captives alive and erected howling lions: THE
ELONGATED HORIZONTAL SPHERE BUTTRESSED ON FOUR COL-
UMNS, and their kingdoms disappeared.

Christ flourished and perished in Yudah.

Christianity gained Africa, and from the seaports of the Mediterranean it won
the Roman Empire.

The stampeding Franks came into violent contact with it as well as the
Greco-Roman tradition.

They were swamped by the remote reflections of the two vortices of the West.

Gothic sculpture was but a faint echo of the HAMITO-SEMITIC energies
through Roman traditions, and it lasted half a thousand years, and it wilfully
divagated again into the Greek derivation from the land of Amen-Ra.

VORTEX OF A VORTEX!!

VORTEX IS THE POINT ONE AND INDIVISIBLE!

VORTEX IS ENERGY! and it gave forth SOLID EXCREMENTS in the
quattro e cinque cento, LIQUID until the seventeenth century, GASES whistle
till now. THIS is the history of form value in the West until the FALL OF
IMPRESSIONISM.

The black-haired men who wandered through the pass of Khotan into the
valley of the YELLOW RIVER lived peacefully tilling their lands, and they
grew prosperous.

Their paleolithic feeling was intensified. As gods they had themselves in the
persons of their human ancestors - and of the spirits of the horse and of the
land and the grain.

THE SPHERE SWAYED.

THE VORTEX WAS ABSOLUTE.

The Shang and Chow dynasties produced the convex bronze vases.

The features of Tao-t'ie were inscribed inside of the square with the rounded
corners - the centuple spherical frog presided over the inverted truncated cone
that is the bronze war drum.

THE VORTEX WAS INTENSE MATURITY. Maturity is fecundity - they
grew numerous and it lasted for six thousand years.



162 The Idea of the Modern World

The force relapsed and they accumulated wealth, forsook their work, and after
losing their form-understanding through the Han and T'ang dynasties, they
founded the Ming and found artistic ruin and sterility.

THE SPHERE LOST SIGNIFICANCE AND THEY ADMIRED THEM-
SELVES.

During their great period off-shoots from their race had landed on another
continent. After many wanderings some tribes settled on the highlands of
Yukatan and Mexico.

When the Ming were losing their conception, these neo-Mongols had a
flourishing state. Through the strain of warfare they submitted the Chinese
sphere to horizontal treatment much as the Semites had done. Their cruel nature
and temperament supplied them with a stimulant: THE VORTEX OF DE-
STRUCTION.

Besides these highly developed peoples there lived on the world other races
inhabiting Africa and the Ocean islands.

When we first knew them they were very near the paleolithic stage. Though
they were not so much dependent upon animals their expenditure of energy
was wide, for they began to till the land and practice crafts rationally, and they
fell into contemplation before their sex: the site of their great energy: THEIR
CONVEX MATURITY.

They pulled the sphere lengthways and made the cylinder, this is the
VORTEX OF FECUNDITY, and it has left us the masterpieces that are known
as love charms.

The soil was hard, material difficult to win from nature, storms frequent, as
also fevers and other epidemics. They got frightened: This is the VORTEX OF
FEAR, its mass is the POINTED CONE, its masterpieces the fetishes.

And WE the moderns: Epstein, Brancusi, Archipenko, Dunikowski, Modiglia-
ni, and myself, through the incessant struggle in the complex city, have likewise
to spend much energy.

The knowledge of our civilization embraces the world, we have mastered the
elements.

We have been influenced by what we liked most, each according to his own
individuality, we have crystallized the sphere into the cube, we have made a
combination of all the possible shaped masses - concentrating them to express
our abstract thoughts of conscious superiority.

Will and consciousness are our

VORTEX.



Vortex Gaudier-Brzeska

(WRITTEN FROM THE TRENCHES)

I HAVE BEEN FIGHTING FOR TWO MONTHS and I can now gauge the
intensity of life.

HUMAN MASSES teem and move, are destroyed and crop up again.

HORSES are worn out in three weeks, die by the roadside.



II a Modernity 163

DOGS wander, are destroyed, and others come along.

WITH ALL THE DESTRUCTION that works around us NOTHING IS
CHANGED, EVEN SUPERFICIALLY. LIFE IS THE SAME STRENGTH .
fHE MOVING AGENT THAT PERMITS THE SMALL INDIVIDUAL
f ASSERT HIMSELF.

i THE BURSTING SHELLS, the volleys, wire entanglements, projectors,
Rotors, the chaos of battle DO NOT ALTER IN THE LEAST the outlines
f the hill we are besieging. A company of PARTRIDGES scuttle along before
our verv trench.

v IT WOULD BE FOLLY TO SEEK ARTISTIC EMOTIONS AMID
fTHESE LITTLE WORKS OF OURS.

-THIS PALTRY MECHANISM, WHICH SERVES AS A PURGE TO
0VER-NUMEROUS HUMANITY.
I THIS WAR IS A GREAT REMEDY.

e IN THE INDIVIDUAL IT KILLS ARROGANCE, SELF-ESTEEM,
#RIDE.

^ IT TAKES AWAY FROM THE MASSES NUMBERS UPON NUMBERS
OF UNIMPORTANT UNITS, WHOSE ECONOMIC ACTIVITIES
BECOME NOXIOUS AS THE RECENT TRADES CRISES HAVE SHOWN

& MY VIEWS ON SCULPTURE REMAIN ABSOLUTELY THE SAME .
PIT IS THE VORTEX OF WILL, OF DECISION, THAT BEGINS.
i I SHALL DERIVE MY EMOTIONS SOLELY FROM THE ARRANGE-
MENT OF SURFACES, I shall present my emotions by the ARRANGEMENT
m MY SURFACES, THE PLANES AND LINES BY WHICH THEY ARE
EFINED.

^Just as this hill where the Germans are solidly entrenched, gives me a nasty
^feeling, solely because its gentle slopes are broken up by earth-works, which
throw long shadows at sunset. Just so shall I get feeling, of whatsoever definition,
from a statue ACCORDING TO ITS SLOPES, varied to infinity.
- I have made an experiment. Two days ago I pinched from an enemy a mauser
*ifle. Its heavy unwieldy shape swamped me with a powerful IMAGE of brutality.

I was in doubt for a long time whether it pleased or displeased me.

I found that I did not like it.

I broke the butt off and with my knife I carved in it a design, through which
'I tried to express a gentler order of feeling, which I preferred.

BUT I WILL EMPHASIZE that MY DESIGN got its effect (just as the
gun had) FROM A VERY SIMPLE COMPOSITION OF LINES AND
PLANES.



13 Karl Kraus (1874-1936) from 'In These Great Times'

Kraus lived and worked in Vienna. He was an author and playwright, but is best known
% the journal Die Fackel (The Torch) which he published virtually single-handed from
1899 to 1936, the time of the Anschluss, His linguistic facility and obsessive attention



164 The Idea of the Modern World

to detail were legendary, as were his sustained attacks on the hypocrisy of the
institutions of Austrian life. On the outbreak of the First World War, Kraus fell silent
feeling that a hasty response would be subject to misunderstanding in the charge^
atmosphere of the time. His silence was broken by the address In dieser grossen Zeif
read on 19 November 1914 in Vienna and published in Die Fackel the following month'
The present extract is taken from the opening section of the translation in H. Zohn (ed.)'
In These Great Times: A Kari Kraus Reader, Manchester, 1976/84. (The 'manifesto' to
which Kraus refers was the proclamation of war, To My Peoples', delivered by the
Emperor Franz Josef in August 1914.)

In these great times which I knew when they were this small; which will become
small again, provided they have time left for it; and which, because in the realm
of organic growth no such transformation is possible, we had better call fat
times and, truly, hard times as well; in these times in which things are happening
that could not be imagined and in which what can no longer be imagined must
happen, for if one could imagine it, it would not happen; in these serious times
which have died laughing at the thought that they might become serious; which,
surprised by their own tragedy, are reaching for diversion and, catching them-
selves redhanded, are groping for words; in these loud times which boom with
the horrible symphony of actions which produce reports and of reports which
cause actions: in these times you should not expect any words of my own from
me - none but these words which barely manage to prevent silence from being
misinterpreted. Respect for the immutability, the subordination of language
before this misfortune is too deeply rooted in me. In the realm of poverty of
imagination where people die of spiritual famine without feeling spiritual hunger,
where pens are dipped in blood and swords in ink, that which is not thought
must be done, but that which is only thought is unutterable. Expect no words
of my own from me. Nor would I be able to say anything new, for in the room
in which one writes there is such noise, and at this time one should not
determine whether it comes from animals, from children, or merely from
mortars. He who encourages deeds with words desecrates words and deeds and
is doubly despicable. This occupation is not extinct. Those who now have
nothing to say because actions are speaking continue to talk. Let him who has
something to say come forward and be silent! Nor may I bring out old words
as long as deeds are committed that are new to us and spectators say that they
were not to be expected of them. My words were able to drown out rotary
presses, and if these were not brought to a standstill, this is no reflection on
my words. Even the greater machine has not managed to do it, and an ear that
hears the trumpets of the day. All that blood has not made the muck of life
congeal in fright, nor has it made printer's ink blanch. The maw, rather,
swallowed up the many swords, and we looked only at the maw and measured
greatness only by the maw. And 'gold for iron 1 fell from the altar into the
operetta, bombing was a music-hall song, and fifteen thousand prisoners were
put in a special edition of the newspaper which a soubrette read from the stage
so that a librettist might take a curtain call. For me (the insatiable one who
does not have sacrifices enough), the line commanded by fate has not been
reached. For me it is war only if only those who are unfit are sent off to it-



Ha Modernity 165

^otherwise my peace has no peace; I secretly prepare for the great times and

&ink thoughts that I can tell only to the Good Lord and not to the good state

\-ffiich now does not permit me to tell it that it is too tolerant. For if the state

jpes not now have the idea of choking off the so-called freedom of the press,

phich does not notice a few white spots, then it never will; and if I were to

~Ut this into its head, the state would do violence to the idea, and my text

tfould be the only victim. So I shall have to wait, though I am the only Austrian

w ho cannot wait but would like to see the end of the world replaced by a simple

aU to-da-fe. The idea which I should like to put into the heads of the actual

holders of nominal power is only an idee fixe of mine. But an unstable state of

Ownership, that of a state and of a civilized world, is saved by such fixed ideas.

{i general is not believed when he talks about the importance of swamps - until

one day Europe is viewed only as the surroundings of swamps. Of a terrain I

$ee only the swamps, of their depth I see only the surface, of a situation I see

Inly its manifestations, of these I see only a reflection, and even of that I see

JUrily the outlines. And sometimes an intonation or even a hallucination suffices

iSe. Do me the favor, just for fun, of following me to the surface of this

Stoblem-deep world which was not created until it became cultured, which

icvolves around its own axis and wishes the sun revolved around it.

^ Above that exalted manifesto, that prose poem which initiated a time full of

Miction, the only poem this time has produced till now, above the most humane

t|ister which the street was able to offer our eyes there hangs the head of a

Vaudeville comedian, larger than life. Next to it a manufacturer of rubber heels

sglesecrates the mystery of creation by saying of a kicking infant that this is the

fjgiily way a human being ought to come into the world, using this particular

fSrand. If I am of the opinion that, things being the way they are, it would be

fetter if people did not come into the world at all, I am an eccentric. But if I

flaintain that under such circumstances no one will come into the world in the

fiiture and that at a later date boot-heels may come into the world but without

the persons to go with them, because they were not able to keep pace with their

#wn development and stayed behind as the last obstacle to their progress - if

I maintain this sort of thing, I am a fool who deduces the whole condition from

ft symptom, the plague from a bubo. If I were not a fool but an educated man,

I would draw such bold conclusions from a bacillus and not from a bubo, and

People would believe me. How foolish to say that one should confiscate the

bubo to rid oneself of the plague! But I am truly of the opinion that in this

time, however we may call it or evaluate it, whether it is out of joint or already

Set right, whether it is accumulating murder and rottenness before the eyes of

 Hamlet or is already becoming ripe for the arm of a Fortinbras - that in its

condition the root lies at the surface. This sort of thing can be made clear by

a great confusion, and what was once paradoxical is now confirmed by the great

times. Since I am neither a politician nor his half-brother, an esthete, I would

n ot dream of denying the necessity of anything that is happening or of

c omplaining that mankind does not know how to die in beauty. [. . .] Mankind

I Consists of customers. Behind flags and flames, heroes and helpers, behind all

fatherlands an altar has been erected at which pious science wrings its hands:



166 The idea of the Modern World

i

God created the consumer! Yet God did not create the consumer that he might
prosper on earth, for the consumer was created naked and becomes a dealer
only when he sells clothes. The necessity to eat in order to live cannot be
disputed philosophically, though the public nature of this function evidences an
ineradicable lack of modesty. Culture is the tacit agreement to let the means of
subsistence disappear behind the purpose of existence. Civilization is the sub-
ordination of the latter to the former. [ . . . ]



14 Kasimir Malevich (1878-1935) From Cubism and
Futurism to Suprematism: The New Realism in
Painting

Malevich rapidly assimilated Western European avant-garde art in the decade before
the First World War: Impressionism, Primitivism, Cubism, Futurism. After the severing
of links to the West by the outbreak of war in the autumn of 1914, Malevich launched
Suprematism at '0.10 The Last Futurist Exhibition' in Petrograd in December 1915. A
pamphlet to accompany the exhibition was published there, with the title From Cubism
to Suprematism in Art, to New Realism in Painting, to Absolute Creation. It was
republished in expanded form as From Cubism and Futurism to Suprematism: The New
Realism in Painting in Moscow in 1916. The present translation is taken from T.
Anderson (ed.), K. S. Malevich: Essays on Art 1915-1933, vol. 1, Copenhagen, 1969.

Only with the disappearance of a habit of mind which sees in pictures little
corners of nature, madonnas and shameless Venuses, shall we witness a work of
pure, living art.

I have transformed myself in the zero of form and dragged myself out of the

rubbish-filled pool of Academic art.

I have destroyed the ring of the horizon and escaped from the circle of things,
from the horizon-ring which confines the artist and the forms of nature.

This accursed ring, which opens up newer and newer prospects, leads the
artist away from the target of destruction.

And only a cowardly consciousness and meagre creative powers in an artist
are deceived by this fraud and base their art on the forms of nature, afraid of
losing the foundation on which the savage and the academy have based their art.

To reproduce beloved objects and little corners of nature is just like a thief
being enraptured by his legs in irons.

Only dull and impotent artists screen their work with sincerity.
In art there is a need for truth, not sincerity.

Things have disappeared like smoke; to gam the new artistic culture, art ap-
proaches creation as an end in itself and domination over the forms of nature.



Ha Modernity 167

The Art of the Savage and its Principles

The savage was the first to found the principle of naturalism: fashioning his
drawings out of a dot and five little sticks, he tried to recreate his own image.

This first attempt laid the basis for conscious imitation of the forms of nature.

From this arose the aim of approaching the face of nature as closely as
possible.

And all the artist's efforts were directed towards the representation of her
creative forms.

Collective art, or the art of copying, had its origin in the tracing of the
savage's first primitive image.

Collective, because the real man with his subtle range of feelings, psychology
and anatomy had not yet been discovered.

The savage saw neither his external image, nor his inner condition.

His consciousness could only see the shape of a man, animal, etc.

And as his consciousness developed, so the scheme by which he depicted
nature grew more complicated.

The further his consciousness embraced nature, the more complicated his
iwork became and the more his knowledge and ability increased.

His consciousness developed only on one side, the side of nature's creation,
and not on the side of new forms of art.
^ Therefore his primitive pictures cannot be considered as creative work.

The deformities in his pictures are the result of weakness on the technical
side.
,v Technique, like consciousness, was only on the path of its development.

- And his pictures must not be considered as Art.

For inability is not art.

He merely pointed the way to art.

Consequently, the original scheme was a framework, on which the generations
hung newer and newer discoveries made in nature.

And the scheme grew more complicated and achieved its flowering in the
Ancient World and the Renaissance of art.

The masters of these two epochs portrayed man in his complete form, both
inner and outer.

Man was assembled and his inner condition was expressed.

But despite their colossal mastery, they did not complete the savage's idea:

The reflection, as in a mirror, of nature on canvas.

And it is a mistake to believe that their age was the brightest flowering in
art, and that the younger generation must at all costs strive towards this ideal.

Such a concept is false.

It diverts young forces from the contemporary stream of life, thereby demor-
alizing them.

Their bodies fly in aeroplanes, but art and life are covered with the old robes
of Neros and Titians.



168 The Idea of the Modern World

Thus they are unable to see the new beauty of our modern life.
For they live by the beauty of past ages.

So the Realists, Impressionists, Cubism, Futurism and Suprematism were not
understood.

These last-mentioned artists cast off the robes of the past and came out into
contemporary life to find a new beauty.

And I say:

That no torture-chamber of the Academies can withstand the passage of time.

Forms move and are born, and we make newer and newer discoveries.

And what I reveal to you, do not conceal.

And it is absurd to force our age into the old forms of time past.
* * *

In copying or tracing the forms of nature we have fed our consciousness with
a false understanding of art.

The work of the Primitives has been taken for creation.

That of the Classics - also creation. [ . . . ]

The transferring of real objects onto canvas is the art of skilful reproduction,
and only that.

And between the art of creating and the art of copying there is a great
difference. [. . .]

The artist can be a creator only when the forms in his picture have nothing
in common with nature.

For art is the ability to construct, not on the interrelation of form and colour,
and not on an aesthetic basis of beauty in composition, but on the basis of weight,
speed and the direction of movement.

Forms must be given life and the right to individual existence. [ . . . ]

An artist is under the obligation to be a free creator, but not a freebooter.
An artist is given talent in order that he may give to life his share of creation
and increase the flow of life. Only in absolute creation will he acquire his right.

And this is possible when we free all our art from vulgar subject-matter and
teach our consciousness to see everything in nature not as real forms and objects,
but as material masses from which forms must be made, which have nothing
in common with nature.

Thus the habit of seeing Madonnas and Venuses in pictures, with fat, playful
cupids, will disappear.

Colour and texture in painting are ends in themselves. They are the essence
of painting, but this essence has always been destroyed by the subject.

And if the masters of the Renaissance had discovered the surface of painting,
it would have been much more exalted and valuable than any Madonna or
Giaconda.



Ha Modernity 169

And any carved-out pentagon or hexagon would have been a greater work of
sculpture than the Venus de Milo or David.

* * *

Academic realists - they are the last descendants of the savage.

It is they who go about in the worn-out robes of the past.

And again, as before, some have thrown off this greasy robe.

And given the rag-merchant from the Academy a slap in the face with their
declaration of Futurism.

They began with a mighty movement to beat on the consciousness, like nails
in a stone wall.

To pull you out of the catacombs into the speed of our time.

I affirm that whoever has not trod the path of Futurism as the exponent of
modern life, is condemned to crawl for ever among the ancient graves and feed
on the crusts of the past.

Futurism opened the 'new' in modern life: the beauty of speed.

And through speed we move more swiftly.

And we who only yesterday were Futurists, arrived through speed at new
forms, at new relationships with nature and things.

n We arrived at Suprematism, leaving Futurism as a loop-hole through which
those left behind will pass.

* We have abandoned Futurism; and we, the most daring, have spat on the altar
of its art.

I But can cowards spit on their idols.
- Like we did yesterday!!!

I tell you, you will not see the new beauty and the truth, until you make up
your minds to spit. [. . .]

We did not renounce Futurism because it was languishing, and its end was
approaching. No. The beauty of speed which it discovered is eternal and the
new will still be revealed to many.

As we run to our goal through the speed of Futurism, thought moves more
swiftly, and whoever finds himself in Futurism is nearer to this aim and further
from the past.

And your lack of understanding is quite natural. How can a man who always
rides in a gig understand the experiences and impressions of one who travels
l n an express, or flies through the air?

The Academy is a mouldy vault, in which art flagellates itself.

Huge wars, great inventions, conquest of the air, speed of travel, telephones,
telegraphs, dreadnoughts - the realm of electricity.

But our young artists paint Neros and half-naked Roman warriors.

All honour to the Futurists, who forbade the painting of female hams, the
Painting of portraits and guitars in moonlight.



170 The idea of the Modern World

They took an enormous step forward, they gave up meat and glorified the
machine.

But meat and the machine are the muscles of life.
Both are the bodies in which life moves.

Here two worlds have collided.

The world of meat and the world of iron.

Both forms are the organs of utilitarian reason.

And the relationship of the artist to the forms which things take in life has
to be explained.

Until now the artist always pursued the thing.

Thus the new Futurism pursues the machine of to-day's speed.

These are both kinds of art: the old and the new, Futurism, are behind the
running forms.

And the question arises: will this aim in painting justify its existence?

No!

Because in pursuing the form of aeroplanes or automobiles, we shall always
be anticipating new cast-off forms of technical life . . .

And secondly:

In pursuing the form of things, we cannot discover painting as an end in
itself, the way to direct creation.

Painting will remain the means of reproducing this or that condition of the
forms of life.

But the Futurists forbade the depiction of nakedness not for the sake of giving
freedom to painting or words to act as ends in themselves. But because of the
change in the technical side of life.

The new life of iron and the machine, the roar of automobiles, the glitter of
electric lights, the whirring of propellers, have awoken the soul, which was
stifling in the catacombs of ancient reason and has emerged on the roads woven
between earth and sky.

If all artists could see the crossroads of these celestial paths, if they could
comprehend these monstrous runways and the weaving of our bodies with the
clouds in the sky, then they would not paint chrysanthemums.

The dynamic of movement has directed thought to produce the dynamic of
plastic painting.

But the efforts of the Futurists to produce purely plastic painting as such,
were not crowned with success.

They could not abandon subject-matter, which would have made their task easier.

When they had driven reason halfway off the surface of the picture (the old
callouse of habit that sees everything naturalistically), they were able to make
a picture of the new life, of new things, but only this.

In the depiction of movement, the wholeness of things vanished as their
flashing particles hid themselves among other running bodies.



II a Modernity 171

And in constructing the parts of the running objects, they tried to depict only
t he impression of movement.

But in order to depict the movement of modern life, one must operate with
its forms.

Which made the arrival of painting at its goal more difficult.

But however it was done, consciously or unconsciously, for the sake of
movement, or for the sake of depicting impressions, the wholeness of things
was violated.

And in this breaking-up and violation of wholeness lay the hidden meaning
which the naturalistic aim had concealed.

The aim underlying this destruction was not primarily that of depicting the
movement of things, but that of their destruction for the sake of the pure essence
of painting; that is, towards an approach to non-objective creation. [. . .]

Having overthrown reason, the Futurists proclaimed intuition as the subcon-
scious.

.: However, they created their pictures not from the subconscious forms of
intuition, but employed the forms of utilitarian reason. [ . . . ]

The intuitive, it seems to me, should reveal itself in forms which are
unconscious and without response.

i I consider that it was necessary to understand the intuitive in art as the aim
of our selective feeling towards objects. And it followed a purely conscious path,
decisively forcing its way through the artist.

It appears as two levels of consciousness fighting between themselves.

But the consciousness, accustomed to the training of utilitarian reason, could
not accord with the sense which led to the destruction of the world of objects.

The artist did not understand this aim, and, submitting to this sense, betrayed
reason and disfigured the form.

Creation by utilitarian reason has a specific purpose.
''; But intuitive creation has no utilitarian purpose. Until now we have had no
such manifestation of Intuition in art.

In art all pictures emerge from creative forms of a utilitarian order. All the
naturalists' pictures have the same form as in nature.

The intuitive form should emerge from nothing.

In the same way that Reason, which creates things for everyday life, takes
them from nothing and perfects them. [. . .]

The artist should now know what, and why, things happen in his pictures.

Formerly he lived by some kind of mood. He awaited the rising of the moon,
twilight, put green shades on his lamps, and this all attuned his mood like a violin.

But when asked why this face was crooked, or green, he could not give an
e *act answer.

4 I want it so, I like it like that . . .'

In the end this desire was ascribed to intuitive will.



172 The Idea of the Modern World

Consequently the intuitive feeling did not speak clearly. And in that case, i ts
condition was not only subconscious, but totally unconscious.

Paintings were a tangle of these concepts. The picture was half real, half
deformed.

Being a painter, I ought to say why in pictures people's faces are painted
green and red.

The picture - paint, colour - lies within our organism. Its outbursts are great
and demanding.

My nervous system is coloured by them.

My brain burns with their colours.

But colour was oppressed by common-sense, was enslaved by it. And the
spirit of colour weakened and died out.

But when it conquered common-sense, then the colours flowed onto the
detested form of real things.

The colours matured, but their form did not mature in the consciousness.

This is why faces and bodies were red, green and blue.

But this was the portent leading to the creation of forms in painting which
were ends in themselves.

Now it is necessary to give the body shape and lend it a living form in real life.

And this will be when forms emerge from the mass of the painting; that is,
they will arise in the same way that utilitarian forms arose.

Such forms will not be copies of living things in life, but will themselves be
a living thing.

A painted surface is a real, living form.

Intuitive feeling is now becoming conscious, no longer is it subconscious.

Or even, rather, the other way round - it was always conscious, only the
artist was unable to interpret its demands.

The forms of Suprematism, the new realism in painting, are already proof of
the construction of forms from nothing, discovered by Intuitive Reason.

In Cubism, the attempt to disfigure the forms of reality and the breaking-up
of objects represent the striving of the will towards the independent life of the
forms which it has created.

Futurist Painting

f . . . ] The Futurists hold the dynamic of three-dimensional form to be of
prime importance in painting.

But in failing to destroy the world of objects, they achieve only the dynamic
of things.

Therefore Futurist paintings and all those of by-gone artists can be reduced
from twenty colours to one, and not lose their impression.

Repin's picture, Ivan the Terrible, could be devoid of colour and still give
us the same impressions of horror as in colour.

The subject will always kill colour and we shall not notice it.



Ha Modernity 173

Then, when the faces painted green and red to a certain extent kill the subject,
ike colour is more noticeable. And colour is that by which a painting lives:
^hich means it is the most important.

,And here I have arrived at pure colour forms.

And Suprematism is the pure art of painting, whose independence cannot be
reduced to a single colour.

The gallop of a horse can be depicted with a pencil of one colour.

But it is impossible to depict the movement of red, green or blue masses with
a pencil.

- Painters should abandon subject and objects if they wish to be pure painters.

This demand for the dynamic of plastic painting indicates the need for the
mass in painting to emerge from the object and arrive at the domination of
form as an end in itself over content and things, at non-objective Suprematism

- at the new realism in art, at absolute creation.

Futurism approaches the dynamism of painting through the academism of
form.
And the path of both forces leads to Suprematism in painting.

If we examine the art of Cubism, and ask what energy in objects roused the
intuitive feeling to activity, we shall see that the energy in painting was
lecbndary.

The very object itself, together with its essence, purpose, sense, or the fullness
of its presentation, the Cubists thought, were also unnecessary.

Until now it seemed that the beauty of objects was preserved when they were
transferred whole into the picture, their essence being revealed especially in the
crudeness of the line, or in its simplification.

But it transpired that one more situation of objects was discovered, which
reveals to us the new beauty.

Namely: intuitive feeling discovered in objects the energy from the dissonance
Obtained in the collision of two opposed forms.

Objects embody a mass of moments in time. Their forms are various, and
consequently their depictions are various.

All these aspects of time in things and their anatomy - the rings of a tree -
have become more important than their essence and meaning.

And these new situations were adopted by the Cubists as a means of
constructing pictures.

At the same time these means were so constructed that the unexpected collision
f two forms would provide a dissonance of the greatest force of tension.

And the scale of each form is arbitrary.

Which justifies the appearance of parts of real objects in positions not relating
to nature.

In achieving this new beauty, or simply energy, we have freed ourselves from
the impression of the wholeness of objects.

The millstone round the neck of painting is beginning to crack.



174 The Idea of the Modern World

An object painted according to the principle of Cubism can be considered
finished when its dissonances are exhausted.

Nevertheless, all forms which repeat themselves should be omitted by the
artist as copies.

But if the artist finds little tension in the picture, he is free to take them
from another object.

Consequently in Cubism the principle of the transference of objects falls down,

A picture is made, but the object is not transferred.

Whence this conclusion:

If for thousands of years past the artist has tried to approach the depiction
of an object as closely as possible, to present its essence and meaning, then in
our era of Cubism the artist has destroyed objects together with their meaning,
essence and purpose.

The new picture has sprung from their fragments.

Objects have vanished like smoke, for the sake of the new culture of art.
* * *

There is no more love of little corners, there is no more love for which the
truth of art was betrayed.

The square is not a subconscious form. It is the creation of intuitive reason.

It is the face of the new art.

The square is a living, royal infant.

It is the first step of pure creation in art. Before it, there were naive
deformities and copies of nature.

Our world of art has become new, non-objective, pure.

Everything has vanished, there remains a mass of material, from which the
new forms will be built.

In the art of Suprematism forms will live, like all living forms of nature.

These forms announce that man has gained his equilibrium by arriving from
a state of single reasoning at one of double reasoning.

Utilitarian reasoning and intuitive reasoning.

The new realism in painting is very much realism in painting, for it contains
no realism of mountains, sky, water . , .

Until now there was realism of objects, but not of painted units of colour,
which are constructed so that they depend neither on form, nor on colour, nor
on their position relative to each other.

Each form is free and individual.

Each form is a world.

Any painting surface is more alive than any face from which a pair of eyes
and a grin jut out.

A face painted in a picture gives a pitiful parody of life, and this allusion is
only a reminder of the living.

But a surface lives, it has been born. The grave reminds us of a dead person,
a picture of a living one.

Or on the contrary, a living face, a landscape in nature, reminds us of a
picture, i.e. of something dead.



Ha Modernity 175

This is why it is strange to look at a red or black painted surface.

This is why they snigger and spit at the exhibitions of new movements.

Art and its new aims were always a spittoon.

gut cats grow accustomed to a place and it is difficult to train them to a new

For such people art is absolutely unnecessary. As long as there are pictures
f their grandmother and their favourite little corners of lilac groves.

Everything runs from the past to the future, but everything should live by
the present, for in the future the apple-trees will shed their blossom,
r Tomorrow will wipe out the trace of the present, and you will not catch up
tfith the pace of life.

The mire of the past, like a millstone, will drag you into the slough.

This is why I hate all those who supply you with monuments to the dead.

The Academy and the critics are this millstone. Round your neck are the old
realism and the movement which strives towards the reproduction of living
nature.

They act in the same way as in the times of the Grand Inquisition.

Their aims are laughable, because they want at all costs to force what they
take from nature to live on the canvas.

At the same time as everything is running and breathing, there are their
frozen poses in pictures. And this torture is worse than breaking on the wheel.
Sculptured statues, inspired (which means living), stand in their tracks, posed
in movement.

Is this not torture?
v Setting the soul in marble and then mocking the living.

But your pride is an artist who knows how to torture.

You put birds in a cage also for pleasure.

And for the sake of knowledge you keep animals in zoological gardens.

I am fortunate to have broken out of that torture-chamber of the Inquisition
which is academism.

I have arrived at the surface and can take the dimension of a living body.

But I shall use the dimension from which I shall create the new.

I have released all the birds from the eternal cage, and opened the gates to
the animals in zoological gardens.

May they tear to pieces and devour the remains of your art.

And may the freed bear bathe his body in the ice of the frozen north and
not languish in the aquarium of boiled water in the academic garden.

You may delight in the composition of a painting, but surely composition is
f he sentence of death to a figure condemned by the artist to an eternal pose.

Your delight is the confirmation of this sentence.

The Group of Suprematists: K. Malevteh, I. Pum, M. Men'kov, I. Klyun, K.
fioguslavskaya, and Rozanova, has led the struggle for the freedom of objects from
the obligations of art.

And calls upon the Academy to renounce the inquisition of nature.



176 The Idea of the Modern World

The instrument of torture is idealism and the demands of aesthetic feeling.
The idealisation of the form of man is the mortification of much living sinew.
Aestheticism is the garbage of intuitive feeling.
You want to see pieces of living nature on the hooks of your walls.
Just as Nero admired the torn bodies of people and animals from the zoological
garden.

I say to all: reject love, reject aestheticism, reject the trunks of wisdom, f or
in the new culture your wisdom is laughable and insignificant.

1 have untied the knots of wisdom and set free the consciousness of colour!

Remove from yourselves quickly the hardened skin of centuries, so that you
may catch us up the more easily.

I have overcome the impossible and formed gulfs with my breathing.

You are in the nets of the horizon, like fish!

We, Suprematists, throw open the way to you.

Hurry!
- For tomorrow you will not recognize us.



1IB

Cubism



1 Jean Metzinger (1883-1957) 'Note on Painting 1

The author was a Cubist painter, one of the principal organizers of the public launch of
Cubism at the Salon des Independents in the spring of 1911. His brief essay estab-
fshing Cubism as the decisive modern movement, and in particular Picasso and Braque
as its leaders, had appeared in Paris the previous autumn in Pan, October-November
1910, pp. 649-51. The present translation is taken from Edward Fry (ed.), Cubism,
New York and London, 1966.

Is there any of the most modern works in painting and sculpture that does not
secretly obey the Greek rhythm?

! Nothing, from the Primitives to Cezanne, breaks decisively with the chain of
variations contained in the Hellenic theme. I see today the rebels of yesterday
mechanically prostrating themselves before the bas-relief at Eleusis. Gothics,
Romantics, Impressionists, the old measure has triumphed over your praise-
worthy departures from rhythm; and yet your labours have not been in vain -
they have established in us the foreknowledge of a new and different rhythm.

For us the Greeks invented the human form; we must reinvent it for others.

We are not concerned, here, with a partial 'movement' dealing in accepted
freedoms (those of interpretation, transposition, etc.: half-measures!), but with
a fundamental liberation.

Already there are arising men of courage who know what they are doing -
here are painters: Picasso, Braque, Delaunay, Le Fauconnier. Wholly and only
Painters, they do not illuminate concepts in the manner of the 'nee-primitives';
&ey are too enlightened to believe in the stability of any system, even one
^Ued classical art, and at the same time they recognize in the most novel of
their own creations the triumph of desires that are centuries old. Their reason
holds the balance between the pursuit of the transient and the mania for the
et ernal. While condemning the absurdity of the theoreticians of 'emotion', they
take good care not to drag painting towards purely decorative speculation. When,
*i* order to defeat the deceptiveness of vision, they momentarily impose their
domination on the external world, their understanding remains untouched by
Hegelian superstition.



178 The idea of the Modern World



//



is useless to paint where it is possible to describe.



Fortified with this thought, Picasso unveils to us the very face of painting.

Rejecting every ornamental, anecdotal or symbolic intention, he achieves a
painterly purity hitherto unknown. I am aware of no paintings from the past,
even the finest, that belong to painting as clearly as his.

Picasso does not deny the object, he illuminates it with his intelligence and
feeling. With visual perceptions he combines tactile perceptions. He tests,
understands, organizes: the picture is not to be a transposition or a diagram, in
it we are to contemplate the sensible and living equivalent of an idea, the total
image. Thesis, antithesis, synthesis - the old formula undergoes an energetic
inter-inversion of its first two terms: Picasso confesses himself a realist. Cezanne
showed us forms living in the reality of light, Picasso brings us a material
account of their real life in the mind - he lays out a free, mobile perspective,
from which that ingenious mathematician Maurice Princet has deduced a whole
geometry.

The fine shades neutralize one another round ardent constructions. Picasso
disdains the often brutal technique of the so-called colourists, and brings the
seven colours back to the primordial unity of white.

The abandonment of the burdensome inheritance of dogma; the displacing,
again and again, of the poles of habit; the lyrical negation of axioms; the clever
mixing, again and again, of the successive and the simultaneous: Georges Braque
knows thoroughly the great natural laws that warrant these liberties.

Whether it be a face or a fruit he is painting, the total image radiates in time;
the picture is no longer a dead portion of space. A main volume is physiologically
born of concurrent masses. And this miraculous dynamic process has a fluid
counterpoint in a colour-scheme dependent on the ineluctable two-fold principle
of warm and cold tones.

Braque, joyfully fashioning new plastic signs, commits not a single fault of
taste. Let us not be misled by the word 'new 1 ; without detracting from this
painter's boldness in innovation, I can compare him to Chardin and Lancret: I
can link the daring grace of his art with the genius of our race . . .



2 Guillaume Apollinaire (1880-1918) The Cubists'

The poet and essayist Apollinaire was one of the most influential figures in the Parisian
avant-garde in the first two decades of the twentieth century. He was rapidly established
both as a leading intellectual influence on, and impresario of, Cubism. This essay, whicn
distinguishes Cubism from the Impressionist-Fauvist tradition in terms of its formal ana
monumental qualities, appeared as part of his review of the Salon d'Automne of 191 1-
It was originally published in Paris in L'lntransigeant, 10 October 1911. The present
translation is taken from Breunig, op. cit.

In a tiny room, Room 8, are the works of a few painters known by the name
of cubists. Cubism is not, as is generally thought, the art of painting everything
in the form of cubes.



IIb Cubism 179

^ In 1908, Picasso showed a few paintings in which there were some simply

1g|jfld firmly drawn houses that gave the public the illusion of these cubes, whence

;^e name of our youngest school of painting. This school has already aroused

v&jssionate discussion. Cubism can in no way be considered a systematic doctrine;

ydoes, however, constitute a school, and the painters who make up this school

%ant t0 transform their art by returning to first principles with regard to line

^jnd inspiration, just as the fauves - and many of the cubists were at one time

%uves - returned to first principles with regard to color and composition.

^However, the public, accustomed as it is to the brilliant but practically

Armless daubs of the impressionists, refused to recognize at first glance the

flatness of the formal conceptions of our cubists. People were shocked to see

^contrasts between dark forms and lighted segments, because they were used to

%eing only paintings without shadows. In the monumental appearance of

compositions that go beyond the frivolities of contemporary art, the public has

jefused to see what is really there: a noble and restrained art ready to undertake

the vast subjects for which impressionism had left painters totally unprepared.

ibism is a necessary reaction that will give rise to great works, whether people

$ke it or not. For is it possible, can anyone believe for an instant, that the

Indeniable efforts of these young artists will remain sterile? I will even go

ftirther, and without underestimating the talents of all sorts that are manifest

it the Salon d'Automne, I will say that cubism is the most noble undertaking

% French art today. [. . .]



3 Guillaume Apollinaire (1880-1918) 'On the Subject
" in Modern Painting'

|n this essay Apollinaire defines Cubism as an austere, pure art, offering a pleasure of
ts own as distinct from the pleasure to be derived either from nature or from depictions
of it. He appears to view it as a step on the way to a potentially abstract art. Originaliy
published in Les Soirees de Paris, February 1912. The present translation is taken from
Breunig, op. cit.

The new painters paint works that do not have a real subject, and from now
On, the titles in catalogues will be like names that identify a man without
describing him.

Just as there are some very skinny people named Portly and some very
dark-haired people named Fair. I have seen paintings entitled Solitude that show
Several figures.

Painters sometimes still condescend to use vaguely explanatory words such as
Portrait, landscape, or still-life; but many young painters simply employ the
general term painting.

If painters still observe nature, they no longer imitate it, and they carefully
^void the representation of natural scenes observed directly or reconstituted
through study. Modern art rejects all the means of pleasing that were employed
by the greatest artists of the past: the perfect representation of the human figure,



180 The Idea of the Modern World

voluptuous nudes, carefully finished details, etc. . . . Today's art is austere, and
even the most prudish senator could find nothing to criticize in it.

Indeed, it is well known that one of the reasons cubism has enjoyed such
success in elegant society is precisely this austerity.

Verisimilitude no longer has any importance, for the artist sacrifices everything
to the composition of his picture. The subject no longer counts, or if it counts,
it counts for very little.

If the aim of painting has remained what it always was - namely, to give pleasure
to the eye - the works of the new painters require the viewer to find in them
a different kind of pleasure from the one he can just as easily find in the
spectacle of nature.

An entirely new art is thus being evolved, an art that will be to painting, as
painting has hitherto been envisaged, what music is to literature.

It will be pure painting, just as music is pure literature.

In listening to a concert, the music-lover experiences a joy qualitatively
different from that he experiences in listening to natural sounds, such as the
murmur of a stream, the rushing of a torrent, the whistling of the wind in the
forest, or to the harmonies of a human language founded on reason and not on
aesthetics.

Similarly, the new painters provide their admirers with artistic sensations due
exclusively to the harmony of lights and shades and independent of the subject
depicted in the picture.

We all know the story of Apelles and Protogenes, as it is told by Pliny

It provides an excellent illustration of aesthetic pleasure independent of the
subject treated by the artist and resulting solely from the contrasts I have just
mentioned.

Apelles arrived one day on the island of Rhodes to see the works of
Protogenes, who lived there. Protogenes was not in his studio when Apelles
arrived. Only an old woman was there, keeping watch over a large canvas ready
to be painted. Instead of leaving his name, Apelles drew on the canvas a line
so fine that one could hardly imagine anything more perfect.

On his return, Protogenes noticed the line and, recognizing the hand of
Apelles, drew on top of it another line in a different color, even more subtle
than the first, thus making it appear as if there were three lines on the canvas.

Apelles returned the next day, and the subtlety of the line he drew then made
Protogenes despair. That work was for a long time admired by connoisseurs,
who contemplated it with as much pleasure as if, instead of some barely visible
lines, it had contained representations of gods and goddesses.

The young painters of the avant-garde schools, then, wish to do pure painting.
Theirs is an entirely new plastic art. It is only at its beginnings, and is not yet
as abstract as it would like to be. The new painters are in a sense mathematicians
without knowing it, but they have not yet abandoned nature, and they examine
it patiently.

A Picasso studies an object the way a surgeon dissects a corpse.



IIb Cubism 181

If this art of pure painting succeeds in disengaging itself entirely from the
traditional way of painting, the latter will not necessarily disappear. The
development of music, after all, did not cause the disappearance of the various
literary genres, nor did the acrid taste of tobacco replace the savor of food.



4 Guillaume Apollinaire (1880-1918) The New
Painting: Art Notes'

Here Apollinaire discusses the depiction of space in Cubist painting, claiming (proble-
matically) that it embodies contemporary ideas of a 'fourth dimension'. These were
related to the development of non-Euclidean geometries in the late nineteenth century,
as well as to Einstein's theory of relativity. This latter, though doubtless little understood,
was an object of contemporary fascination, particularly to the avant-garde, in the years
before the First World War. Apollinaire first developed this connection in a lecture
delivered to accompany a Cubist exhibition in November 1911. Originally published in
Les Soirees de Paris, April-May 1912. The present translation is taken from Breunig,
op. cit.

The new painters have been sharply criticized for their preoccupation with
geometry. And yet, geometric figures are the essence of draftsmanship. Geo-
metry, the science that deals with space, its measurement and relationships, has
always been the most basic rule of painting.

Until now, the three dimensions of Euclidean geometry sufficed to still the
anxiety provoked in the souls of great artists by a sense of the infinite - anxiety
that cannot be called scientific, since art and science are two separate domains.

The new painters do not intend to become geometricians, any more than their
predecessors did. But it may be said that geometry is to the plastic arts what
grammar is to the art of writing. Now today's scientists have gone beyond the
three dimensions of Euclidean geometry. Painters have, therefore, very naturally
been led to a preoccupation with those new dimensions of space that are
collectively designated, in the language of modern studios, by the term fourth
dimension.

Without entering into mathematical explanations pertaining to another field,
and confining myself to plastic representation as I see it, I would say that in
the plastic arts the fourth dimension is generated by the three known dimen-
sions: it represents the immensity of space eternalized in all directions at a given
foment. It is space itself, or the dimension of infinity; it is what gives objects
Plasticity. It gives them their just proportion in a given work, where as in Greek
ar t, for example, a kind of mechanical rhythm is constantly destroving propor-
tion.

Greek art had a purely human conception of beauty. It took man as the
Measure of perfection. The art of the new painters takes the infinite universe
a s its ideal, and it is to the fourth dimension alone that we owe this new measure
f perfection that allows the artist to give objects the proportions appropriate
10 the degree of plasticity he wishes them to attain. [. . .]



182 The Idea of the Modern World

Wishing to attain the proportions of the ideal and not limiting themselves to
humanity, the young painters offer us works that are more cerebral than sensual
They are moving further and further away from the old art of optical illusions
and literal proportions, in order to express the grandeur of metaphysical forms



5 Guillaume Apollinaire (1880-1918) from The
Cubist Painters (Chapter VII)

Apoliinaire's book, for which his own principal title was Meditations esthetiques, com-
prised a miscellaneous collections of writings, some dating back to 1905. In Chapter
VII he strives, somewhat misleadingly, to disentangle four distinct tendencies within
Cubism. He also speaks of an inner or essential reality, whose dictates Cubism obeys;
and links the new movement to the tradition of Courbet as well as of Cezanne. Originally
published Paris, 1912. The present extract is taken from Fry, op. cit.

Cubism differs from the old schools of painting in that it is not an art of
imitation, but an art of conception which tends towards creation.

In representing conceptualized reality or creative reality, the painter can give
the effect of three dimensions. He can to a certain extent cube. But not by
simply rendering reality as seen, unless he indulges in trompe-VmU in fore-
shortening, or in perspective, thus distorting the quality of the forms conceived
or created.

I can discriminate four tendencies in cubism. Of these, two are parallel and
pure.

Scientific cubism is one of the pure tendencies. It is the art of painting new
structures out of elements borrowed not from the reality of sight, but from the
reality of insight. All men have a sense of this interior reality. A man does not
have to be cultivated in order to conceive, for example, of a round form.

The geometrical aspect, which made such an impression on those who saw
the first canvases of the scientific cubists, came from the fact that the essential
reality was rendered with great purity, while visual accidents and anecdotes had
been eliminated. The painters who follow this tendency are: Picasso, whose
luminous art also belongs to the other pure tendency of cubism, Georges Braque,
Albert Gleizes, Marie Laurencin and Juan Gris.

Physical cubism is the art of painting new structures with elements borrowed,
for the most part, from visual reality. This art, however, belongs in the cubist
movement because of its constructive discipline. It has a great future as historical
painting. Its social role is very clear, but it is not a pure art. It confuses what
is properly the subject with images. The painter-physicist who created this trend
is Le Fauconnier.

Orphic cubism is the other important trend of the new school. It is the art oi
painting new structures with elements which have not been borrowed from the
visual sphere, but have been created entirely by the artist himself, and been
endowed by him with fullness of reality. The works of the orphic artist must



IIb Cubism 183

; jmultaneously give a pure aesthetic pleasure; a structure which is self-evident;
gpd a sublime meaning, that is, a subject. This is pure art. The light in Picasso's
paintings is based on this conception, which Robert Delaunay is also in the
Igocess of discovering and towards which Fernand Leger, Francis Picabia, and
parcel Duchamp are also directing their energies.

^Instinctive cubism is the art of painting new structures with elements which
h$ not borrowed from visual reality, but are suggested to the artist by instinct
and intuition; it has long tended towards orphism. The instinctive artist lacks
lucidity and an aesthetic doctrine; instinctive cubism includes a large number
pf artists. Born of French impressionism, this movement has now spread all
^ver Europe.

I^Cezanne's last paintings and his watercolours belong to cubism, but Courbet
'j$he father of the new painters; and Andre Derain, whom I propose to discuss
pme other time, was the eldest of his beloved sons, for we find him at the
beginning of the fauvist movement, which was a kind of introduction to cubism,
^jid also at the beginning of this great subjective movement; but it would be
|po difficult today to write discerningly of a man who so wilfully stands apart
Upm everyone and everything.

j;|*The modern school of painting seems to me the most audacious that has ever
appeared. It has posed the question of what is beautiful in itself.
It wants to visualize beauty disengaged from whatever charm man has for

Titian, and until now, no European artist has dared attempt this. The new artists
Remand an ideal beauty, which will be, not merely the proud expression of the
^ecies, but the expression of the universe, in so far as it has been humanized
y light.

VjjprThe new art clothes its creations with a magnificence which surpasses anything
flse conceived by the artists of our time. Ardent in its search for beauty, it is
fioble and energetic, and the reality it brings us is marvellously clear. I love the
#Tt of today because above all else I love the light; for man loves the light more
than anything; it was he who invented fire.



"ft Jacques Riviere (1886-1925) 'Present Tendencies in
Painting'

The author, a well-known critic, offered an extended and critical discussion of various
wchnical aspects of Cubist representation: again underpinned by philosophical idealiz-
^ on of a profound or true reality distinct from mere appearance. Ironically he concludes
*e essay by praising more conservative Cubists while criticizing the more thorough-
going practitioners for pushing their new principles too far. Originally published in the
fevue d'Europe et d'Amerique, Paris, March 1912, pp. 384-406. The present extract
^ taken from Fry, op. cit. (Ellipses are integral to the English version.)

Mne must, I think guard against misinterpreting the uneasiness and the hesitant
Conviction shown by the cubists. I do not see it as a sign that their vocation is
Arbitrary, nor do I conclude from it that their inner torments are all in vain.



184 The Idea of the Modern World



iib Cubism 185



On the contrary, their perplexity makes me believe that there is in their
enterprise something greater than themselves, an overwhelmingly powerful
necessity in the evolution of painting, a truth greater than they can see at fi rst
sight. They are the precursors - clumsy, like all precursors - of a new art which
is henceforth inevitable . . .

My intention is to give the cubists a little more freedom and assurance by
supplying them with the deep reasons for what they are doing. True, this will
not be possible without showing them how badly they have done it so far.

I The Present Needs of Painting

. . . The true purpose of painting is to represent objects as they really are; that
is to say, differently from the way we see them. It tends always to give us their
sensible essence, their presence, this is why the image it forms does not resemble
their appearance . . .

Let us now try to determine more precisely what sorts of transformation the
painter must impose on objects as he sees them in order to express them as
they are. These transformations are both negative and positive: he must eliminate
lighting and perspective, and he must replace them with other and more truly
plastic values.

Why lighting must be eliminated

... It is the sign of a particular instant ... If, therefore, the plastic image
is to reveal the essence and permanence of beings, it must be free of lighting
effects . . .

Lighting is not only a superficial mark; it has the effect of profoundly altering
the forms themselves ... It can therefore be said that lighting prevents things
from appearing as they are . . . Contrary to what is usually thought, sight is a
successive sense; we have to combine many of its perceptions before we can
know a single object well. But the painted image is fixed . . .

What must be put in place of lighting

He [the cubist] has renounced lighting - that is to say, the direction of the
light ~ but not light itself. . . It is enough for him to replace a crude and unjust
distribution of light and shade with a more subtle and more equal distribution;
it is enough for him to divide up between all the surfaces the shade that formerly
accumulated on some; he will use the small portion of shading allotted to each
one by placing it against the nearest edge of some other lit surface, in order to
mark the respective inclination and divergence of the parts of the object.

In this way he will be able to model the object without having recourse to
contrasts, simply by means of summits and declivities. This procedure will have
the advantage of marking not only the separation but also the join of the planes,
instead of a succession of bright salients and black cavities, we shall see slopes
supported on one another in a gentle solidarity. As they will be both separate
and united, the exigencies of multiplicity and those of unity will be satisfied *
one and the same time.



-In short the painter, instead of showing the object as he sees it - that is to
W? dismembered into bright and dark surfaces - will construct it as it is - that
'& to say, in the form of a geometrical volume, set free from lighting effects.
j place of its relief he will put its volume.

"#'
^fhy perspective must be eliminated

fV. Perspective is as accidental a thing as lighting. It is the sign, not of a
larticular moment in time, but of a particular position in space. It indicates
n ot the situation of the objects, but the situation of a spectator . . . Hence, in
flie final analysis, perspective is also the sign of an instant, of the instant when
| certain man is at a certain point.

[f What is more, like lighting, it alters them - it dissimulates their true form.
%, fact, it is a law of opties - that is, a physical law . . .

| Certainly reality shows us these objects mutilated in this way. But in reality
^ can change position: a step to the right and a step to the left complete our
Jsion. The knowledge we have of an object is, as I said before, a complex sum
Iff perceptions. The plastic image does not move: it must be complete at first

---mtt; therefore it must renounce perspective.

 '0hat must be put in place of perspective

50. The elimination of perspective leads quite naturally to this simple rule: the
JJjpbject must always be presented from the most revealing angle . . .
i& fit may even sometimes involve more than one viewpoint: sometimes it will
iplay itself as it is impossible for us to see it, with one side more than we

ever discover in it if we stayed still . . .
Ln object can be represented in a profound and perfect way by one only of
parts, provided this part is the node of all the others ... A house, if one looks
H the point where two roof-planes and two walls meet, is more completely
faown than if one saw the whole facade and nothing else . . .
# Perspective is not the only way of expressing depth; nor, perhaps, is it the
Jfcst way. It does not express depth in itself, directly and explicitly; it can only
^ggest it by outlining profiles . . .

^Fortunately depth is not pure emptiness; one can attribute a certain consist-
ency to it, since it too is occupied - by air. The painter will therefore be able
P express it otherwise than by perspective - by giving it a body; not by
^ggesting it, but by painting it as if it were a material thing. To this end he
%! ma ^ e a ^ tne e dg es of the object into starting-points for gentle planes of
t Jk 0W tnat w *** recede towards the more distant objects. Where one object is
Jr -font of others, this fact will be shown by the fringes of shadow with which
;* contour will be edged; its form will detach itself from the others not as a
*&ple profile on a screen, but because the strokes delimiting it will be flanges,
,$** because from them shadows will flow towards the background, as the waters
Jf^ river fall regularly from a dam. The depth will make its appearance as a
ftlk^k out visible recession accompanying the objects; they will hardly appear
on the same plane, for between them there will insinuate itself a positive




#&lie



186 The Idea of the Modern World

distancing and separation produced by these small dark slopes. They will be
distinguished from each other without needing to alter their real appearance,
simply and solely by the sensible presence, between their images, of the intervals
which separate them in nature. By embodying itself in shadows, space, which
maintains their discreteness in nature, will continue to do so in the picture as well,
This procedure will have the advantage over perspective of marking the
connection as well as the distinction between objects; for the planes which keep
them apart will also form a transition between them. These planes will at one
and the same time repel and bring closer the more distant objects.

II The Mistakes of the Cubists

In spite of appearances, painting has not yet emerged from impressionism. AH
art is impressionist that aims at representing, instead of the things themselves,
the sensation we have of them; instead of reality, the image by which we become
aware of it; instead of the object, the intermediary that brings us into relation
with it . . .

The cubists are destined to take up the greater part of the lesson of Cezanne;
they are going to give back to painting its true aim, which is to reproduce, with
asperity and with respect, objects as they are . . .

First mistake of the cubists

From the truth that the painter must always show enough faces of an object to
suggest its volume, they conclude that he must show all its faces. From the
truth that sometimes it is necessary to add to the visible faces another, which
could not be seen except by changing one's position a little, they conclude that
it is necessary to add all the faces one could see by moving right round the
object and looking at it from above and below.

The absurdity of such an inference does not need any long demonstration.
Let us simply remark that the procedure, as understood by the cubists, arrives
at a result that is the direct opposite of its purpose. If the painter sometimes
shows more faces of an object than one can really see at once, this is in order
to give its volume. But every volume is closed and implies the joining of the
planes to each other; it consists in a certain relationship of all the faces to a
centre. By putting all its faces side by side, the cubists give the object the
appearance of an unfolded map and destroy its volume . , .

Second mistake of the cubists

From the truth that lighting and perspective, which act to subordinate the parts
to the object and the objects to the picture, have to be eliminated, they conclude
that all subordination must be renounced . . . They understand eliminating per-
spective and lighting to mean sacrificing nothing as secondary; they take these two
ideas as equivalent, as interchangeable. They thus condemn themselves never
again to select anything from reality; and since there can be no subordination
without selection, the elements in their pictures relapse into anarchy and form
a mad cacophony which makes us laugh . . .



\ Hb Cubism 187

fltird and perhaps last mistake of the cubists

from the truth that depth must be expressed in genuinely plastic terms - by
Apposing it to have its own consistency - they conclude that it must be
^presented with as much solidity as the objects themselves and by the same
#eans.

./, To each object they add the distance which separates it from neighbouring
objects, in the form of planes as resistant as its own; and in this way they show
'jt, prolonged in all directions and armed with incomprehensible fins. The
intervals between forms - all the empty parts of the picture, all the places in
& occupied by nothing but air, find themselves filled up by a system of walls
and fortifications. These are new, entirely imaginary objects, thrusting in
between the first ones as though to wedge them tight.

Here again the procedure renders itself useless and automatically does away
idth the effects it aims at producing. The purpose of the painter's efforts to
express depth is only to distinguish objects one from another, only to mark
4eir independence in the third dimension. But if he gives to what separates
jkem the same appearance as he gives to each of them, he ceases to represent
fheir separation and tends, on the contrary, to confuse them, to weld them into
&a inexplicable continuum.

fin short, the cubists behave as if they were parodying themselves. By carrying
ifceir newly-found principles to the point of absurdity, they deprive them of
fwsaning. They do away with the volume of the object by their unwillingness
^ leave out any of its elements. They do away with the individual integrity of
^c objects in the picture by trying to keep them intact. They do away with
?*^pth (whose function it is to distinguish one object from another) by trying
;lei represent it solidly . . .

fl is, indeed, impossible not to discern already in the work of some young artists
* more intelligent and penetrating understanding of cubism. I have directed my
criticisms here principally at Picasso, at Braque and at the group formed by
Metzinger, Gleizes, Delaunay, Leger, Herbin, Marcel Duchamp. Le Fauconnier,
iho was a member of it, seems to be freeing himself from it. He may become
 fine painter. But it is chiefly towards Derain and Dufy on the one hand, and
on the other towards La Fresnaye, de Segonzac and Fontenay, that my best
hopes have tended, ever since Picasso, who for a moment seemed near to
Possessing genius, strayed into occult researches where it is impossible to follow
hn. Lastly, I shall set apart Andre Lhote, whose recent works appear to me
to announce, with admirable simplicity, the decisive arrival of the new painting.



? Albert Gleizes (1881-1953) and Jean Metzinger
(1883-1957) from Cubism

jjkth authors were Cubist painters involved in the public launch of Cubism at the Salon

*s Independents in 1911. The present essay was written during the build-up to the

fcfge Section d'Or exhibition in October 1912. Once again 'profound' and 'superficial'



188 The Idea of the Modern World

realisms are distinguished, and a link is traced to Courbet. The view of Cubism advanced
here takes on a marked Nietzschean inflection in its closing passages. Originally
published as Du Cubisme, Paris, 1912; translated into English in 1913. The present
extracts are taken from R. L. Herbert, Modem Artists on Art, New York, 1964.



I

To evaluate the importance of Cubism, we must go back to Gustave Courbet.
This master - after David and Ingres had magnificently brought to an end a
secular idealism - instead of wasting himself in servile repetitions like Delaroche
and the Deverias, inaugurated a yearning for realism which is felt in all modern
work. However, he remained a slave to the worst visual conventions. Unaware
that in order to discover one true relationship it is necessary to sacrifice a
thousand surface appearances, he accepted without the slightest intellectual
control everything his retina communicated. He did not suspect that the visible
world only becomes the real world by the operation of thought, and that the
objects which strike us with the greatest force are not always those whose
existence is richest in plastic truths.

Reality is deeper than academic recipes, and more complex also. Courbet was
like one who contemplates the Ocean for the first time and who, diverted by
the play of the waves, does not think of the depths; we can hardly blame him,
because it is to him that we owe our present joys, so subtle and so powerful.

Edouard Manet marks a higher stage. Ail the same, his realism is still below
Ingres' idealism, and his Olympia is heavy next to the Odalisque. We love him
for having transgressed the decayed rules of composition and for having
diminished the value of anecdote to the extent of painting 'no matter what.' In
that we recognize a precursor, we for whom the beauty of a work resides
expressly in the work, and not in what is only its pretext. Despite many things,
we call Manet a realist less because he represented everyday events than because
he endowed with a radiant reality many potential qualities enclosed in the most
ordinary objects.

After him there was a cleavage. The yearning for realism was split into
superficial realism and profound realism. The former belongs to the Impres-
sionists: Monet, Sisley, etc.; the latter to Cezanne.

The art of the Impressionists involves an absurdity: by diversity of color it
tries to create life, yet its drawing is feeble and worthless. A dress shimmers,
marvelous; forms disappear, atrophied. Here, even more than with Courbet, the
retina predominates over the brain; they were aware of this and, to justify
themselves, gave credit to the incompatibility of the intellectual faculties and
artistic feeling.

However, no energy can thwart the general impulse from which it stems. We
will stop short of considering Impressionism a false start. Imitation is the only
error possible in art; it attacks the law of time, which is Law. Merely by the
freedom with which they let the technique appear, or showed the constituent
elements of a hue, Monet and his disciples helped widen the horizon. They
never tried to make Painting decorative, symbolic, moral, etc. If they were not



iib Cubism 189

great painters, they were painters, and that is enough for us to venerate them.

People have tried to make Cezanne into a sort of genius manque: they say
that he knew admirable things but that he stuttered instead of singing out. The
truth is that he was in bad company. Cezanne is one of the greatest of those
who orient history, and it is inappropriate to compare him to Van Gogh or
Gauguin. He recalls Rembrandt. Like the author of the Pilgrims of Emmaus,
disregarding idle chatter, he plumbed reality with a stubborn eye and, if he did
not himself reach those regions where profound realism merges insensibly into
luminous spirituality, at least he dedicated himself to whoever really wants to
attain a simple, yet prodigious method.

He teaches us how to dominate universal dynamism. He reveals to us the
modifications that supposedly inanimate objects impose on one another. From
him we learn that to change a body's coloration is to corrupt its structure. He
prophesies that the study of primordial volumes will open up unheard-of
horizons. His work, an homogeneous block, stirs under our glance; it contracts,
withdraws, melts, or illuminates itself and proves beyond all doubt that painting
is not - or is no longer - the art of imitating an object by means of lines and
colors, but the art of giving to our instinct a plastic consciousness.

He who understands Cezanne, is close to Cubism. From now on we are
justified in saying that between this school and the previous manifestations there
is only a difference of intensity, and that in order to assure ourselves of the
fact we need only attentively regard the process of this realism which, departing
from Courbet's superficial realism, plunges with Cezanne into profound reality,
growing luminous as it forces the unknowable to retreat.

* * *

At this point we should like to destroy a widespread misapprehension to which
we have already made allusion. Many consider that decorative preoccupations
must govern the spirit of the new painters. Undoubtedly they are ignorant of
the most obvious signs which make decorative work the antithesis of the picture.
The decorative work of art exists only by virtue of its destination', it is animated
only by the relations established between it and the given objects. Essentially
dependent, necessarily incomplete, it must in the first place satisfy the mind so as
not to distract it from the display which justifies and completes it. It is an organ.

A painting carries within itself its raison d'etre. You may take it with impunity
from a church to a drawing-room, from a museum to a study. Essentially
independent, necessarily complete, it need not immediately satisfy the mind: on
the contrary, it should lead it, little by little, toward the imaginative depths where
burns the light of organization. It does not harmonize with this or that ensemble,
*t harmonizes with the totality of things, with the universe: it is an organism.

* * *

II

Dissociating, for convenience, things that we know to be indissolubly united,
let us study, by means of form and color, the integration of the plastic
consciousness.



190 The Idea of the Modern World

To discern a form implies, besides the visual function and the faculty f
moving oneself, a certain development of the mind; to the eyes of most people
the external world is amorphous.

To discern a form is to verify it by a pre-existing idea, an act that no one,
save the man we call an artist, can accomplish without external assistance.

Before a natural spectacle, the child, in order to coordinate his sensations and
to subject them to mental control, compares them with his picture-book; culture
intervening, the adult refers himself to works of art.

The artist, having discerned a form which presents a certain intensity of
analogy with his pre-existing idea, prefers it to other forms, and consequently
- for we like to force our preferences on others - he endeavors to enclose the
quality of this form (the unmeasurable sum of the affinities perceived between
the visible manifestation and the tendency of his mind) in a symbol likely to
affect others. When he succeeds he forces the crowd, confronted by his
integrated plastic consciousness, to adopt the same relationship he established
with nature. But while the painter, eager to create, rejects the natural image as
soon as he has made use of it, the crowd long remains the slave of the painted
image, and persists in seeing the world only through the adopted sign. That is
why any new form seems monstrous, and why the most slavish imitations are
admired.
* * *

To whom shall we impute the misapprehension? To the painters who disregard
their rights. When from any spectacle they have separated the features which
summarize it, they believe themselves constrained to observe an accuracy which
is truly superfluous. Let us remind them that we visit an exhibition to
contemplate painting and to enjoy it, not to enlarge our knowledge of geography,
anatomy, etc.

Let the picture imitate nothing and let it present nakedly its raison d'etrel
Then we should indeed be ungrateful were we to deplore the absence of all
those things - flowers, or landscape, or faces - whose mere reflection it might
have been. Nevertheless, let us admit that the reminiscence of natural forms
cannot be absolutely banished; as yet, at all events. An art cannot be raised all
at once to the level of a pure effusion.

This is understood by the Cubist painters, who tirelessly study pictorial form
and the space which it engenders.

This space we have negligently confused with pure visual space or with
Euclidean space.

Euclid, in one of his postulates, speaks of the indeformability of figures in
movement, so we need not insist upon this point.

If we wished to tie the painter's space to a particular geometry, we should
have to refer it to the non-Euclidean scientists; we should have to study, at
some length, certain of Riemann's theorems.

As for visual space, we know that it results from the harmony of the sensations
of convergence and accommodation of the eye.

For the picture, a flat surface, the accommodation is negative. Therefore the
convergence which perspective teaches us to simulate cannot evoke the idea ot



Hb Cubism 191

depth- Moreover, we know that the most serious infractions of the rules of
perspective will by no means compromise the spatiality of a painting. Do not
the Chinese painters evoke space, despite their strong partiality for divergence}

To establish pictorial space, we must have recourse to tactile and motor
sensations, indeed to all our faculties. It is our whole personality which,
contracting or expanding, transforms the plane of the picture. As it reacts, this
plane reflects the personality back upon the understanding of {he spectator,
gild thus pictorial space is defined: a sensitive passage between two subjective
spaces.

.r The forms which are situated within this space spring from a dynamism which
ire profess to dominate. In order that our intelligence may possess it, let us
first exercise our sensitivity. There are only nuances. Form appears endowed
with properties identical to those of color. It is tempered or augmented by
contact with another form, it is destroyed or it flowers, it is multiplied or it
disappears. An ellipse may change its circumference because it is inscribed in
a polygon. A form more emphatic than those which surround it may govern
the whole picture, may imprint its own effigy upon everything. Those picture-
makers who minutely imitate one or two leaves in order that all the leaves of
a J tree may seem to be painted, show in a clumsy fashion that they suspect this
fruth. An illusion, perhaps, but we must take it into account. The eye quickly
interests the mind in its errors. These analogies and contrasts are capable of all
food and all evil; the masters felt this when they strove to compose with
{pyramids, crosses, circles, semicircles, etc.

: '*> To compose, to construct, to design, reduces itself to this: to determine by
etir own activity the dynamism of form.

< ; Some, and they are not the least intelligent, see the aim of our technique in
Ihe exclusive study of volumes. If they were to add that because surfaces are
Itie limits of volumes, and lines those of surfaces, it suffices to imitate a contour
in order to represent a volume, we might agree with them; but they are thinking
only of the sensation of relief, which we consider insufficient. We are neither
geometers nor sculptors; for us, lines, surfaces, and volumes are only nuances
Of the notion of fullness. To imitate only volumes would /be to deny these
ftuances for the benefit of a monotonous intensity. We might as well renounce
at once our vow of variety.

1 Between sculpturally bold reliefs, let us throw slender shafts which do not
define, but which suggest. Certain forms must remain implicit, so that the mind
f the spectator is the chosen place of their concrete birth.
;* Let us also contrive to cut by large restful surfaces any area where activity
*& exaggerated by excessive contiguities.

In short, the science of design consists in instituting relations between straight
nnes and curves. A picture which contained only straight lines or curves would
ftot express existence.

It would be the same with a painting in which curves and straight lines exactly
Compensated one another, for exact equivalence is equal to zero.
g The diversity of the relations of line to line must be indefinite; on this
Condition it incorporates quality, the unmeasurable sum of the affinities



192 The Idea of the Modern World

perceived between that which we discern and that which already existed within
us; on this condition a work of art moves us.

What the curve is to the straight line, the cold tone is to the warm in the
domain of color.



Ill

After the Impressionists had burned up the last Romantic bitumens, some
believed in a renaissance, or at least the advent of a new art: the art of color.
Some were delirious. They would have given the Louvre and all the museums
of the world for a scrap of cardboard spotted with hazy pink and apple-green.
We are not jesting. To these excesses we owe the experience of a bold and
necessary experiment,

Seurat and Signac thought of schematizing the palette and, boldly breaking
with an age-long habit of the eye, established optical mixture.

Noble works of art, by Seurat as well as by Signac, Cross, and certain others,
testify to the fertility of the Neo-Impressionist method; but it appears contest-
able as soon as we cease to regard it on the plane of superficial realism.

Endeavoring to assimilate the colors of the palette with those of the prism,
it is based on the exclusive use of pure elements. Now the colors of the prism
are homogeneous, while those of the palette, being heterogeneous, can furnish
pure elements only insofar as we accept the idea of a relative purity.

Suppose this were possible. A thousand little touches of pure color break
down white light, and the resultant synthesis should take place in the eye
of the spectator. They are so disposed that they are not reciprocally annihi-
lated by the optical fusion of the complementaries; for, outside the prism,
whether we form an optical mixture or a mixture on the palette, the result
of the sum of complementaries is a troubled grey, not a luminous white.

* * *

It was then that the Cubists taught a new way of imagining light.

According to them, to illuminate is to reveal; to color is to specify the mode
of revelation. They call luminous that which strikes the mind, and dark that
which the mind has to penetrate.

We do not automatically associate the sensation of white with the idea of
light, any more than black with the idea of darkness. We admit that a black
jewel, even if of a matte black, may be more luminous than the white or pink
satin of its case. Loving light, we refuse to measure it, and we avoid the
geometric ideas of focus and ray, which imply the repetition - contrary to the
principle of variety which guides us - of light planes and dark intervals in a
given direction. Loving color, we refuse to limit it, and sober or dazzling, fresh
or muddy, we accept all the possibilities contained between the two extreme
points of the spectrum, between the cold and the warm tone.

Here are a thousand tints which escape from the prism, and hasten to range
themselves in the lucid region forbidden to those who are blinded by the
immediate.



r



IIb Cubism 193



IV

If we consider only the bare fact of painting, we attain a common ground of
understanding.

Who will deny that this fact consists in dividing the surface of the canvas
and investing each part with a quality which must not be excluded by the nature
of the whole?

Taste immediately dictates a rule: we must paint so that no two portions of
the same extent ever meet in the picture. Common sense approves and explains:
let one portion repeat another, and the whole becomes measurable. The art
which ceases to be a fixation of our personality (unmeasurable, in which nothing
is ever repeated), fails to do what we expect of it.

The inequality of parts being granted as a prime condition, there are two
methods of regarding the division of the canvas. According to the first, all the
parts are connected by a rhythmic artifice which is determined by one of them.
This one - its position on the canvas matters little - gives the painting a center
from which or toward which the gradations of color tend, according as the
maximum or minimum of intensity resides there.

According to the second, in order that the spectator ready to establish unity
himself may apprehend all the elements in the order assigned to them by creative
intuition, the properties of each portion must be left independent, and the plastic
continuity must be broken into a thousand surprises of light and shade.

Hence we have two methods apparently inimical.

However little we know of the history of art, we can readily find names which
illustrate each. The interesting point is to reconcile them.

The Cubist painters endeavour to do so, and whether they partially interrupt
the ties demanded by the first method or confine one of those forces which the
second insists should be freely allowed to flash out, they achieve that superior
disequilibrium without which we cannot conceive lyricism.

Both methods are based on the kinship of color and form.

Although of a hundred thousand living painters only four or five appear to
perceive it, a law here asserts itself which is to be neither discussed nor
interpreted, but rigorously followed:

Every inflection of form is accompanied by a modification of color, and every
Modification of color gives birth to a form.

There are tints which refuse to wed certain lines; there are surfaces which
cannot support certain colors, repelling them to a distance or sinking under
them as under too heavy a weight.

To simple forms the fundamental hues of the spectrum are allied, and
fragmentary forms should assume sparkling colors.
* * *

There is nothing real outside ourselves, there is nothing real except the
coincidence of a sensation and an individual mental direction. Far from us any
thought of doubting the existence of the objects which strike our senses; but,
<>emg reasonable, we can only have certitude with regard to the images which
they make blossom in our mind.



194 The Idea of the Modern World

It therefore amazes us that well-meaning critics explain the remarkable
difference between the forms attributed to nature and those of modern painting,
by a desire to represent things not as they appear, but as they are. And how
are they? According to them, the object possesses an absolute form, an essential
form, and, in order to uncover it, we should suppress chiaroscuro and traditional
perspective. What naivete! An object has not one absolute form, it has several;
it has as many as there are planes in the domain of meaning. The one which
these writers point to is miraculously adapted to geometric form. Geometry j s
a science, painting is an art. The geometer measures, the painter savors. The
absolute of the one is necessarily the relative of the other; if logic is alarmed
at this, so much the worse! Will it ever prevent a wine from being different in
the retort of the chemist and in the glass of the drinker?

We are frankly amused to think that many a novice may perhaps pay for his
too literal comprehension of Cubist theory, and his faith in absolute truth, by
arduously juxtaposing the six faces of a cube or the two ears of a model seen
in profile.

Does it ensue from this that we should follow the example of the Impress-
ionists and rely upon the senses alone? By no means. We seek the essential, but
we seek it in our personality, and not in a sort of eternity, laboriously fitted
out by mathematicians and philosophers.
* * *

[. . .] We reject not only synchronistic and primary images, but also fanciful
occultism, an easy way out; if we condemn the exclusive use of common signs
it is not at all because we think of replacing them by cabalistic ones. We will
even willingly confess that it is impossible to write without using cliches, and
to paint while disregarding familiar signs completely. It is up to each one to
decide whether he should disseminate them throughout his work, mix them
intimately with personal signs, or boldly plaster them, magical dissonances,
tatters of the great collective lie, on a single point of the plane of higher reality
which he sets aside for his art. A true painter takes into account all the elements
which experience reveals to him, even if they are neutral or vulgar. A simple
question of tact.

But objective or conventional reality, this world intermediate between an-
other's consciousness and our own, never ceases to fluctuate according to the
will of race, religion, scientific theory, etc., although humanity has labored from
time immemorial to hold it fast. Into the occasional gaps in the cycle, we can
insert our personal discoveries and contribute surprising exceptions to the norm.



V

To carry out a work of art it is not enough to know the relations of color and
form and to apply the laws that govern them; the artist must also contrive to
free himself from the servitude inherent in such a task. Any painter of health)
sensitivity and sufficient intelligence can provide us with well-painted pictures,
but only he can awaken beauty who is designated by Taste. We call thus the



IIb Cubism 195

laculty thanks to which we become conscious of Quality, and we reject the
notions of good taste and bad taste which correspond with nothing positive: a
faculty is neither good nor bad, it is simply more or less developed.
. We attribute a rudimentary taste to the savage who is delighted by glass beads,
pU t we might with infinitely greater justice consider as a savage the so-called
civilized man who, for example, can appreciate nothing but Italian painting or
Louis XV furniture. Taste is valued according to the number of qualities it
allows us to perceive; yet when this number exceeds a certain figure it diminishes
in intensity and evaporates into eclecticism. Taste is innate; but like sensitivity,
which enhances it, it is tributary to the will. Many deny this. What is more
obvious, however, than the influence of the will on our senses? [. . .]

m* *

y; The will exerted on taste with a view to a qualitative possession of the world

derives its merit from the subjugation of every conquest to the nature of the
chosen material.

i. Without using any allegorical or symbolic literary artifice, but with only
iHiflections of lines and colors, a painter can show in the same picture both a
Chinese and a French city, together with the mountains, oceans, flora and fauna,
peoples with their histories and their desires, everything which in exterior reality
separates them. Distance or time, concrete thing or pure conception, nothing
refuses to be said in the painter's tongue, any more than in that of the poet,
the musician, or the scientist.

;te :* *

fe That the ultimate end of painting is to reach the masses, we have agreed; it
tiki however, not in the language of the masses that painting should address the
passes, but in its own, in order to move, to dominate, to direct, and not in
fcrder to be understood. It is the same with religions and philosophies. The
Artist who abstains from any concessions, who does not explain himself and who
tells nothing, builds up an internal strength whose radiance shines all around.

It is in consummating ourselves within ourselves that we shall purify humanity,
it is by increasing our own riches that we shall enrich others, it is by setting
fire to the heart of the star for our intimate joy that we shall exalt the universe.

To sum up, Cubism, which has been accused of being a system, condemns
all systems.

The technical simplifications which have provoked such accusations denote a
legitimate anxiety to eliminate everything that does not exactly correspond to
the conditions of the plastic material, a noble vow of purity. Let us grant that
!t is a method, but let us not permit the confusion of method with system.

For the partial liberties conquered by Courbet, Manet, Cezanne, and the
Impressionists, Cubism substitutes an indefinite liberty.

Henceforth objective knowledge at last regarded as chimerical, and all that
*ne crowd understands by natural form proven to be convention, the painter
^ill know no other laws than those of Taste.

> From then on, by the study of all the manifestations of physical and mental
We, he will learn to apply them. But if all the same he ventures into metaphysics,
Cosmogony, or mathematics, let him be content with obtaining their savor, and



W-



196 The Idea of the Modern World

abstain from demanding of them certitudes which they do not possess. In their
depths one finds nothing but love and desire.

A realist, he will fashion the real in the image of his mind, for there is only
one truth, ours, when we impose it on everyone. And it is the faith in Beauty
which provides the necessary strength.



8 Fernand Leger (1881-1955) 'The Origins of
Painting and its Representational Value'

Leger formulates a claim that Cubism embodies a 'realism of conception' in respect of the
relations and contrasts drawn between pictorial elements themselves. In its specialization
and internal fragmentation such an art will be an expression of modern life. Originally
published in Montjoie, Paris, 1913. The present extract is taken from Leger, op. cit.

Without claiming to explain the aim or the means of an art that is already at
a fairly advanced stage of development, I am going to attempt, as far as it is
possible, to answer one of the questions most often asked about modern pictures.
I put this question in its simplest form: 'What does that represent?' I will
concentrate on this simple question and, with a brief explanation, will try to
prove its utter inanity.

If, in the field of painting, imitation of an object had value in itself, any
picture by anyone at all that had any imitative character would have pictorial
value. As I do not think it is necessary to insist upon this point or to discuss
such an example, I now assert something that has been said before but that
needs to be said again here: the realistic value of a work of art is completely
independent of any imitative character.

This truth should be accepted as dogma and made axiomatic in the general
understanding of painting.

I am using the word 'realistic' intentionally in its most literal sense, for the
quality of a pictorial work is in direct proportion to its quantity of realism.

In painting, what constitutes what we call realism?

Definitions are always dangerous, for in order to capture a complete concept
in a few words, it is necessary to make a concession, which often sacrifices
clarity or is too simplistic.

In spite of everything I will risk a definition and say that, in my view, pictorial
realism is the simultaneous ordering of three great plastic components: Lines,
Forms, and Colors.

No work can lay claim to pure classicism, that is, to a lasting qualit)
independent of the period of its creation, if one of those components is
completely sacrificed to the detriment of the other two. f . . . ]

I repeat: every epoch has produced such works, which, despite all the talent
they involve, remain simply period pieces. They become dated; they ma}
astonish or intrigue present generations, but since they do not have the
components needed to attain to pure realism, they must finally disappear. For
most of the painters who preceded the impressionists, the three indispensable



IIb Cubism 197

components that I mentioned earlier were closely linked to the imitation of a
subject that contained an absolute value in itself. [ . . . ]

The impressionists were the first to reject the absolute value of the subject and
10 consider its value to be merely relative.

That is the tie that links and explains the entire modern evolution. The
impressionists are tne great originators of the present movement; they are its
primitives in the sense that, wishing to free themselves from the imitative aspect,
they considered painting for its color only, neglecting all form and all line almost
entirely.

The admirable work resulting from this conception necessitates comprehension
of a new kind of color. Their quest for real atmosphere even then treated the
subject as relative: trees, houses merge and are closely interconnected, enveloped
jn a colored dynamism that their methods did not yet allow them to develop.

The imitation of the subject that their work still involves is thus, even then,
no more than a pretext for variety, a theme and nothing more. For the
impressionists a green apple on a red rug is no longer the relationship between
two objects, but the relationship between two tones, a green and a red.

When this truth became formulated in living works, the present movement
was inevitable. I particularly stress this epoch of French painting, for I think
it is at this precise moment that the two great pictorial concepts, visual realism
and realism of conception, meet - the first completing its ascent, which includes
mB traditional painting down to the impressionists, and the second, realism of
conception, beginning with them.

-.-si- The first, as I have said, demands an object, a subject, devices of perspective
that are now considered negative and antirealistic.

ft The second, dispensing with all this cumbersome baggage, has already been
achieved in many contemporary pictures.

One painter among the impressionists, Cezanne, understood everything that
was incomplete in traditional painting. He felt the necessity for a new form and
draftsmanship closely linked to the new color. All his life and all his work were
spent in this search.
* * *

In the history of modern painting Cezanne will occupy the place that Manet
held some years before him. Both were transitional painters.

Manet, through his investigations and his own sensibility, gradually abandoned
*he methods of his predecessors to arrive at impressionism, and he is unques-
tionably its great creator.

The more one examines the work of these two painters, the more one is struck
ty the historical analogy between them.

Manet was inspired by the Spanish, by Velasquez, by Goya, by the most
luminous works, to arrive at new forms.

Cezanne finds a color and, unlike Manet, struggles in the pursuit of a structure
ai *d form that Manet has destroyed and that he feels is absolutely necessary to
express the great reality.

"All the great movements in painting, whatever their direction, have always
Proceeded by revolution, by reaction, and not by evolution.



198 The Idea of the Modern World

The relationships among volumes, lines, and colors will prove to be the
springboard for all the work of recent years and for all the influence exerted
on artistic circles both in France and abroad.

From now on, everything can converge toward an intense realism obtained
by purely dynamic means.

Pictorial contrasts used in their purest sense (complementary colors, lines,
and forms) are henceforth the structural basis of modern pictures.

# # #

Many people are patiently awaiting the end of what they call a phase in the
history of art; they are waiting for something else, and they think that modern
painting is passing through a stage, a necessary one perhaps, but that it will
return to what is commonly called 'painting for everyone. '

This is a very great mistake. When an art like this is in possession of all its
means, which enable it to achieve absolutely complete works, it is bound to be
dominant for a very long time.

I am convinced that we are approaching a conception of art as comprehensive
as those of the greatest epochs of the past; the same tendency to large scale,
the same collective effort. [. . .]

* * *

For painters, living like everyone else in an age neither more nor less
intellectual than preceding ones, merely different, in order to impose a similar
way of seeing and to destroy everything that perspective and sentimentalism
had helped to erect, it was necessary to have something else besides their
audacity and their individual conception.

If the age had not lent itself to this - I repeat, if their art had not had an
affinity with its own time and had not been an evolution deriving from past
epochs - it would not have been able to survive.

Present-day life, more fragmented and faster moving than life in previous
eras, has had to accept as its means of expression an art of dynamic division-
ism; and the sentimental side, the expression of the subject (in the sense
of popular expression), has reached a critical moment that must be clearly
defined.

In order to find a comparable period, I will go back to the fifteenth century,
the time of the culmination and decline of the Gothic style. During this entire
period, architecture was the great means of popular expression: the basic
structure of cathedrals had been embellished with every lifelike ornament that
the French imagination could discover and invent.

But the invention of printing was bound to revolutionize and change totall}
these means of expression. [. . .]

Without attempting to compare the present evolution, with its scientific
inventions, to the revolution brought about at the end of the Middle Ages b>
Gutenberg's invention, in the realm "of humanity's means of expression,
maintain that modern mechanical achievements such as color photography, the
motion-picture camera, the profusion of more or less popular novels, and the
popularization of the theaters have effectively replaced and henceforth rendere



Hb Cubism 199

superfluous the development of visual, sentimental, representational, and popular
subject matter in pictorial art.

I earnestly ask myself how all those more or less historical or dramatic pictures
shown in the French Salon can compete with the screen of any cinema. Visual
realism has never before been so intensely captured.

Several years ago one could still argue that at least moving pictures lacked
color, but color photography has been invented. 'Subject' paintings no longer
have even this advantage; their popular side, their only reason for existence, has
disappeared, and the few workers who used to be seen in museums, planted in
front of a cavalry charge by M. Detaille or a historical scene by M. J. -P. Laurens,
are no longer there: they are at the cinema.

The average bourgeois also - the small merchant who fifty years ago enabled
these minor local and provincial masters to make a living - now has completely
dispensed with their services.

Photography requires fewer sittings than portrait painting, captures a likeness
more faithfully, and costs less. The portrait painter is dying out, and the genre
and historial painters will die out too - not by a natural death but killed off
by their period.

This will have killed that.
V Since the means of expression have multiplied, plastic art must logically limit
itself to its own purpose: realism of conception. (This was born with Manet,
developed by the impressionists and Cezanne, and is achieving wide acceptance
among contemporary painters.)

'}- Architecture itself, stripped of all its representational trimmings, is approach-
ing a modern and utilitarian conception after several centuries of false tradi-
tionalism .

s Architectural art is confining itself to its own means - the relationship between
lines and the balance of large masses; the decorative element itself is becoming
plastic and architectural.

Each art is isolating itself and limiting itself to its own domain.

Specialization is a modern characteristic, and pictorial art, like all other mani-
festations of human genius, must submit to its law; it is logical, for by limiting
each discipline to its own purpose, it enables achievements to be intensified.

In this way pictorial art gains in realism. The modern conception is not simply
* passing abstraction, valid only for a few initiates; it is the total expression of
a new generation whose needs it shares and whose aspirations it answers.



9 Olga Rozanova (1886-1916) 'The Bases of the New
Creation'

Kozanova was one of a number of women artists prominent in the Russian avant-garde,

and was active in a succession of groups from 1911 onwards. The present essay, her

l^ajor statement on the new art, was published in the third issue of the journal of the

^nion of Youth group in St Petersburg in 1913. The present extract is taken from John

oowlt, Russian Art of the Avant Garde, London, 1976 and 1988.



200 The Idea of the Modern World

The art of Painting is the decomposition of nature's ready-made images into
the distinctive properties of the common material found within them and the
creation of different images by means of the interrelation of these properties;
this interrelation is established by the Creator's individual attitude. The artist
determines these properties by his visual faculty. The world is a piece of raw
material - for the unreceptive soul it is the back of a mirror, but for reflective
souls it is a mirror of images appearing continually.

How does the world reveal itself to us? How does our soul reflect the world?
In order to reflect, it is necessary to perceive. In order to perceive, it is necessary
to touch, to see. Only the Intuitive Principle introduces us to the World.

And only the Abstract Principle - Calculation - as the consequence of the
active aspiration to express the world, can build a Picture.

This establishes the following order in the process of creation:

1 Intuitive Principle

2 Individual transformation of the visible

3 Abstract creation

The fascination of the visible, the charm of the spectacle, arrests the eye, and
the artist's primary aspiration to create arises from this confrontation with
nature. The desire to penetrate the World and, in reflecting it, to reflect oneself
is an intuitive impulse that selects the Subject - this word being understood in
its purely painterly meaning.

In this way, nature is a 'Subject' as much as any subject set for painting in
abstracto and is the point of departure, the seed, from which a Work of Art
develops; the intuitive impulse in the process of creation is the first psychological
stage in this development. How does the artist use the phenomena of nature,
and how does he transform the visible World on the basis of his relationship
with it?

A rearing horse, motionless cliffs, a delicate flower, are equally beautiful if
they can express themselves in equal degree.

But what can the artist express if he repeats them?

At best, an unconscious plagiarism of nature, for which the artist, not knowing
his own objectives, could be forgiven; at worst, a plagiarism in the literal sense
of the word, when people would refuse to reject it merely out of creative
impotence.

- Because the artist must be not a passive imitator of nature, but an active
spokesman of his relationship with her. Hence the question arises: to what extent
and to what degree should nature's influence on the artist be expressed?

A servile repetition of nature's models can never express all her fullness.

It is time, at long last, to acknowledge this and to declare frankly, once and
for all, that other ways, other methods of expressing the World are needed.

The photographer and the servile artist, in depicting nature's images, will
repeat them.

The artist of artistic individuality, in depicting them, will reflect himself.

He will reveal the properties of the World and erect from them a New World
- the World of the Picture, and by renouncing repetition of the visible, he will



Hb Cubism 201

inevitably create different images; in turning to their practical realization on the
canvas, he will be forced to reckon with them.

The Intuitive Principle, as an extrinsic stimulus to creation, and individual
transformation - the second stage in the creative process - have played their
role in advancing the meaning of the abstract.

The abstract embraces the conception of creative Calculation, and of expedient
relations to the painterly task. It has played an essential role in the New Art
I by indissolubly combining the conception of artistic means and the conception
of artistic ends. Modern art is no longer a copy of concrete objects; it has set
itself on a different plane, it has upturned completely the conception of Art
(hat existed hitherto.

The artist of the Past, riveted to nature, forgot about the picture as an important
phenomenon, and as a result, it became merely a pale reminder of what he saw, a
boring assemblage of ready-made, indivisible images of nature, the fruit of logic
with its immutable, nonaesthetic characteristics. Nature enslaved the artist.

And if in olden times, the individual transformation of nature found occasional
expression when the artist changed it according to his individual conception
(the works of archaic eras, of infant nations, the primitives), it was, nevertheless,
an example of an unrealized property, attempts at free speech, and more often
than not, the ready-made images triumphed as a result.

Only now does the artist create a Picture quite consciously not only by not
Copying nature, but also by subordinating the primitive conception of it to
conceptions complicated by all the psychology of modern creative thought: what
the artist sees + what he knows + what he remembers, etc. In putting paint
onto canvas, he further subjects the result of this consciousness to a constructive
processing that, strictly speaking, is the most important thing in Art - and the
very conception of the Picture and of its self-sufficient value can arise only on
this condition.

In an ideal state of affairs the artist passes spontaneously from one creative
state to another, and the Principles - the Intuitive, the Individual, the Abstract
- are united organically, not mechanically. I do not intend to analyze the
individual trends of modern art but wish merely to determine the general
character of the New creative World View. I shall touch on these trends only
to the extent that they are the consequence of this New creative psychology
and evoke this or that attitude in the public and critics nurtured on the
Psychology of the old conception of art. To begin with, the art of our time will
be fatally incomprehensible to such people unless they make the effort to accept
the required viewpoint.

For the majority of the public nurtured by pseudo artists on copies of nature,
the conception of beauty rests on the terms 'Familiar' and 'Intelligible.' So when
*n art created on new principles forces the public to awaken from its stagnant,
sleepy attitudes crystallized once and for all, the transition to a different state
incites protest and hostility since the public is unprepared for it.
* * *

Every new epoch in art differs from the preceding one in that it introduces
*fiany new artistic theses into its previously cultivated experience, and in



202 The Idea of the Modern World

following the path of this development, it works out a new code of artistic
formulas. But in the course of time, creative energy begins inevitably to slacken.

New formulas cannot be cultivated - on the contrary, those cultivated
previously develop artistic technique to an extraordinary level of refinement and
reduce it to prestidigitation of the paintbrush; the extreme expression of this is
a crystallization into the conditioned repetition of ready-made forms. And in
this soil the putrid flowers of imitation thrive. Without going into the depths
of art history, we can cite examples of imitation from the not too distant past
(it, too, has grown obsolete), namely, the exhibitions of the 'World of Art' and
especially the 'Union of Russian Artists' as they now stand: they give nothing
to the treasure house of art and essentially are merely the epigones of the
Wanderers. The only difference is that the servile imitation of nature with a
smattering of Social-Populist ideology (the Wanderers) is replaced in this case
by the imitation of an intimate aristocratic life with its cult of antiquity and
sentimentality of individual experience (the cozy art of the 'World of Art 1
exhibitions and their like).

I pointed out above that all previous art had touched on problems of a purely
painterly nature only by allusion and that it had confined itself generally to the
repetition of the visible; we can say therefore that only the nineteenth century,
thanks to the school of the impressionists, advanced theses that had been
unknown previously: the stipulation of a locale of air and light in the picture
and color analysis.

Then followed Van Gogh, who hinted at the principle of dynamism, and
Cezanne, who advanced the questions of construction, planar and surface
dimension.

But Van Gogh and Cezanne are only the estuaries of those broad and
impetuous currents that are most well defined in our time: futurism and cubism.

Proceeding from the possibilities to which I alluded (dynamism, planar and
surface dimension), each of these currents has enriched art with a series of
independent theses.

Moreover, although initially they were diametrically opposed to each other
(Dynamics, Statics), they were enriched subsequently with a series of common
theses. These have lent a common tone to all modern trends in painting.

Only modern Art has advocated the full and serious importance of such
principles as pictorial dynamism, volume and equilibrium, weight and weight-
lessness, linear and plane displacement, rhythm as a legitimate division of space,
design, planar and surface dimension, texture, color correlation, and others.
Suffice it to enumerate these principles that distinguish the New Art from the
Old to be convinced that they are the Qualitative - and not just the quantitative
- New Basis that proves the 'self-sufficient 1 significance of the New Art. They
are principles hitherto unknown that signify the rise of a new era in creation -
an era of purelv artistic achievements.

- The era of the final, absolute liberation of the Great Art of Painting from
the alien traits of Literature, Society, and everyday life. Our age is to be credited
with the cultivation of this valuable world view - an age that is not affected b>
the question of how quickly the individual trends it has created flash past.



IIb Cubism 203

After elucidating the essential values of the New Art, one cannot help noting
t he extraordinary rise in the whole creative life of our day, the unprecedented
diversity and quantity of artistic trends.

t0 Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler (1884-1976) from The
Rise of Cubism

Kahnweiler was the leading dealer in Cubist art at the moment of its foundation. His
contacts, indeed his friendship, with Picasso and Braque enabled them to work relatively
unhindered by the demands of public exhibition. Declared an enemy alien on the
outbreak of war in 1914, when his collection was sequestrated, Kahnweiler retired to
Switzerland. There, influenced by his readings in philosophy, particularly an interest in
Kant, he composed a theoretical work Der Gegenstand der Asthetik, which included his
pioneering study of Cubism. This appeared separately, first in Zurich in 1916 and sub-
sequently in book form as Der Wegzum Kubismus in Munich in 1920. The present trans-
lation is taken from Robert Motherwell (ed.), Documents of Modern Art, New York, 1949.



[. . .] painting in our time has become lyric, its stimulus the pure intense
Relight in the beauty of things. Lyric painting celebrates this beauty without
epic or dramatic overtones. It strives to capture this beauty in the unity of the
work of art. The nature of the new painting is clearly characterized as repre-
sentational as well as structural: representational in that it tries to reproduce
the formal beauty of things: structural in its attempt to grasp the meaning of
this formal beauty in the painting.

Representation and structure conflict. Their reconciliation by the new paint-
ing, and the stages along the" road to this goal, are the subject of this work.
* * *



{...] In the year 1906, Braque, Derain, Matisse and many others were still
striving for expression through color, using only pleasant arabesques, and
completely dissolving the form of the object. Cezanne's great example was still
not understood. Painting threatened to debase itself to the level of ornamenta-
tion; it sought to be 'decorative, 1 to 'adorn 1 the wall.

; Picasso had remained indifferent to the temptation of color. He had pursued
another path, never abandoning his concern for the object. The literary
'expression 1 which had existed in his earlier work now vanished. A lyricism of
form retaining fidelity to nature began to take shape. [. . .]
w Toward the end of 1906, ... the soft round contours in Picasso's paintings
gave way to hard angular forms; instead of delicate rose, pale yellow and light
fcreen, the massive forms were weighted with leaden white, gray and black.

Early in 1907 Picasso began a strange large painting [Les Demoiselles d'Avignon]
depicting women, fruit and drapery, which he left unfinished. It cannot be called
ther than unfinished, even though it represents a long period of work. Begun



204 The Idea of the Modern World

in the spirit of the works of 1906, it contains in one section the endeavors f
1907 and thus never constitutes a unified whole.

The nudes, with large, quiet eyes, stand rigid, like mannequins. Their stiff
round bodies are flesh-colored, black and white. That is the style of 1906.

In the foreground, however, alien to the style of the rest of the painting
appear a crouching figure and a bowl of fruit. These forms are drawn angularly
not roundly modeled in chiaroscuro. The colors are luscious blue, strident
yellow, next to pure black and white. This is the beginning of Cubism, the first
upsurge, a desperate titanic clash with all of the problems at once.

These problems were the basic tasks of painting: to represent three dimensions
and color on a flat surface, and to comprehend them in the unity of that surface.
'Representation,' however, and 'comprehension' in the strictest and highest
sense. Not the simulation of form by chiaroscuro, but the depiction of the three
dimensional through drawing on a flat surface. No pleasant 'composition' but
uncompromising, organically articulated structure. In addition, there was the
problem of color, and finally, the most difficult of all, that of the amalgamation,
the reconciliation of the whole.

Rashly, Picasso attacked all the problems at once. He placed sharp-edged
images on the canvas, heads and nudes mostly, in the brightest colors: yellow,
red, blue and black. He applied the colors in thread-like fashion to serve as
lines of direction, and to build up, in conjunction with the drawing, the plastic
effect. But, after months of the most laborious searching, Picasso realized that
complete solution of the problem did not lie in this direction. [. . .]

In the spring of 1908 he resumed his quest, this time solving one by one the
problems that arose. He had to begin with the most important thing, and that
seemed to be the explanation of form, the representation of the three-dimen-
sional and its position in space on a two-dimensional surface. [ . . . ]

Thus Picasso painted figures resembling Congo sculptures, and still lifes of
the simplest form. His perspective in these works is similar to that of Cezanne.
Light is never more than a means to create form - through chiaroscuro, since
he did not at this time repeat the unsuccessful attempt of 1907 to create form
through drawing. Of these paintings one can no longer say, The light comes
from this or that side,' because light has become completely a means. The
pictures are almost monochromatic; brick red and red brown, often with a gray
or gray green ground, since the color is meant only to be chiaroscuro.

While Picasso was painting in Paris, and in the summer, at La Rue-des-Bois
(near Creil, Oise), Braque, at the other end of France, in FEstaque (near
Marseilles) was painting the series of landscapes we have already mentioned-
No connection existed between the two artists. This venture was a completely
new one, totally different from Picasso's work of 1907; by an entirely different
route Braque arrived at the same point as Picasso. If, in the whole history of
art, there were not already sufficient proof that the appearance of the aesthetic
product is conditioned in its particularity by the spirit of the time, that even
the most powerful artists unconsciously execute its will, then this would be
proof Separated by distance, and working independently, the two artists devoted
their most intense effort to paintings which share an extraordinary resemblance-




iib Cubism 205

| S relationship between their paintings continued but ceased to be astonishing
LU se the friendship between the two artists, begun in the winter of that year,
IJpjght about a constant exchange of ideas.

^picasso and Braque had to begin with objects of the simplest sort: in landscape,
^jlfi cylindrical tree trunks and rectangular houses; in still life, with plates,
^metrical vessels, round fruits and one or two nude figures. They sought to
See these objects as plastic as possible, and to define their position in space.
jjpfe we touch upon the indirect advantage of lyric painting. It has made us
*#are of the beauty of form in the simplest objects, where we had carelessly
gjperlooked it before. These objects have now become eternally vivid in the reflected
&iendor of the beauty which the artist has abstracted from them. [. . .]

f"

fo,-

jrithe winter of 1908, the two friends began to work along common and parallel
#rihs. The subjects of their still life painting became more complex, the
presentation of nudes more detailed. The relation of objects to one another
jjiiderwent further differentiation, and structure, heretofore relatively uncompli-
cated . . . took on more intricacy and variety. Color, as the expression of light,
It chiaroscuro, continued to be used as a means of shaping form. Distortion of
iiran, the usual consequence of the conflict between representation and struc-

Ipfre, was strongly evident.

fiAmong the new subjects introduced at this time were musical instruments,
iWch Braque was the first to paint, and which continued to play such an

/Aportant role in cubist still life painting. Other new motifs were fruit bowls,
jfcwtles and glasses.

'During the summer of 1909 which Picasso spent at Horta (near Tolosa, Spain)
iad Braque at La Roche Guyon (on the Seine, near Mantes) the new language
<*fbrm was further augmented and enriched, but left essentially unchanged.

Several times during the spring of 1910 Picasso attempted to endow the forms
of his pictures with color. That is, he tried to use color not only as an expression
*f light, or chiaroscuro, for the creation of form, but rather as an equally
a&portant end in itself. Each time he was obliged to paint over the color he
had thus introduced . . .

At the same time Braque made an important discovery. In one of his pictures
he painted a completely naturalistic nail casting its shadow on a wall. The
Usefulness of this innovation will be discussed later. The difficulty lay in the
^corporation of this 'real' object into the unity of the painting. From then on,
both artists consistently limited the space in the background of the picture. In
^landscape, for instance, instead of painting an illusionistic distant horizon in
**ich the eye lost itself, the artists closed the three-dimensional space with a
fountain. In still life or nude painting, the wall of a room served the same
Purpose. This method of limiting space had already been used frequently by
Cezanne.

 ! During the summer, again spent in TEstaque, Braque took a further step in
| the introduction of 'real objects,' that is, of realistically painted things intro-



206 The Idea of the Modern World

duced, undistorted in form and color, into the picture. We find lettering for
the first time in a Guitar Player of the period. Here again, lyrical painting
uncovered a new world of beauty - this time in posters, display windows and
commercial signs which play so important a role in our visual impressions.

Much more important, however, was the decisive advance which set Cubism
free from the language previously used by painting. This occured in Cadaques
(in Spain, on the Mediterranean near the French border) where Picasso spent
his summer. Little satisfied, even after weeks of arduous labor, he returned to
Paris in the fall with his unfinished works. But he had taken the great step; he
had pierced the closed form. A new tool had been forged for the achievement
of the new purpose.

Years of research had proved that closed form did not permit an expression
sufficient for the two artists' aims. Closed form accepts objects as contained by
their own surfaces, viz., the skin; it then endeavours to represent this closed
body, and, since no object is visible without light, to paint this 'skin' as the
contact point between the body and light where both merge into color. This
chiaroscuro can provide only an illusion of the form of objects. In the actual
three dimensional world the object is there to be touched even after light is
eliminated. Memory images of tactile perceptions can also be verified on visible
bodies. The different accommodations of the retina of the eye enable us, as it
were, to 'touch 1 three-dimensional objects from a distance. Two-dimensional
painting is not concerned with all this. Thus the painters of the Renaissance,
using the closed form method, endeavored to give the illusion of form by
painting light as color on the surface of objects. It was never more than 'illusion. 1

Since it was the mission of color to create the form as chiaroscuro, or light
that had become perceivable, there was no possibility of rendering local color
or color itself. It could only be painted as objectivated light.

In addition, Braque and Picasso were disturbed by the unavoidable distortion
of form which worried many spectators initially. [. . .] Comparison between the
real object as articulated by the rhythm of forms in the painting and the same
object as it exists in the spectator's memory inevitably results in 'distortions'
as long as even the slightest verisimilitude in the work of art creates this conflict
in the spectator. Through the combined discoveries of Braque and Picasso
during the summer of 1910 it became possible to avoid these difficulties by a
new way of painting.

On the one hand, Picasso's new method made it possible to 'represent 1 the
form of objects and their position in space instead of attempting to imitate them
through illusionistic means. With the representation of solid objects this could
be effected by a process of representation that has a certain resemblance to
geometrical drawing. This is a matter of course since the aim of both is to
render the three-dimensional object on a two-dimensional plane. In addition,
the painter no longer has to limit himself to depicting the object as it would
appear from one given viewpoint, but wherever necessary for fuller comprehen-
sion, can show it from several sides, and from above and below.

Representation of the position of objects in space is done as follows: instead
of beginning from a supposed foreground and going on from there to give an



11b Cubism 207

fusion of depth by means of perspective, the painter begins from a definite
a nd clearly defined background. Starting from this background the painter now
^orks toward the front by a sort of scheme of forms in which each object's
position is clearly indicated, both in relation to the definite background and to
other objects. Such an arrangement thus gives a clear and plastic view. But, if
on ly this scheme of forms were to exist it would be impossible to see in the
painting the 'representation' of things from the outer world. One would only
see an arrangement of planes, cylinders, quadrangles, etc.

At this point Braque's introduction of undistorted real objects into the
painting takes on its full significance. When 'real details' are thus introduced
the result is a stimulus which carries with it memory images. Combining the
'real' stimulus and the scheme of forms, these images construct the finished
object in the mind. Thus the desired physical representation comes into being
in the spectator's mind.

Now the rhythmization necessary for the coordination of the individual parts
into the unity of the work of art can take place without producing disturbing
distortions, since the object in effect is no longer 'present' in the painting, that
\% since it does not yet have the least resemblance to actuality. Therefore, the
stimulus cannot come into conflict with the product of the assimilation. In other
words, there exist in the painting the scheme of forms and small real details as
s&imuli integrated into the unity of the work of art; there exists, as well, but
only in the mind of the spectator, the finished product of the assimilation, the
human head, for instance. There is no possibility of a conflict here, and yet the
Object once 'recognized' in the painting is now 'seen' with a perspicacity of
which no illusionistic art is capable.

As to color, its utilization as chiaroscuro had been abolished. Thus, it could
be freely employed, as color, within the unity of the work of art. For the
representation of local color, its application on a small scale is sufficient to effect
fes incorporation into the finished representation in the mind of the spectator.

In the words of Locke, these painters distinguish between primary and
secondary qualities. They endeavor to represent the primary, or most important
qualities, as exactly as possible. In painting these are: the object's form, and its
position in space. They merely suggest the secondary characteristics such as
color and tactile quality, leaving their incorporation into the object to the mind
of the spectator.

This new language has given painting an unprecedented freedom. It is no
longer bound to the more or less verisimilar optic image which describes the
bject from a single viewpoint. It can, in order to give a thorough representation
of the object's primary characteristics, depict them as stereometric drawing on
"le plane, or, through several representations of the same object, can provide
an analytical study of that object which the spectator then fuses into one again
m his mind. The representation does not necessarily have to be in the closed
banner of the stereometric drawing; colored planes, through their direction and
Relative position, can bring together the formal scheme without uniting in closed
Prms. This was the great advance made at Cadaques. Instead of an analytical
description, the painter can, if he prefers, also create in this way a synthesis of



208 The Idea of the Modern World

the object, or in the words of Kant, 'put together the various conceptions and
comprehend their variety in one perception. 1 [ . .]

[ . . . ] Here we must make a sharp distinction between the impression made
upon the spectator and the lines of the painting itself. The name 'Cubism' and
the designation 'Geometric Art' grew out of the impression of early spectators
who 'saw' geometric forms in the paintings. This impression is unjustified, since
the visual conception desired by the painter by no means resides in the geometric
forms, but rather in the representation of the reproduced objects.

How does such a sensory illusion come about? It occurs only with observers
whom lack of habit has prevented from making the associations which lead to
objective perception. Man is possessed by an urge to objectivate; he wants to
'see something' in the work of art which should - and he is sure of this -
represent something. His imagination forcefully calls up memory images, but
the only ones which present themselves, the only ones which seem to fit the
straight lines and uniform curves are geometric images. Experience has shown
that this 'geometric impression 1 disappears completely as soon as the spectator
familiarizes himself with the new method of expression and gains in perception.

If we disregard representation, however, and limit ourselves to the 'actual'
individual lines in the painting, there is no disputing the fact that they are very
often straight lines and uniform curves. Furthermore, the forms which they
serve to delineate are often similar to the circle and rectangle, or even to
stereometric representations of cubes, spheres and cylinders. But, such straight
lines and uniform curves are present in all styles of the plastic arts which do
not have as their goal the illusionistic imitation of nature. Architecture, which
is a plastic art, but at the same time non-representational, uses these lines
extensively. The same is true of applied art. Man creates no building, no product
which does not have regular lines. In architecture and applied art, cubes, spheres
and cylinders are the permanent basic forms. They do not exist in the natural
world, nor do straight lines. But they are deeply rooted in man; they are the
necessary condition for all objective perception.

Our remarks until now about visual perception have concerned its content
alone, the two dimensional 'seen' and the three dimensional 'known' visual
images. Now we are concerned with the form of these images, the form of our
perception of the physical world. The geometric forms we have just mentioned
provide us with the solid structure; on this structure we build the products of
our imagination which are composed of stimuli on the retina and memon
images. They are our categories of vision. When we direct our view on the
outer world, we always demand those forms but they are never given to us in
all their purity. The fiat picture which we 'see' bases itself mainly on the straight
horizontal and vertical, and secondly on the circle. We test the 'seen' lines ot
the physical world for their greater or lesser relationship to these basic lines.
Where no actual line exists, we supply the 'basic' line ourselves. For example
a water horizon which is limited on both sides appears horizontal to us; one
which is unlimited on both sides appears curved. Furthermore, only our
knowledge of simple stereometric forms enables us to add the third dimension
to the flat picture which our eye perceives. Without the cube, we would have



Hb Cubism 209

00 feeling of the three dimensionality of objects, and without the sphere and
cylinder, no feeling of the varieties of this three dimensionality. Our a priori
knowledge of these forms is the necessary condition, without which there would
{>e no seeing, no world of objects. Architecture and applied art realize in space
|rhese basic forms which we always demand in vain of the natural world; the
sculpture of periods which have turned away from nature approaches these forms
insofar as its representational goal permits, and the two-dimensional painting of
such periods gives expression to the same longing in its use of 'basic lines.'
Humanity is possessed not only by the longing for these lines and forms, but
jjso by the ability to create them. This ability shows itself clearly in those
civilizations in which no 'representational 1 plastic art has produced other lines
gnd forms.

In its works Cubism, in accordance with its role as both constructive and
representational art, brings the forms of the physical world as close as possible
to their underlying basic forms. Through connection with these basic forms,
upon which all visual and tactile perception is based, Cubism provides the
dearest elucidation and foundation of all forms. The unconscious effort which
we have to make with each object of the physical world before we can perceive
its form is lessened by cubist painting through its demonstration of the relation
between these objects and basic forms. Like a skeletal frame these basic forms
wderlie the impression of the represented object in the final visual result of
the painting; they are no longer 'seen' but are the basis of the 'seen' form.



11 Georges Braque (1882-1963) 'Thoughts on
Painting'

Braque's aphorisms, purportedly jotted down in the margins of his drawings, emphasize
both the autonomy of Cubism, the 'constitution of a pictorial fact', and its status as a
form of representation. They were first collected and published by Pierre Reverdy in
Ws journal Nord-Sud, Paris, December 1917. The present translation is taken from Fry,
Pp. cit.



1

f.J

4
5

i8



In art progress consists not in extension but in the knowledge of its limits.

The limits of the means employed determine the style, engender the new

form and impel to creation.

The charm and the force of children's paintings often stem from the limited

means employed. Conversely the art of decadence is a product of extension.

New means, new subjects.

The subject is not the object; it is the new unity, the lyricism which stems

entirely from the means employed.

The painter thinks in forms and colours.

The aim is not to reconstitute an anecdotal fact but to constitute a pictorial

fact.

Painting is a mode of representation.




w



210 The Idea of the Modern World

9 One must not imitate what one wishes to create.

10 One does not imitate the appearance; the appearance is the result.

11 To be pure imitation, painting must make an abstraction of appearances.

12 To work from nature is to improvise. One must beware of an ali-purp 0$e
formula, suitable for interpreting the other arts as well as reality, and which
instead of creating, would produce only a style or rather a stylization.

13 The arts that make their effect by their purity have never been all-purpose
arts. Greek sculpture and its decadence, among others, teach us this.

14 The senses deform, the mind forms. Work to perfect the mind. There is
no certainty except in what the mind conceives.

15 A painter trying to make a circle would only make a ring. Possibly the look
of it may satisfy him but he will have doubts. The compass will restore
his certainty. The papiers colles in my drawings have also given me a kind
of certainty.

16 Trompe-Vwtl is due to an anecdotal accident that makes its effect through
the simplicity of the facts.

17 The papiers coiles, the imitation wood - and other elements of the same
nature - which I have used in certain drawings, also make their effect
through the simplicity of the facts, and it is this that has led people to
confuse them with trompe-l'ml, of which they are precisely the opposite.
They too are simple facts, but created by the mind and such that they are
one of the justifications of a new figuration in space.

18 Nobility comes from contained emotion.

19 Emotion must not be rendered by an emotional trembling. It is not
something that is added, or that is imitated. It is the germ, the work is the
flowering.

20 I love the rule which corrects emotion.



12 Pablo Picasso (1881-1973) 'Picasso Speaks'

Picasso's comments on Cubism were given in an interview with Marius de Zayas, an
American critic, in 1923. They are sceptical of attempts to intellectualize Cubism,
representing it instead as an art like any other whose success or failure is determined
by results rather than intentions. De Zayas had lived in Paris before the First World War,
moving in Apollinaire's circles. He was involved in mounting the first exhibition of
Picasso's work in America in 1911 and had published two books on the new art in
1913 and 1915, the latter on the influence of African art. He became director of the
Modern Galiery in New York in 1915, exhibiting Picasso and Braque among others. The
present interview, in a translation approved by Picasso, was originally published as
Picasso Speaks' in The Arts, New York, May 1923, pp. 315-26.

I can hardly understand the importance given to the word research in connection
with modern painting. In my opinion to search means nothing in painting. To
find, is the thing. Nobody is interested in following a man who, with his eyes
fixed on the ground, spends his life looking for the pocketbook that fortune
should put in his path. The one who finds something no matter what it might



IIb Cubism 211

^ even if his intention were not to search for it, at least arouses our curiosity,
if not our admiration.

Among the several sins that I have been accused of committing, none is more
lse than the one that I have, as the principal objective in my work, the spirit
f research. When I paint my object is to show what I have found and not what
| am looking for. In art intentions are not sufficient and, as we say in Spanish:
fcve must be proved by facts and not by reasons. What one does is what counts
and not what one had the intention of doing.

We all know that Art is not truth. Art is a lie that makes us realize truth, at
least the truth that is given us to understand. The artist must know the manner
wherebv to convince others of the truthfulness of his lies. If he only shows in
his work that he has searched, and re-searched, for the way to put over lies,
he would never accomplish anything.

The idea of research has often made painting go astray, and made the artist
lose himself in mental lucubrations. Perhaps this has been the principal fault of
modern art. The spirit of research has poisoned those who have not fully
Understood all the positive and conclusive elements in modern art and has made
diem attempt to paint the invisible and, therefore, the unpaintable.

They speak of naturalism in opposition to modern painting. I would like to
blow if anyone has ever seen a natural work of art. Nature and art, being two
different things, cannot be the same thing. Through art we express our
conception of what nature is not.

.- Velasquez left us his idea of the people of his epoch. Undoubtedly they were
different from what he painted them, but we cannot conceive a Philip IV in
fciy other way than the one Velasquez painted. Rubens also made a portrait of
the same king and in Rubens's portrait he seems to be quite another person.
We believe in the one painted by Velasquez, for he convinces us by his right

iff might.

From the painters of the origins, the primitives, whose work is obviously
different from nature, down to those artists who, like David, Ingres, and even
Bouguereau, believed in painting nature as it is, art has always been art and
not nature. And from the point of view of art there are no concrete or abstract
forms, but only forms which are more or less convincing lies. That those lies
are necessary to our mental selves is beyond any doubt, as it is through them
that we form our aesthetic point of view of life.

Cubism is no different from any other school of painting. The same principles
and the same elements are common to all. The fact that for a long time Cubism
has not been understood and that even today there are people who cannot see
anything in it, means nothing. I do not read English, an English book is a blank-
hook to me. This does not mean that the English language does not exist, and
Why should I blame anybody else but myself if I cannot understand what I
know nothing about?

I also often hear the work evolution. Repeatedly I am asked to explain how
^y painting evolved. To me there is no past or future in art. If a work of art
Cannot live always in the present it must not be considered at all. The art of
the Greeks, of the Egyptians, of the great painters who lived in other times, is



212 The Idea of the Modern World

not an art of the past; perhaps it is more alive today than it ever was. Art does
not evolve by itself, the ideas of people change and with them their mode of
expression. When I hear people speak of the evolution of an artist, it seems to
me that they are considering him standing between two mirrors that face each
other and reproduce his image an infinite number of times, and that they
contemplate the successive images of one mirror as his past, and the images of
the other mirror as his future, while his real image is taken as his present. They
do not consider that they all are the same images in different planes.

Variation does not mean evolution. If an artist varies his mode of expression
this only means that he has changed his manner of thinking, and in changing,
it might be for the better or it might be for the worse.

The several manners I have used in my art must not be considered as an
evolution, or as steps toward an unknown ideal of painting. All I have ever
made was made for the present and with the hope that it will always remain in
the present. I have never taken into consideration the spirit of research. When
I have found something to express, I have done it without thinking of the past
or of the future. I do not believe I have used radically different elements in
the different manners I have used in painting. If the subjects I have wanted to
express have suggested different ways of expression I have never hesitated to
adopt them. I have never made trials nor experiments. Whenever I had
something to say, I have said it in the manner in which I have felt it ought to
be said. Different motives inevitably require different methods of expression.
This does not imply either evolution or progress, but an adaptation of the idea
one wants to express and the means to express that idea.

Arts of transition do not exist. In the chronological history of art there are
periods which are more positive, more complete than others. This means that
there are periods in which there are better artists than in others. If the history
of art could be graphically represented, as in a chart used by a nurse to mark
the changes of temperature of her patient, the same silhouettes of mountains
would be shown, proving that in art there is no ascendant progress, but that it
follows certain ups and downs that might occur at any time. The same occurs
with the work of an individual artist.

Many think that Cubism is an art of transition, an experiment which is to
bring ulterior results. Those who think that way have not understood it. Cubism
is not either a seed or a foetus, but an art dealing primarily with forms, and
when a form is realized it is there to live its own life. A mineral substance,
having geometric formation, is not made so for transitory purposes, it is to
remain what it is and will always have its own form. But if we are to apply the
law of evolution and transformation to art, then we have to admit that all art
is transitory. On the contrary, art does not enter into these philosophic
absolutisms. If Cubism is an art of transition I am sure that the only thing that
will come out of it is another form of Cubism.

Mathematics, trigonometry, chemistry, psychoanalysis, music, and whatnot,
have been related to Cubism to give it an easier interpretation. All this has been
pure literature, not to say nonsense, which brought bad results, blinding peopl e
with theories.



IIh Cubism 213

Cubism has kept itself within the limits and limitations of painting, never
pretending to go beyond it. Drawing, design, and color are understood and
practiced in Cubism in the spirit and manner that they are understood and
practiced in all other schools. Our subjects might be different, as we have
introduced into painting objects and forms that were formerly ignored. We have
kept our eyes open to our surroundings, and also our brains.

We give to form and color all their individual significance, as far as we can
see it; in our subjects, we keep the joy of discovery, the pleasure of the
unexpected; our subject itself must be a source of interest. But of what use is
it to say what we do when everybody can see it if he wants to?



Part III

Rationalization and
Transformation



Ill

Introduction



By the outbreak of the First World War the channels of the avant-garde were
open. Those channels mostly ran to Paris, from cities as diverse as Oslo and
Milan, Moscow, Vienna and Barcelona. But sometimes the current ran the other
way too, and on occasion scarcely touched Paris at all: a Russian-German axis
grew strong, signalled by Kandinsky's presence in Munich. August 1914,
however, put a stop to this mutual fertilization, and gave xenophobia a foothold
in the avant-garde which it has never quite lost. The effect of the war was not
simply a matter of travel ceasing. Willingly or unwillingly artists were drawn
ipto the conflict. Many were wounded, died or suffered mental collapse. Others

 - or in some cases the same - became disenchanted with their societies to the
extent of allying themselves with wider social forces devoted to their overthrow.
As war was joined on the social agenda by revolution, the artistic avant-garde
acquired a more forceful political dimension than hitherto. These years were
apocalyptic. The Hapsburg, Hohernzollern, Ottoman and Romanov dynasties,
Repositories of power for centuries rather than mere decades, were overthrown.
Mass political movements came to occupy the historical stage, Fascism and
Communism foremost among them. Technology advanced, military technology
furthest of all, taking with it the apparatus of social control- Death and
devastation occurred on a scale unseen in Europe since the plagues. To regard
a form of art as modern was to require of it that it respond in aesthetic kind
to the demands imposed by the modern condition. It is scarcely to be wondered
a * then, that the war years and their aftermath should have proved a traumatic
Period for the artistic avant-garde.

Two different and opposed responses are discernible among the various groups
Of artists, related to the different wartime circumstances of specific countries
W cities. On the one side there was the belief that the war had been the result
* a breakdown, particularly of a breakdown in shared values and social cohesion,

y which the pre-war avant-garde was itself a symptom. In this light the war
^e to be viewed as a cleansing process, the 'great test', in Le Corbusier's
Phrase: a sacrifice required for the re-establishment of a civilized order (see IIlA

Wteswi). On the other stood a perception of the war as the quite specific outcome

M that order's concealed barbarism: a perception that the war represented a
Heightened version of bourgeois society, or a limited version of its broader



218 Rationalization and Transformation

priorities. In order to ensure that such a catastrophe never happened again, far
from that order being re-established, what was required was that the social
forces whose order in the last instance it was, be themselves swept away (see
MB passim),

Paris had been the focal point of an international avant-garde. But the war
led to a wave of nationalism in French culture which victory only intensified.
French tradition was perceived as the legitimate descendant of the Renaissance
and Classical tradition, and its re-establishment became the common coin of
debate (IIIA2, 5, 7, 9). This voice had in fact been heard before the war (see
lA,7 and 8). The difference now was that agreement came from broader sections
of the avant-garde, which hitherto had in general tended to be identified by the
distance it took from dominant values. The meaning of Cubism became a
particular site of controversy. Cubism mattered because its status was incon-
testable as the paradigmatic modern movement. Its effect on the practice of art
had been such that it could not now be ignored by those wishing to orientate
art to the new circumstances. What was at issue w r as what Cubism meant.
Pre-war Cubism had had bohemian, even anarchistic affiliations, not least in
respect of the Spaniard Picasso: a far cry from the invocation of a national,
classical tradition now being made by those such as Denis who occupied the
right of the avant-garde spectrum. But the war had the effect of shifting this
emphasis within avant-garde thought from its somewhat paradoxical and con-
servative margin to the centre. Cubism came to be redefined in terms consonant
with the rappel d Vordre (see IIlAl and 5).

The classicizing tendency was not restricted to France. Italy, also on the
winning side in the war, had been host to the most aggressively anti-classical
pre-war avant-garde in the form of the Futurist movement. But the realities of
the war - the reality at bottom of pitting men against machines - had disabled
that rhetoric as effectively as it had maimed many of the flesh-and-blood
individuals who had assented to it. There ensued a turn to the classical tradition
with all that it was supposed to embody in terms of eternal, unchanging values
(see IIIA4 and 6). In England, the pre-war Vorticist avant-garde had suffered a
similar depletion and diversion of its energies. In 1921 Wyndham Lewis added
an English voice to the endemic post-war call for reconnection to tradition
(IIIA10).

There is a sense, then - or perhaps better a sector - in which the avant-garde
stopped in its tracks. In a closely related but ultimately different sense, however,
the avant-garde was also redefined: in terms which removed it from an}
oppositional locale, and established it as the modernized bearer of tradition, and
as such as a candidate for a plausible culture of the modern bourgeoisie (see

IIIA7).

Yet for some this was always going to be insufficient, if not indeed tantamoun
to a betrayal of the avant-garde's raison d'etre. The alternative reading of the
war as the fault of bourgeois society rather than of its opponents, involved a^
alternative and complementary reading of Cubism. Not accidentally these force
were initially focused in Zurich, that is to say in neutral Switzerland, surrounde
by the warring capitalist powers - and as such both a whirlpool of intrigue an




III Introduction 219

a refuge for opponents of the war. Seen from this perspective, the avant-garde
was far from appearing as a body which need only be smartened up to play its
part in social restoration; rather, it appeared to be already complicit in the
culture of the international bourgeoisie; it followed that it deserved to be finished
off along with its sponsors (see HlBl and 3). Among its other targets, Dada
mounted an onslaught on the sense which had been made of art. Marcel
Duchamp had already left for America before the war, and was thus himself
removed from the reach of the European conflict. But with his Readymades he
essayed perhaps the most extreme refutation of the claim that there is some
essential, or classical, property that is shared by all great art (see IIIB2).

Duchamp's was not a political critique in any strict sense, and by the same
token neither was Picabia's (see IIIB14). Zurich Dada and perhaps even more
so its descendants in Paris, Barcelona and New York, were cultural gestures
with a broader ideological rather than a more narrowly political impact. It is in
the light of this that Dada is commonly perceived as anti-art and irrationalist.
It was both those things. But it was the Dada position that bourgeois art,
bourgeois order and bourgeois rationalism had been implicated in the deaths of
millions; that bourgeois culture was no more than a mask of civilization laid
Over a deeper barbarism. Cubism, as art, was no more worth saving than any
of the other -isms. But before it went under, Cubism had hit upon a device
whose potential transcended the circumscribed circle of an artistic avant-garde,
iticd ultimately to its haut-bourgeois sponsors. This was collage. Developed into
photomontage it became the main weapon in the critical artist's armoury against
convention. Nowhere was this transition from a more or less hermetic art,
through cultural contestation, to an explicitly politically motivated intervention,
lore evident than in the inflection given to Dada, late in the war, in Berlin
#ce IIIB4-6).

\ *From the foregoing it may at first appear that there is a direct correlation to
%e made between artistic form and political standpoint. It may seem, that is to
say, that a search for underlying principles, let alone a reinstatement of
figuration, signifies a conservative politics; whereas a technically radical practice
founded in devices for the scrambling of sense - be they verbal or pictorial -
ftttomatically implies a politically radical stance. There is indeed some truth in
this. But it does not hold for all instances, let alone in all places. This issue of
Pfoce is important, for much here concerns the question of context. Before the
first World War ended it had brought in its train an event which, put simply,
changed the context for the art of succeeding decades, until the Second World
War, and beyond. The Russian Revolution of October 1917 set an agenda for
*th art and politics which only at the very end of the century may seem to
$**e receded into history. Then, at the moment of its occurrence, its effect was
petrifying. The socialist revolution against the entire bourgeois order rendered
I field of problems and possibilities significantly different. In Europe there
J^as no area of human endeavour which escaped its influence. Art was no
**ception.

*** The problem may be put like this. The rappel a Vordre was fundamentally
^storative, as its name implies. It was not necessarily altogether reactionary.



220 Rationalization and Transformation

For example, it did not characteristically result in calls for the restoration of
the monarchies. But what it did set out to restore, in fact to stimulate anew,
was the order of bourgeois capitalism organized around the form of the
nation-state. It was this which culture in general and art in particular was called
upon to support. By contrast Dadaism in its various forms was an oppositional
force committed to the overthrow of that damaged but resilient status quo. The
point which arises here, it goes almost without saying, is that what in fact the
Dadaists could not do, the Bolsheviks did. The rules of the game were effectively
changed by the success of the Communist revolution in what was to become
the Soviet Union. For the prospect of positive participation in the building of
a new life rapidly came on the agenda of radical art practice. Intervention in
daily life was no longer opposition to an entrenched status quo. Equally rapidly,
the types of attitude and practice evolved to cope with that situation fed back
to influence radical artists in the West, who were hopeful of achieving similar
successes against their own restored forms of bourgeois capitalism (IIID2 and
4). In this situation there is no direct equivalence between art and politics,
nothing to say that a conservatively formed poem or painting may not be fuelled
by Bolshevik political desire (see IIIB13); nothing either to say that the techni-
cally radical artwork may not be predicated upon an idealist cosmology to which
socialism, or even democracy, is anathema (see Illcll). And the uniquely
expressive T, at one moment the cutting-edge of the avant-garde and scourge
of bourgeois conformity, could at the next stand for petty-bourgeois reaction
and self-indulgence, in its refusal of the collectivity required to defend the
revolution and build the new world (see IIlBll-12).

These currents are vividly represented in Germany in the wake of the
revolution of November 1918, not least in that alliance of Expressionists and
Dadaists which was the Novembergruppe (see IIIB8). But this fragile avant-garde
coalition was pulled apart by the failure of the German revolution and the
setting up of the bourgeois Weimar Republic. The turn to a 'new objectivity'
was the somewhat paradoxical outcome for many of those who had been most
closely identified with Berlin Dada - a move which was underwritten for artists
like Grosz, Heartfield and Schlichter by membership of the newly formed
German Communist Party (see IIIB9 and 13). The tendency among left-wing
artists to turn again to objective forms of figuration is dealt with more fully in
the next section (see IVb passim). What pertains here is to note the diversity
of aims underlying the technically not dissimilar practices of Carra, de Chirico
and Derain, and of Grosz and other members of the Novembergruppe Left
opposition.

There was another kind of order emergent in the post-war West European
avant-garde which had relations of a different kind with the art practice evolving
in the Soviet Union. Dadaists and artists of the new objectivity shared a broad
political perspective with the post-revolutionary avant-garde, but little in the
way of techniques. Others, however, while sharing relatively little in terms of
political sympathies seemed to employ very nearly identical technical procedures.

The war years saw the achievement of a vision which had possessed the
avant-garde since the turn of the century: an abstract art. Although often



III Introduction 221

^edited with having painted the first abstract picture as early as 1910, Kandin-
s fcy was in fact still doubtful as to the feasibility of an abstract art in 1914 (see
|p8). In the conditions of relative isolation imposed by the war two remarkably
s ifnilar forms of geometric abstraction were achieved almost simultaneously at
opposite ends of the continent. Close scrutiny either of the paintings themselves
ot of the theories underlying them would have revealed clear distinctions. None
the less, in the long view there are obvious similarities between the painting of
j^londrian, advanced under the rubric of the 'new plastic' in Holland, and the
painting of Malevich, who called his work 'Suprematism', in Russia (see
IIIC5-7). While no less idiosyncratic than Kandinsky, Malevich and Mondrian
Jiad both passed through Cubism, and thus shared a technical resource which
both marked their art off from his, and offered a greater promise of development
to other artists. Cubism was always at bottom a representational art, but in its
autonomization of the picture surface and in its animation of that surface as a
series of shifting planes, it seems to have offered the technical device which
enabled theories of abstraction to be realized in practice. It is moreover a key
feature of this abstract art that it was advanced as a relevant response to social
as well as to aesthetic demands. In Holland, Mondrian joined with Van Doesburg
and others in the De Stijl group to advertise abstract art as the spiritual
precursor of a Utopian social harmony (see IIIc3^). In Russia the revolution
led Malevich to transform his Suprematism into the collective UNOVIS - Sup-
porters of the New Art - the more effectively to propagandize abstraction as the
revolutionary art appropriate to the new revolutionary society (see IIIc8 and 10).

Both of these approaches remain resolutely idealist. In response to the Marxist
materialism of the Bolsheviks however, other Russian artists developed an
austere form of technical inquiry, a so-called 'laboratory art', under the overall
name of Constructivism (see IIID3, 5 and 6). That there are clear overlaps
between these developments has often been taken as justifying claims for the
existence of an 'international constructive tendency'. Russian Constructivism
however, remains, distinct, politically and theoretically, if not always technically
and formally; distinguished by its post-revolutionary situation from comparable
practices in the bourgeois societies of Western Europe. Such 'utilitarian' con-
structivism in Russia stood at the high-water mark of a frequently voiced
avant-garde aspiration: the ultimate dissolution of art into life. In their social
dimension, Western forms of constructive abstraction proceeded by a similar
route to the opposite destination: the aestheticization of life itself. If their hopes
w ere fulfilled, art as it was currently practised would cease, not because it had
oeen subsumed into life but because the whole of life would have been rendered
artistic.

The former claim proceeds from Marxist historical materialism, and it com-
mitted those making it to the construction of a new life here and now within
the real history of the revolution. For the latter, historical reality, let alone the
contingencies of political organization, seems at times to have been viewed as
impeding a Utopian vision. The materialism of the one was as much opposed
to the idealism of the other as any Dadaist would have been to demands to
^instate the classical.



222 Rationalization and Transformation

There are, then, moments of unusual proximity as well as deep divergence
across the spectrum of the European avant-garde in the years after the Fi rst
World War, years given their peculiar and lasting character by the impact f
the Russian Revolution and the response it drew from artists. No one template
or pattern will do to describe these relations, as technical and contextual factors
form first into one constellation only to dissolve into another. There is an elusive
but significant distinction to be made between one sense of order which i s
predicated on a reinstatement of the classical tradition, and another which aspires
to a kind of modernization of the universal, a geometric Modernist utopianism.
This latter in its turn, though, must be distinguished from yet a third kind of
order built upon a sense of historical contingency and rupture, rather than any
conviction of eternal verities and forms of continuity. We may speak of three
tendencies in Classicism, Rationalism and Constructivism. These are at the same
time both responses to war and revolution, and responses to previous avant-garde
work. Neither side of that triangle makes any sense without the other. Nor does
the impulse to a kind of avant-garde border which also infuses the period, and
which exists in symbiosis with its apparent opposites. What is being contested,
culturally and technically, is a social space. The kinds of society which might
emerge, and the kinds of art which might therefore be possible, seemed uniquely
open in the approximate decade 1916/17 to 1926/27. The old world had gone
down like Atlantis in the maelstrom of world war, and the shape of the new
one had not yet been defined.



IllA

JNeo-Classicism and the Call
to Order



I Amedee Ozenfant (1886-1966) 'Notes on Cubism'

fie author was a Cubist painter as well as a prolific writer. This essay is an early
Statement of the desire, in the changed circumstances of the war and its aftermath, to
Ifean up Cubism: to 'rationalize' and 'purify' it. Not least, this involved separating it from
Ifiy supposed German associations and explicitly formulating a relation to the French
classical tradition. Originally published as 'Notes sur le Cubisme' in L'Eian, no. 10, Paris,
iecember 1916, from which the present translation is made. (This was the final edition
#a journal founded by Ozenfant in April 1915.)

 ..**;

the campaign of Elan has shown that Cubism owes nothing to the Germans:

%mce the insults about this issue were killed off in Paris, they have become rare

pi the provinces.

1 But none the less Cubism is widely discussed.

> The literary world shows us that intelligent amateurs of art are interested in

#ur pursuits, and most of this world shows a certain good will and an

understanding of Cubism; nevertheless, an important part of this same public

Continues to look down on Cubists and feel that the Cubists do the same to

them. The public happily scoffs at that which is beyond its understanding.

Moreover, certain artists have been led to adopt an abstruse and disdainful

attitude to the public, judging them to be fools.

For many, Cubism has remained an art of the clique or coterie: it is useless
to harp on the dangers art runs when it shuts itself in an ivory tower.

Certain Cubists, mimicking Picasso, have thought it possible to rebuild the
pretentious and trivial ivory tower of the Romantics and to top it off with a
&p brought down from Montmartre.

'Others, neither artists nor intellectuals but true ignoramuses, have worn out
the public with a pseudo-scientific pathos, discrediting the works of the true
^Cubists.

This interest in Cubism is quite evident today, so that from now on it will
** possible to speak of it reasonably, of its truth and of its errors.
* Cubism is assured a genuine importance in the history of the plastic arts,
because it has already partly realized its purist plan of cleansing the language



1



224 Rationalization and Transformation

of the plastic arts of parasitic expressions, just as Mallarme tried to do in verbal
language.

Cubism is a Movement of Purism

Following the experiments of Ingres, Cezanne, Seurat, Matisse on the essential
properties of visible matter, Cubism has pointed out that optical effects count
formally, beyond all description or representation, by the power of their
harmonies and dissonances.

Cubism was to fuse the regeneration of contemporary art with the great
tradition of the formalists: Assyrians, Greeks, Chinese and the admirable
anonymous 'Negro' artists.

Eliminating all literal representation, the Picassos, Braques and Archipenkos
showed once again the essential elements in the works of a Claude Lorrain or
a Negro painter: the optical relations of matter. Despite the interest of its
experiments, Cubism went through a crisis. This was the fault of certain major
artists who, tempted by the commodity that Cubism had made from itself,
turned in upon themselves and lapsed into the automatic use of the same forms
over and over. This threatened to ossify Cubism into a formula of angles, the
repetition of handles, spouts, to stand for pitchers and so on.

This was a crisis because true Cubists, renouncing the charm of living curves,
used the line and the square in a Socratic manner; whereas the mediocrities
(having successively abandoned pointillism, then Matisse-ism, as old hat),
decided that Cubism was the last fashionable bandwagon. Their latest delight
is to impose parts of a square on women's faces; this is to turn Cubism into a
machine-tool.

A crisis, because some ignoramuses, contrary to all reason, banished the third
dimension as out of date, and replaced it by a new fourth dimension. As this
fourth dimension is purely hypothetical (the formal sense of man remains
conditioned by his perceptions, which are purely three-dimensional) what do
they do? They suppress the third dimension. So in effect they reduce to just
two dimensions, forgetting that it is ludicrous to pretend, with the help of the
two dimensions, to create from them a fourth.

The third dimension (depth) is never absent from any plastic work, even in
a simple drawing, since this drawing suggests on one plane the limits of different
planes. It is never absent, even in a canvas covered with patches of colour, since
formally the diverse colours appear to be on different planes.

The only painting in two dimensions would be a surface plane painted in #
single colour.

If in a plastic work the third dimension is necessarily perspectival, one can
argue, as a necessary corollary, that there are no plastic works which lac
perspective. .

However, there are Cubists who declare they have depicted the fourt
dimension and abolished the third, in the process supplanting perspective. As
if you could play around with perspective, and the volume of substantial objects,
just on the basis of fashion or some decree!




iiia Neo-Classicism and the Call to Order 225

This just proves that formalists, being architects of matter and working with
the properties of this matter in space, should in the interests of both Cubism
a nd Art, know as much as possible about the laws that govern them, to avoid
making free with these same laws.

The artist has a right to unlimited poetic licence if his sensibility guides him,
but such a licence can only ever serve to confirm the existence of these laws.

There is also a crisis because the faux naifs, followers of Rousseau, believe in
the indispensability of the trivial. They are accompanied by a group of poets,
nale imitations of Max Jacob, and of grotesque musicians who prattle, whistle
and tinkle. There is a crisis, finally, because certain artists, enamoured of
strength, forget that strength without flexibility is brutality; a manifestation of
weakness, certainly a form of sickliness.

.:.. One of the most highly prized achievements in Cubism is, first, to have succeeded
jn introducing into art new harmonies of matter, form and tone. Second, to have
shown, as it seems to me, that everything is beautiful from a certain angle.
-. Cubism knew how to change accepted angles.

4 Contributing a new way of attuning our eyes (though sometimes perversely),
it revealed new beauties to the eye, thereby diminishing ugliness by getting us
*i$ed to its artistic taste.

# Finally, it seems that Cubism too often forgets that its value does not depend
on the absence of representation, but from the beauty of harmony. If it is true
fkat the interest of a form is independent of meaningfulness, the opposite is
J&ae; that meaning takes nothing from formal beauty.

3: If it seems just to class Braque amongst the great formal artists, this is not
(because his art is non-representational. If it seems certain that Segonzac is a
freat formal artist, this is not because his art is representational.
'-p However, it seems probable that the representationality of forms, far from
damaging their shape, may be a source of formal strength (because the emotion
Aplastic art is not solely an optical phenomenon). The intellect reacts to the
optical sensation, and enriches or deforms it, according to whether one has used
& appropriately or not.

3 Remember that this intervention by the intelligence would allow one to make
**se of the resources of natural association: and thus Cubism would avoid the
anger of ossifying its forms into 'decorative' formulae. (This is something that
the Persians, the Cretans, the Arabs, etc. did not avoid when they organized
*e interplay of form beyond all representation.)

We will indulge those followers who constitute a school because in spite of
tverything, they have use of the forms of the masters; they can exaggerate them,
Slickly make them unbearable, set free the liberty that their genius holds in chains.



I Guillaume Apollinaire (1880-1918) 'The New
Spirit and the Poets'

pollinaire stresses the return to discipline and to order demanded of the post-war
^nt-garde. This involved a rejection of romanticism, which is seen as tainted by



226 Rationalization and Transformation

German associations, and the invocation of classicism, rooted in a sense of the nation
Originally published as 1'Esprit Nouveau et les Poetes', Mercure de France, Paris,
1 December 1918. The present extract is taken from R. Shattuck (ed.) f Selected Writings
of Guillaume Apollinaire, New York, 1971.

The new spirit which will dominate the poetry of the entire world has nowhere
come to light as it has in France. The strong intellectual discipline which the
French have always imposed on themselves permits them, as well as their
spiritual kin, to have a conception of life, of the arts and of letters, which,
without being simply the recollection of antiquity, is also not the counterpart
of romantic prettiness.

The new spirit which is making itself heard strives above all to inherit from
the classics a sound good sense, a sure critical spirit, perspectives on the universe
and on the soul of man, and the sense of duty which lays bare our feelings and
limits or rather contains their manifestations.

It strives further to inherit from the romantics a curiosity which will incite
it to explore all the domains suitable for furnishing literary subject matter which
will permit life to be exalted in whatever form it occurs.

To explore truth, to search for it, as much in the ethnic domain, for example,
as in that of the imagination - those are the principal characteristics of the new
spirit.

This tendency, moreover, has always had its bold proponents, although they
were unaware of it; for a long time it has been taking shape and making progress.

However, this is the first time that it has appeared fullv conscious of itself.

It would have been strange if in an epoch when the popular art par excellence,
the cinema, is a book of pictures, the poets had not tried to compose pictures
for meditative and refined minds which are not content with the crude imagin-
ings of the makers of films. These last will become more perceptive, and one
can predict the day when, the photograph and the cinema having become the
only form of publication in use, the poet will have a freedom heretofore unknown.

One should not be astonished if, with only the means they have now at their
disposal, they set themselves to preparing this new art (vaster than the plain
art of words) in which, like conductors of an orchestra of unbelievable scope,
they will have at their disposition the entire world, its noises and its appearances,
the thought and language of man, song, dance, all the arts and all the artifices,
still more mirages than Morgane could summon up on the hill of Gibel, witn
which to compose the visible and unfolded book of the future.

But generally you will not find in France the 'words at liberty' which have
been reached by the excesses of the Italian and Russian futurists, the extravagant
offspring of the new spirit, for France abhors disorder. She readily questions
fundamentals, but she has a horror of chaos.

Do not believe that this new spirit is complicated, slack, artificial, and frozen-
In keeping with the very order of nature, the poet puts aside any high-flo* n



IIIa Neo-Classicism and the Call to Order 227

^rpose. There is no longer any Wagnerianism in us, and the young authors
^ve cast far away all the enchanted clothing of the mighty romanticism of
germany and Wagner, just as they have rejected the rustic tinsel of our early
valuations of Jean-Jacques Rousseau.

- I do not believe that social developments will ever go so far that one will not
liable to speak of national literature. On the contrary, however far one advances
0ii the path of new freedoms, they will only reinforce most of the ancient
disciplines and bring out new ones which will not be less demanding than the
0|d. This is why I think that, whatever happens, art increasingly has a country,
furthermore, poets must always express a milieu, a nation; and artists, just as
poets, just as philosophers, form a social estate which belongs doubtless to all
humanity, but as the expression of a race, of one given environment.

Art will only cease being national the day that the whole universe, living in
the same climate, in houses built in the same style, speaks the same language
#ith the same accent - that is to say never. From ethnic and national differences
#e born the variety of literary expressions, and it is that very variety which
must be preserved.

, A cosmopolitan lyric expression would only yield shapeless works without
character or individual structure, which would have the value of the common-
|laces of international parliamentary rhetoric. And notice that the cinema, which

M the perfect cosmopolitan art, already shows ethnic differences immediately
;|pparent to everyone, and film enthusiasts immediately distinguish between an
Jteierican and an Italian film. Likewise the new spirit, which has the ambition
M manifesting a universal spirit and which does not intend to limit its activity,
fenone the less, and claims to respect the fact, a particular and lyric expression
if the French nation, just as the classic spirit is, par excellence, a sublime
impression of the same nation.

$It must not be forgotten that it is perhaps more dangerous for a nation to
*Bow itself to be conquered intellectually than by arms. That is why the new
spirit asserts above all an order and a duty which are the great classic qualities
Manifested by French genius; and to them it adds liberty. This liberty and
this order, which combine in the new spirit, are its characteristic and its
length.



$ Oswald Spengler (1880-1936) from The Decline of
h the West

.'!>

Jpengler's massive work became a benchmark of the conservative response to the
*] dern world in general and the upheaval wrought by the First World War in particular.
; #nough its cultural pessimism had an effect on Nazism, the work also had an influence
... jjPon figures as diverse as El Lissitsky, Ludwig Wittgenstein, and much later, Clement
; j*eenberg. In this extract Spengler charts the decline of Western art from the Renaiss-
ance to Expressionism. Originally published as Der Untergang Des Abendlandes, Gestalt
f *W Wirklichkeit, Munich, 1918. English translation by C. F. Atkinson, London, 1926.
- '"e present extract is taken from Chapter VIII, 'Music and Plastic (2) Act and Portrait'.



228 Rationalization and Transformation

[. . .] The sign of all living art, the pure harmony of 'will', 'must' and 'can\
the self-evidence of the aim, the un-self-consciousness of the execution, the
unity of the art and the Culture - all that is past and gone. In Corot and
Tiepolo, Mozart and Cimarosa, there is still a real mastery of the mother-tongue.
After them, the process of mutilation begins, but no one is conscious of i t
because no one now can speak it fluently. Once upon a time, Freedom and
Necessity were identical; but now what is understood by freedom is in fact
indiscipline. In the time of Rembrandt or Bach the 'failures' that we know only
too well were quite unthinkable. The Destiny of the form lay in the race or
the school, not in the private tendencies of the individual. Under the spell of
a great tradition full achievement is possible even to a minor artist, because the
living art brings him in touch with his task and the task with him. To-day,
these artists can no longer perform what they intend, for intellectual operations
are a poor substitute for the trained instinct that has died out. [. . .]

Between Wagner and Manet there is a deep relationship, which is not, indeed,
obvious to everyone but which Baudelaire with his unerring flair for the decadent
detected at once. For the Impressionists, the end and the culmination of art
was the conjuring up of a world in space out of strokes and patches of colour,
and this was just what Wagner achieved with three bars. A whole world of soul
could crowd into these three bars. Colours of starry midnight, of sweeping
clouds, of autumn, of the day dawning in fear and sorrow, sudden glimpses of
sunlit distances, world-fear, impending doom, despair and its fierce effort,
hopeless hope - all these impressions which no composer before him had thought
it possible to catch, he could paint with entire distinctness in the few tones of
a motive. Here the contrast of Western music with Greek plastic has reached
its maximum. Everything merges in bodiless infinity, no longer even does a
linear melody wrestle itself clear of the vague tone-masses that in strange
surgings challenge an imaginary space. The motive comes up out of dark terrible
deeps. It is flooded for an instant by a flash of hard bright sun. Then, suddenly,
it is so close upon us that we shrink. It laughs, it coaxes, it threatens, and anon
it vanishes into the domain of the strings, only to return again out of endless
distances, faintly modified and in the voice of a single oboe, to pour out a fresh
cornucopia of spiritual colours. Whatever this is, it is neither painting nor music,
in any sense of these words that attaches to previous work in the strict style.

All that Nietzsche says of Wagner is applicable, also, to Manet. Ostensibly a
return to the elemental, to Nature, as against contemplation-painting (Inhalt-
smalerei) and abstract music, their art really signifies a concession to the
barbarism of the Megalopolis, the beginning of dissolution sensibly manifested
in a mixture of brutality and refinement. As a step, it is necessarily the last
step. An artificial art has no further organic future, it is the mark of the end_

And the bitter conclusion is that it is all irretrievably over with the arts o
form of the West. The crisis of the 19th Century was the death-struggle. Like
the Apollinian, the Egyptian and every other, the Faustian art dies of senility,
having actualized its inward possibilities and fulfilled its mission within the
course of its Culture.




HIa Neo-Classicism and the Call to Order 229

^ What is practised as art to-day - be it music after Wagner or painting after
ezanne, Leibl and Menzel - is impotence and falsehood. Look where one will,
can one find the great personalities that would justify the claim that there is
Utill an art of determinate necessity? Look where one will, can one find the
.-self-evident ly necessary task that awaits such an artist? We go through all the
exhibitions, the concerts, the theatres, and find only industrious cobblers and
floisy fools, who delight to. produce something for the market, something that
w ill 'catch on 1 with a public for whom art and music and drama have long
ceased to be spiritual necessities. At what a level of inward and outward dignity
stand to-day that which is called art and those who are called artists! In the
shareholders' meeting of any limited company, or in the technical staff of any
first-rate engineering works there is more intelligence, taste, character and
capacity than in the whole music and painting of present-day Europe. There
have always been, for one great artist, a hundred superfluities who practised
art, but so long as a great tradition (and therefore great art) endured even these
achieved something worthy. We can forgive this hundred for existing, for in
the ensemble of the tradition they were the footing for the individual great man.
But to-day we have only these superfluities, and ten thousand of them, working
art Tor a living' (as if that were a justification!). One thing is quite certain, that
to-day every single art-school could be shut down without art being affected in
the slightest. We can learn all we wish to know about the art-clamour which a
megalopolis sets up in order to forget that its art is dead from the Alexandria
of the year 200. There, as here in our world-cities, we find a pursuit of illusions
of artistic progress, of personal peculiarity, of 'the new style 1 , of 'unsuspected
possibilities', theoretical babble, pretentious fashionable artists, weight-lifters
with cardboard dumb-bells - the 'Literary Man' in the Poet's place, the
unabashed farce of Expressionism which the art-trade has organized as a 'phase
of art-history', thinking and feeling and forming as industrial art. Alexandria,
too, had problem-dramatists and box-office artists whom it preferred to So-
phocles, and painters who invented new tendencies and successfully bluffed their
public. What do we possess to-day as 'art'? A faked music, filled with artificial
noisiness of massed instruments; a faked painting, full of idiotic, exotic and
showcard effects, that every ten years or so concocts out of the form-wealth of
millennia some new 'style' which is in fact no style at all since everyone does
as he pleases; a lying plastic that steals from Assyria, Egypt and Mexico
indifferently. Yet this and only this, the taste of the 'man of the world', can
be accepted as the expression and sign of the age. [. . .]

4 Carlo Carra (1881-1966) c Our Antiquity'

Originally a Futurist painter, Carra came to reject the avant-garde vehemently, embrac-
ing instead a notion of the persistence of eternal values embodied in the classical
tradition in art. After a meeting with de Chirico in 1917 he was involved in the promotion
f a 'Metaphysical School' of Italian painters. Composed between 1916 and 1918, this
essay was originally published in Carra's Pittura Metafisica, Florence, 1919. The present
translation by C. Tisdall is taken from M. Carra, Metaphysical Art, New York 1971.



230 Rationalization and Transformation

Whatever else will our contemporaries find to reproach us with! And yet, if w e
too had forgotten our origins we would certainly be praised, but we would no
longer be fit to carry out works of uncontaminated will.

Our ancient character is firmly rooted in severe law, almost as if to vegetate
more comfortably in modern reality without destroying it.

Admittedly, it would at times be pleasant to leave this state of inebriation. i n
which we live, were it not for the magic link which holds us bound to our poor
'savage gods'.

The hot winds of history arouse this spiritual disposition for new and
profound things. They hint of calm music. The game becomes serious, my
friends, and to sing this music too freely could also be dangerous.

We never knew 'indifference', but now our spasmodic passions have ceased
to preach. We prefer to conceal ourselves from the eyes of the profane. W r e are
alone in the profundity of our epoch, alone with our sin, and with our study.

By a strange anarchical paradox we have returned, almost without wishing to
do so, to pure classicism.

What was it that breathed in our ears the sound of so many things we believed
to be dead?

The truth is that we know of no greater happiness than that of listening to
ourselves.

What is this feeling that provokes in us the jealousy that a thought of ours
may tomorrow belong to many men, a jealousy greater than that provoked by
the thought that our woman may cease to be ours?

If we too had reduced the spirit of art to a convenient calculation of algebra
and daily bread, we would perhaps feel more secure, but also more mortified
than we do. The enjoyments of easily-conquered paradises always leave us
indifferent.

We too have sung the praise of the western orgies; then we felt it permissible
to receive our brothers 1 indecision with the tenderness befitting our democratic
habits. But now we have become more cautious, and no longer tolerate the riots
which ambitious and disturbed people denominate 'artistic movements'. These
villains always ensnare incautious youth, which, eager to make itself felt, fails
to realize that its youthful adventurousness is prone to malevolence and un-
grateful obduracy.

From this it can be discerned that we no longer wish to see ourselves
confronted with uncertain premises. If it is not a sin of pride to do so, let us
claim to have thrown overboard a good part of our corruptibility, or at least ot
our own belief in lying prophecies.

We have become aware of the truths that are said to be serious, and we do
not accept that the veils have been lifted for the delight of the unworthy. It * s
an illusion that one can force this on those who do not wish it, and he who
tries to do so, demonstrates such candour that he is pardonable because the
need to give vent to the passions that torment him is manifest. He is unlike
us, for with experience we have lost this candour and believe most firmly that
that which is particular to the individual can never belong to a generation.



iiia Neo-Classicism and the Call to Order 231

Che chameleon-like reproduction of visible reality is another ugly thing that
as been imported from outside. In places where painters were not used to
condensation of the elements of the body, they could now surrender, with
deceitful ardour, as if it were a liberation, to theories that were born and resolved
without being completed. And it was thus that the painting of so-called effects
$f light (which really concern only highly-strung stage electricians) came to be
jccepted.

r. What was needed was a return to the Italian idea of the original solidity of
things, so that men would recognize the well-disguised deceit of the astute
philosophies which are put into circulation with all the publicity necessary for
tke triumph of an industrial product.

 But now that the inevitable intoxication has been slept off, matters are
returning to a more determined state. In this way, linear delights will no longer
fce disrupted by ecstatic rotations of colour and we will no longer be pushed
towards trivial and trembling mobility and tumultuous surfaces.

I The appearance of even the smallest bodies is no longer changed by ephemeral
distractions, our ends are no longer resolved in light which cannot celebrate
wight.

iThe aims will change and by means of a second, richer, more diffuse and
^nscious transposition, reality will again be conceived with an inextinguishable
-^Jpiritual ardour which will comply more persuasively with form. After this,
fillour, and the picture.

$$ Combinations of the module will return in valiant opposition, and with them,
iplie golden section, giving a more ample spatial breath.

^ Tonal matter will be assembled homogeneously in all its immanent weight.
^Internal discipline brings us to a more fulfilled significance, to a cubature
Regnant with poetry.
1^ And this is how we initiated the second period of our artistic development

Vktr having confronted the public in the Italian theatres, and brawled in the

Squares, for the advent of a new art.

II Much water has flowed under the bridges of art, but the proprieties that
preside over painting are yet to be clarified. They can be summarized in the
fallowing impulses of the spirit:

|) line (straight and curved in contrast) in proportional arrangements of indi-
vidual forces,
f) the local tone of aspects of reality (simultaneous relationship of chiaroscuro

and chromatic colour),
f $-. tne first stage of the form having been attained, to find the balance of the
p? volumes; that is, the synthesis which constitutes the definitive order within
;- the painting. Let us not forget that art cannot be only the immediate
:-h reflection of a sensation; neither must forms remain as merely raw external
J ;).,- expressions of the reality that surrounds us, or be limited to arresting the
shadows of vibratorv movement.



232 Rationalization and Transformation

Let us have creation, not the imitation of phenomena. Certain slight nervou s
stimuli make us smile; we can no longer mistake them for real spiritual joy.

The mislaid necessities of style are returning, or rather are reborn; and the
artist, with greater purity than before, proclaims them irrefutably present.

Never has this problem been felt to be so important as it is today by those
who are exponents of the collective spirit. It is the law of realization that presides
over artistic representation. And so, say what you will, to reduce painting to a
realistic recognition of human and natural appearances is almost equivalent to
a disregard of the superior aims of art.

Artistic creation involves a watchful, diligent and attentive will, and demands
a continued effort to prevent the 'apparitions' from being overlooked. Artistic
creation, which is satisfaction of the imagination and intellect, is destined to
stimulate in the beholder a particular meaning and a repetition of that satisfac-
tion felt by the artist.
* * *

Let it not be thought, however, that we wish to isolate the problem of national
art from the finality of European - universal - order, on which every artistic
problem is directly dependent. We will dwell in detail on the task that the
young are called to perform, a grave responsibility for anyone conscious of the
situation in which Italian art, for various reasons, finds itself. To try to analyse
these reasons could be to fall into the error of a man dissecting the human body
in the hope of discovering not only the law of life but also that of human emotion.

On the other hand, to run joyously towards certain intoxications, shouting
iong live' or 'down with' according to one's sympathies or antipathies, is to
lose contact with the concreteness of things. It therefore follows, if one cannot
reasonably isolate the examination of a single part without considering the idea
imparted by the parts, that one cannot form a general idea without considering
its particular effects. Whether one proceeds from the general to the particular,
or vice versa, whether one proceeds by synthesis or analysis, every artistic
problem must be seen as connected in all its parts and with its necessary unity.

But we know that in the sum of experiences there arise so many new and
unforeseen elements that unity either cannot be attained, or makes itself manifest
in unexpected ways.

In aesthetic activity more than in any other human activity, one never attains
the end one sets out to reach. But in days of great aesthetic disorganization,
any support is good. Today, for men of imagination, tendencies of equal falsity
contend for supremacy at the crossroads of obscure directions.

Light as a fountain, spiritualization slowly comes; but those who wish to
understand are not intimidated by adverse forces.

We are no longer constrained by physical illuminations to play at blind man s
buff with our thoughts. This is the theory of the card players who when the}
want spades and see clubs turn up, change their tactics.

It is easy to throw hurried accents into a mess of hypotheses of doubtfu
taste, or to outline improvised figures without clarity, precision or control. Bu
even if there are infinite ways of erring, there is only one way to work correctrv*



IHa Neo-Classicism and the Call to Order 233

jjye are not concerned with an intimate and objective examination of a definitive
;|fforni, because nothing is definitive, but with a form of art as yet scarcely

Sketched in, simple and elementary. And rather than a norm we set out to

^provide a suggestion in generic terms.

|t Nevertheless, the choice of new criteria and postulates is already a guarantee

Hgf seriousness and probity, if not yet a demonstration of new constructions of

Sforms hitherto sought and imagined and invoked in vain.

1; But one could already demonstrate with readily accessible facts that meta-
physical painting is nothing but an intuitive development of that which preceded
it, and in actual fact it perhaps represents the first, imprecise, ideal projection;
the first steps on intractable soil; an uncontrollable desire to go beyond purely
sensory and materialistic forms, however superfluous it may seem to us to claim
the roots of this form of art in the Italian tradition. We do not wish to base
$ny claim on the future, because art, like history, passes through successive
Stages, though this does not alter its profound essence, and it carries the future
fithin it.

As can be seen, we do not rest our case on originality, but rather on the discovery
of origins which will lead to the achievement of rigorous and immutable forms.

";* * *

;;i[. . .] Perhaps this word [originality] constitutes the greatest and most dis-
%iieting misunderstanding to emerge from the workshops of the artistic peas-
jfef&try in these recent years.

|i It is bitter for the sensitive man to see how arrogance, ostentation, frivolity,
; facuity, wantonness and every excess nowadays are the most positive charac-
teristics of today's artists.

5 b From this arises the reciprocal concern shown by today's painters for surpas-
tbig each other in the incessant invention of new styles, supposing that they
can capture the admiration of the public by such artifice, and neglecting the
fcnprovement of their real creative faculty; their output is consequently closer
& bizarre eccentricity than to the real imagination which neither tires the mind
aor diverts the attention from the substantial aims of art.
'And it is precisely this pitiful mania for seeming original that prevents
contemporary painters from realizing the varied graces of linear relationships,
so essential in the production of that magic enchantment which used to be
^miliar to the painter.

So it happens that, while on the one hand we consider irksome the closed
orders, the arthritic systems and the dead forms which the good old Academy's
Hiles seek to put back into circulation, on the other we must rebuke the young
Painters who are neglecting the most elementary awareness and absolutely every
Necessity of study to follow their own fatuous whims; because in the last resort
*e should never forget that he who refrains from study of the great masters
through fear of losing his native sensibility, will only succeed in creating a form
f art without roots and without real excellence.

It would be as if someone claimed that it is possible to become a great poet
Without having any appreciation at all of language.
Even the earth would produce only wild plants, if the farmer's care and toil



234 Rationalization and Transformation

did not put it in condition to receive the seeds and participate in the nourish-
ment of delicate produce.

This is what happens to the painter as long as he ignores the precious
contribution made by the great masters over the centuries. He who fears to lose
his native poetic sense should not devote himself to art or poetry, since these
presuppose a knowledge of historical development and of the informative laws
of expression.



5 Leonce Rosenberg (1881-1947) 'Tradition and
Cubism'

Rosenberg replaced Kahnweiler as the principal dealer involved in Cubism. He partic-
ularly supported the 'rationalized' developments of the Parisian avant-garde in the
post-war period through his gallery, the Gaierie de I'Effort Moderne, and the accompa-
nying publication, the Bulletin de I'Effort Moderne. The present text was originally
published in the organ of the Metaphysical School, Valori Plastici, Rome, February-
March 1919. This translation is from E. Fry (ed.), Cubism, New York and London, 1966.

Taking no account of accident, pushing aside anecdote, neglecting the particular,
the 'cubist' artists tend towards the constant and the absolute. Instead of
reconstituting an aspect of nature, they seek to construct the plastic equivalents
of natural objects, and the pictorial fact so constituted becomes an aspect created
by the mind. The construction realised in this way has not a comparative value
but a strictly intrinsic value, or, to use a Platonic phrase, is 'beautiful in itself.
There is nothing arbitrary in its architecture; on the contrary, everything in
it is the consequence of a feeling, and is subject to the eternal laws of
equilibrium.

To make a picture, the artist begins by choosing and grouping certain elements
from external reality; in other words by synthesis he draws from some object
the elements - forms and colours - necessary to the assembling of his subject.
The transition from object to subject constitutes his aesthetic, which is governed
by the mind. After this, to pass from the subject to the work, he employs a
variety of means proper to the expression of his subject; this process constitutes
his technique, and it is inspired by emotion. This effort defies analysis; it carries
within itself all the mystery of Art. The final result is the picture, whose
emanation is Beauty.



6 Giorgio de Chirico (1888-1978) 'The Return to the
Craft 1

De Chirico suffered a breakdown during the war. After a one-man show in Rome in 1919
he became increasingly preoccupied with the technical methods of earlier Italian paint-
ing. This essay, concluding with an affirmation in Latin of his status as a classical
painter, was first published as II ritorno al mestiere' in Valori Plastici, Rome, November-



^, iiia Neo-Classicism and the Call to Order 235

f; pecember 1919. The present extract is taken from the translation in Carra, op, cit.

By now it is quite apparent: the painters who have been agitating for half a
century, who have been racking their brains to invent schools and systems, who
jiave sweated with the continual effort of seeming original, of presenting their
personalities, now hide like rabbits behind the banner of multifarious fancy-
"work, and press ahead the latest defence of their ignorance and impotence: the
pretence of spirituality. (This is an uncontrollable phenomenon, but only for
the majority, including the writers on art; a few intelligent men, whom you and
J know, are capable of understanding of what this spirituality consists and of
.esteeming it for what it is worth.) These painters, then, are returning prudently,

v with outstretched hands like men walking in the dark, towards an art less obstructed
jby fancy-work, towards clearer and more concrete forms, and towards surfaces that
pin testify without too many equivocations, just what one knows and what one can
do. In my opinion this is a good sign. Such a turn of events was inevitable.
i, It is curious to note how this return came about. It was effectuated with
prudence, or to be plain, with fear. It seems that the painters feared that in
going back, they would stumble and fall into the same snares and traps that
they themselves had laid during the previous advance. Such fear is justified by
*the fact that they are unarmed, vulnerable and weak. While returning it is
ipecessary, too, that they grasp hold of a few of those same fancy tricks: that

( Jthey make use of the shields they used during the advance. And so the great
problem that terrifies them most in this return is that of the human figure.
s Man who with his canons rises again like a spectre in front of man.
^ The neglect of anthropomorphic representation, and the deformation of it,
.encouraged entire legions of painters to turn out stupid and facile reproductions.
/With its return the problem of animal-man looms larger and more terrible than
.$ver, since, this time, the right weapons to confront it are lacking, or rather they
*re in existence, but they are blunt, and many have forgotten how to u^e them.

These painters can no longer hide behind the excuse of primitive artifice.
1 The case of the penitent painter of today is tragic, but amidst such puerile
confusion there is also a comic side to it that encourages an ironic smile from
beneath the observer's moustache.
* * *

To return to the craft! This will not be easy and will demand time and toil.
The schools and the masters are deficient, or rather they are vilified by the
colouristic riot that has invaded Europe in this half-century. The academies
exist, full of methods and systems, but, alas, what results they produce! What
n earth would the weakest student of 1600 say if he could see a masterpiece
y a professore of an Italian academv, or bv a cher maitre of the Ecole des
iBeaux-Arts of Paris? [. . .]

r 9 * *

'"; [..] This is the point we have reached. This is the state of confusion,

ignorance and overwhelming stupidity in the midst of which the very few

Painters whose brains are clear and whose eyes are clean are preparing to return

t( > pictorial science following the principles and teachings of our old masters.



236 Rationalization and Transformation

Their first lesson was drawing; drawing, the divine art, the foundation of every
plastic construction, skeleton of every good work, eternal law that every artifice
must follow. Drawing, ignored, neglected and deformed by all modern painters
(I say all, including the decorators of parliamentary halls and the various
professors of the realm), drawing, I say, will return not as a fashion as those
who talk of artistic events are accustomed to say, but as an inevitable necessity,
as a condition sine qua non of good creation. 'Un tableau bien dessine est toujours
assez bien peint\ said Jean Dominique Ingres, and I think he knew more about
it than all the modern painters. Just as in elections voters are exhorted to g
to the polls, we, who were the first to set a good example in painting, summon
those painters who have been or can be redeemed to go to the statues. Yes, to
the statues to learn the nobility and the religion of drawing, to the statues to
dehumanize you a little, you who in spite of all your puerile devilries were still
too human. If you lack the time and the means to go and copy in the sculpture
museums, if the academies have not yet adopted the system of shutting the
future painter up for at least five years in a room in which there is nothing but
marble and plaster statues, if the dawn of laws and canons has not yet arisen,
have patience; and meanwhile, so as not to lose time, buy a plaster copy -
thought it need not be a reproduction of an antique masterpiece. Buy your
plaster copy, and then in the silence of your room copy it ten, twenty, a hundred
times. Copy it until you manage to produce a satisfying work, to draw a hand
or a foot in such a way that if they were to come alive miraculously, the bones,
muscles, nerves and tendons would all be correct.

To return to the craft, our painters must be extremely diligent in the
perfection of their means: canvas, colours, brushes, oils and varnishes must be
of the highest quality. Colours, unfortunately, are of very poor quality nowadays
because the roguery and immorality of the manufacturers and the modern
painters' mania for speed have encouraged the distribution of very poor pro-
ducts, since no painter was likely to protest. It would be a good thing if painters
again took up the habit of making their own canvas and colours. Rather more
patience and effort is necessary: but, when the painter has understood once and
for all that the execution of a painting is not a thing to be carried out in the
shortest possible time, a thing merely to be exhibited or sold to a dealer; when
he has understood that the same painting should be worked on for months, even
years, until it is completely smooth and polished; and until the painter's
conscience is completely clear; when he has understood this he will not find it
difficult to sacrifice a few hours a day to the preparation of his own canvases
and colours. He will do it with care and with love, it will cost him less, and
will provide him with safer and more consistent colours.

When this transformation comes about, the finest painters, who will be
considered the masters, will be able to exert control and act as judges and
inspectors for the minor painters. It would be wise to adopt the discipline
current in the era of the great Flemish painters who, united in societies, used
to elect a president who had the power to inflict punishments, to impose fines
and even to expel from the society a painter who was guilty of negligence or
who had used inferior materials.



IHa Neo-Classicism and the Call to Order 237

When Ingres painted, he had within reach one hundred paintbrushes of the
finest quality, perfectly washed and dried and ready for use the moment the
artist needed them. Today our avant-garde boasts of using a couple of rough
decorator's brushes, clogged with dried paint, hard and never washed. [. . .]
* * *

As far as material and craft are concerned, futurism dealt the final blow to
Italian painting. Even before the advent of futurism it was navigating murky
waters, but the futurist revels made the bucket overflow.

Now night falls on everything. We have reached the second half of the
parabola. Hysteria and roguery are condemned. I think that by now we are all
satiated with roguery, whether it be political, literary, or painterly. With the
sunset of hysteria more than one painter will return to the craft, and those who
have already done so can work with freer hands, and their work will be more
adequately recognized and recompensed.

As for me, I am calm, and I decorate myself with three words that I wish to
be the seal of all my work: Pictor classicus sum.



f Charles Edouard Jeanneret (Le Corbusier)
1 (1887-1965) and Amedee Ozenfant (1886-1966)
'Purism'

|fie authors met in late 1917 whereupon Jeanneret, trained as an architect and
*aughtsman, also took up painting. In November 1918 they jointly published After
Cubism (Apres le Cubisme), developing the ideas broached in Ozenfant's 'Notes on
feubism' of 1916. In 1920 they founded the review L'Espht Nouveau to promote a
llturn, within the avant-garde, to principles of classical order. 'Purism', a comprehensive
statement of these principles, was published in the fourth issue of 1920, pp. 369-86.
The present extracts are taken from the first English translation in R. L. Herbert, Modern
Artists on Art, New York, 1964.

Introduction

Logic, born of human constants and without which nothing is human, is an
instrument of control and, for he who is inventive, a guide toward discovery;
it controls and corrects the sometimes capricious march of intuition and permits
ne to go ahead with certainty.

v It is the guide that sometimes precedes and sometimes follows the explorer;
yut without intuition it is a sterile device; nourished by intuition, it allows one
to dance in his fetters.'

f Nothing is worthwhile which is not general, nothing is worthwhile which is
fot transmittable. We have attempted to establish an esthetic that is rational,
*nd therefore human, [. . .]

^he Work of Art

*ne work of art is an artificial object which permits the creator to place the



238 Rationalization and Transformation

spectator in the state he wishes; later we will study the means the creator has
at his disposal to attain this result.

With regard to man, esthetic sensations are not all of the same degree of intensity
or quality; we might say that there is a hierarchy.

The highest level of this hierarchy seems to us to be that special state of a
mathematical sort to which we are raised, for example, by the clear perception
of a great general law (the state of mathematical lyricism, one might say); it i s
superior to the brute pleasure of the senses; the senses are involved, however,
because every being in this state is as if in a state of beatitude.

The goal of art is not simple pleasure, rather it partakes of the nature of
happiness.

It is true that plastic art has to address itself more directly to the senses than
pure mathematics which only acts by symbols, these symbols sufficing to trigger
in the mind consequences of a superior order; in plastic art, the senses should
be strongly moved in order to predispose the mind to the release into play of
subjective reactions without which there is no work of art. But there is no art
worth having without this excitement of an intellectual order, of a mathematical
order; architecture is the art which up until now has most strongly induced the
states of this category. The reason is that everything in architecture is expressed
by order and economy.

The means of executing a work of art is a transmittable and universal language.

One of the highest delights of the human mind is to perceive the order of nature
and to measure its own participation in the scheme of things; the work of art seems
to us to be a labor of putting into order, a masterpiece of human order.

Now the world only appears to man from the human vantage point, that is,
the world seems to obey the laws man has been able to assign to it; when man
creates a work of art, he has the feeling of acting as a 'god '

Now a law is nothing other than the verification of an order.

In summary, a work of art should induce a sensation of a mathematical order,
and the means of inducing this mathematical order should be sought among
universal means.



System

* * *

Man and organized beings are products of natural selection. In every evolution
on earth, the organs of beings are more and more adapted and purified, and
the entire forward march of evolution is a function of purification. The human
body seems to be the highest product of natural selection.

When examining these selected forms, one finds a tendency toward certain
identical aspects, corresponding to constant functions, functions which are ot
maximum efficiency, maximum strength, maximum capacity, etc., that is, maxi-
mum economy. ECONOMY is the law of natural selection.

It is easy to calculate that it is also the great law which governs what we wiH
call 'mechanical selection.'




iiia Neo-Classicism and the Call to Order 239

p." rt .Mechanical selection began with the earliest times and from those times
jtfovided objects whose general laws have endured; only the means of making
^jem changed, the rules endured.

?|lin all ages and with all people, man has created for his use objects of prime
2^ecessity which responded to his imperative needs; these objects were associated
g^jth his organism and helped complete it. In all ages, for example, man has
Sweated containers: vases, glasses, bottles, plates, which were built to suit the
fgggeds of maximum capacity, maximum strength, maximum economy of mater-
ials, maximum economy of effort. In all ages, man has created objects of
transport: boats, cars; objects of defense: arms; objects of pleasure: musical
instruments, etc., all of which have always obeyed the law of selection: economy.
One discovers that all these objects are true extensions of human limbs and
$re, for this reason, of human scale, harmonizing both among themselves and
fith man.

H The machine was born in the last century. The problem of selection was

Ipsed more imperatively than ever (commercial rivalry, cost price); one might

iy that the machine has led fatally to the strictest respect for, and application

$f, the laws of economy. [. . .]

-""Modern mechanization would appear to have created objects decidedly remote

from what man had hitherto known and practiced. It was believed that he had

, '.^Aus retreated from natural products and entered into an arbitrary order; our

ipoch decries the misdeeds of mechanization. We must not be mistaken, this is

i complete error: the machine has applied with a rigor greater than ever the

UJfhysical laws of the world's structure. [. . .]

||vFrom all this comes a fundamental conclusion: that respect for the laws of
sics and of economy has in every age created highly selected objects; that
>e objects contain analogous mathematical curves with deep resonances; that
se artificial objects obey the same laws as the products of natural selection
tyd that, consequently, there thus reigns a total harmony, bringing together the
only two things that interest the human being: himself and what he makes.
, Both natural selection and mechanical selection are manifestations of purifi-
cation.

^From this it would be easy to conclude that the artist will again find elitist
femes in the objects of natural and mechanical selection. As it happens, artists
Of our period have taken pleasure in ornamental art and have chosen ornamented
Ejects.

A work of art is an association, a symphony of consonant and architectured
wins, in architecture and sculpture as well as in painting.

To use as theme anything other than the objects of selection, for example,
Ejects of decorative art, is to introduce a second symphony into the first; it
Ipuld be redundant, surcharged, it would diminish the intensity and adulterate
ffc quality of the emotion.

a^vf all recent schools of painting, only Cubism foresaw the advantages of
JNosing selected objects, and of their inevitable associations. But, by a para-
doxical error, instead of sifting out the general laws of these objects, Cubism
**% showed their accidental aspects, to such an extent that on the basis of this



240 Rationalization and Transformation

erroneous idea it even re-created arbitrary and fantastic forms. Cubism made
square pipes to associate with matchboxes, and triangular bottles to associate
with conical glasses.

From this critique and all the foregoing analyses, one comes logically to the
necessity of a reform, the necessity of a logical choice of themes, and the
necessity of their association not by deformation, but by formation.

If the Cubists were mistaken, it is because they did not seek out the invariable
constituents of their chosen themes, which could have formed a universal,
transmittable language.



Purism

The highest delectation of the human mind is the perception of order, and the
greatest human satisfaction is the feeling of collaboration or participation in this
order. The work of art is an artificial object which lets the spectator be placed
in the state desired by the creator. The sensation of order is of a mathematical
quality. The creation of a work of art should utilize means for specified results.
Here is how we have tried to create a language possessing these means:

Primary forms and colors have standard properties (universal properties which
permit the creation of a transmittable plastic language). But the utilization of
primary forms does not suffice to place the spectator in the sought-for state of
mathematical order. For that one must bring to bear the associations of natural
or artificial forms, and the criterion for their choice is the degree of selection
at which certain elements have arrived (natural selection and mechanical selec-
tion). The Purist element issued from the purification of standard forms is not
a copy, but a creation whose end is to materialize the object in all its generality
and its invariability. Purist elements are thus comparable to words of carefully
defined meaning; Purist syntax is the application of constructive and modular
means; it is the application of the laws which control pictorial space. A painting
is a whole (unity); a painting is an artificial formation which, by appropriate
means, should lead to the objectification of an entire 'world.' One could make
an art of allusions, an art of fashion, based upon surprise and the conventions
of the initiated. Purism strives for an art free of conventions which will utilize
plastic constants and address itself above all to the universal properties of the
senses and the mind.



8 Albert Gleizes (1881-1953) 'The Dada Case'

The author's pre-war Cubism was affected by the post-war 'call to order'. He represents
here a response to the criticism mounted by Dada of the classical principles and tn
bourgeois social order from which they were held to derive. Notably, however, ni
response is made as a defence, not of that social order, but of eternal principles, i
its adherents it was t'esprit nouveau' that was progressive, Dada a manifestation o
the decay of bourgeois society. Originally published in Action, no. 3, Paris, April 19^-



IIIa Neo-Classicism and the Call to Order 241



fjhe present translation is taken from R. Motherwell (ed.), The Dada Painters and Poets,
,i|ewYork, 1951.

,.-."|,. ] It cannot for one moment be denied that we are now at a great
\|urning-point in the history of mankind. In every country a hierarchy, the
hierarchy of bourgeois capitalism, is crumbling, powerless to recapture the reins
^ power. Events have proved stronger than men, and men are being tossed this
^ay and that, with very little idea of what is happening. The political parties
J^om the extreme right to the extreme left continue to accuse one another of
every crime. They cannot get it into their heads that responsibility is an idle
word when applied to man, and that superior forces which scientific investiga-
tions have not succeeded in fathoming act upon the species far more strongly
|han any supposed individual will. This bourgeois hierarchy which has organized
the economic system on a material plane sees nothing but its threatened class
Interests. It has reached such a degree of impotence that it can no longer
gpnceive of a system which might provide a safety valve for the ever-mounting
jjjressure in the lower parts of its organism. On the contrary, it constantly
increases the pressure, having lost all conception of a possible breaking-point.
g On the material plane this bourgeois hierarchy is already dead; what we see
|jow is the decomposition of its corpse. The movement with which it still seems
|p be endowed is merely the wriggling of the worms that are devouring it, and

.-... ;^e glow which prevents the night from being complete is the phosphorescence
jhat we know as the will-o'-the-wisp.
^ Here let it be understood that 'bourgeois hierarchy' is not meant in any

|gjmagogic sense. The mania for classification has created certain distinctions

ftjose reality is purely an appearance, and our demagogues use them as a basis
r telling the lower classes that they have nothing in common with the upper
Jesses. If they do this for reasons of strategy, it is understandable, but if they
Ji simple-minded enough to believe what they say, it's too bad for them. The
bourgeoisie is the expression of a human leaning towards the bestial enjoyment
*>f material realities. And as the division of wealth - an economic conception -
is based on money, it is to the power of money that the goods of this world
belong. In the human struggle, those who have this power are on top, those
who do not possess it but who have the same desire to possess it for the same
fin ds, are on the bottom. Consequently the bourgeois spirit is not peculiar to
a |*y special class, but is common to the whole of society. The last scavenger of
$garette butts has the same impulses as the financier who makes peace or war,
3H that separates them is a simple matter of realization.

* The collapse of the money-base and the increasing shortage of goods - these

** the factors that are undermining the whole social organism. The cataclysm

-#eems inevitable. There will be nothing ideological about it. From the point

view of the human consciousness, it will be quite simply a rebellion of

*te stomach and an exasperation of the desire to enjoy life. And indeed, every

..-f s of our decomposing society is characterized by an urge toward the

; : ; ^sfaction of every physical desire, and by a total lack of constructiveness or

; -^ganization.



242 Rationalization and Transformation

This engulfing materialism, which is so typical of our bourgeois society, quite
naturally prevents us from paying serious attention to the disintegration on the
spiritual plane, since spiritual values are what count least in a regime of this
sort and the word spiritual has taken on an air of waggish insignificance, living
on services rendered and on jokes.

However, it is by juxtaposing the rot on the material plane with the rot on
the spiritual plane that we shall gain an accurate understanding of the Dada
movement. I am even prepared to say that it is easier to follow the course of
this movement than that of the material crisis. Its organism is simpler than the
complex of material forces.

The decomposing material body of the bourgeois hierarchy has its counterpart
in the decomposition of its spiritual values. The material body returns to dust,
the spirit returns to the void. The Dada movement is not the voluntary work
of individuals; it is the fatal product of a state of affairs.

* * *

At the source of the Dada spirit, we find an adroit utilization of spiritual
values once combatted, but now grown fashionable. Then various new impulses
brought a sudden revelation. The need to be first became a dogmatic tenet,
bringing with it further madness. And to these diverse psychological states
correspond a series of pathological states. The abuse of pleasures of all sorts
brings the search for artificial stimulation of the senses, to the lashing of the
nervous system with liquor and drugs. Result: the total loss of control over the
physical organism.

Prior to this stage, what does the individual offer? An intellectual suppleness,
yes, but no extraordinary sensibility; a certain savoir-faire but nothing to suggest
any latent constructive temperament. During this stage and after, he has the
illusion of being liberated from the physical laws that govern us. This is a
familiar adjunct of the hypnosis induced by drugs, but it is more serious when
the illusion is prolonged past the crisis. It is at this moment that the domain
of Dada opens. The impossibility of constructing, of organizing anything
whatsoever, the absence of even the most confused notion of any such construc-
tion, has led Dada to decree that there is no such thing and that the only
solution is to do anything, no matter what, under the guise of instinct.

* * *

Their only certainties derive from an exasperation of the bourgeois conception
of art, essentially individualistic and hence reserved for a few of the initiate.
Carrying this principle to its absurd conclusion, they shut themselves up in
themselves. The presentation of the Dada work is always full of taste, the
paintings reveal charming colors, all very fashionable, the books and magazines
are always delightfully made up and rather recall the catalogues of perfume
manufacturers. There is nothing in the outward aspect of these productions to
offend anyone at all; all is correctness, good form, delicate shading, etc. . . .

The forms in their art work are likewise inoffensive, the grafitti they draw
are quite proper. The texts are so impenetrable that there can be no possible
ground for indignation. Sometimes a choice of words creates a lively and
felicitous image. What they call instinct is anything that passes through their




IIIa Neo-Classicism and the Call to Order 243

beads, and from time to time something quite nice passes through their heads.
This is no more surprising than to find a certain suggestion of organization in
accidental cloud formations.

-But very soon we become aware of the dominants, the leit-motivs which recur
fa their artistic and literary works. And then the pathological case becomes
brutally evident. Their minds are forever haunted by a sexual delirium and a
scatalogical frenzy. Their morbid fantasy runs riot around the genital apparatus
f either sex. There is real joy in their discovery of their own sex and the
feminine sex. Though they deny everything a priori, we must, in spite of that
denial, which strikes me as somewhat premature, recognize that they are full of
conviction when it comes to those ornaments with which babies are made and
which they so love to toy with. They are obsessed with the organs of repro-
duction to such a degree that those of their works which may possibly reveal
genius are inevitably of a genital character. Moreover, by lingering in these
domains, they have found, perhaps without seeking it, another source of
instinctive inspiration. They have discovered the anus and the by-products of
intestinal activity. And their joy, already great, was further augmented. Pro-
gressing from one discovery to another, they announce their triumph to all
comers. They make marbles with fecal matter, they gallop over it, they run
probing fingers through it. This is a phenomenon well known to psychiatrists.
They confuse excrement with the products of the mind. They use the same
word to designate two different things.

* * *

* Dada claims to discredit art by its agitation. But one can no more discredit
art, which is the manifestation of an imperious impulsion of the instinct, than
<me can discredit human society, which also springs from an imperious impulsion
of the instinct. One can no more discredit art by systematically destroying its
faiues, than one can discredit society by a fraudulent international bankruptcy.
What Dada destroys, without assuming responsibility for its acts, is certain
notions of servitude which would vanish very nicely without its help; since what
fc destroying the bourgeois hierarchy on the material plane is its false conception
f the distribution of social wealth. And that is why Dada, in the last analysis,
represents merely the ultimate decomposition of the spiritual values of that
decomposed bourgeois hierarchy. [. . .]



9 Andre Derain (1880-1954) 'On Raphael'

Though Derain had been a leading member of the pre-war avant-garde, like many other
^tists he turned increasingly to classicism during and after the war. His affirmation of
"lis conservative commitment appears in a statement originally published as 'Sur
Raphael' in L'Espr/t Nouveau, no. 3, Paris, December 1920, from which the present
translation is made.

Raphael is the most widely misunderstood of artists! Raphael is not a master
0r tn e young: he cannot be the founder of a school made up of beginners. The



244 Rationalization and Transformation

only way to approach Raphael is after many disappointments. If one departs
from him, it is a disaster; he is a genius capable of spoiling the greatest. There
are distressing examples of this. Besides, his influence was non-existent for more
than a century; we are just emerging from a period in which one only sought
direction from masters of the Dutch school. The recent reorganization of the
Louvre is the happy proof that this time is past. Raphael is above da Vinci,
who is a sound test of worth, and far from being divine has a taste for corruption.
Raphael alone is divine!



10 Percy Wyndham Lewis (1882-1957) The Children
of the New Epoch'

The author perceives that the war has put an end to 'blasting and bombardiering', to
Vorticism, indeed to the apparent anarchy of the pre-war avant-garde tout court In its
place he alludes to 'robustness', 'hygiene' and 'authority': terms which were to become
familiar in conservative rhetoric, not least in the 'call to order' so influential in sections
of the avant-garde. Originally published in The Tyro, no. 1 ( London, 1921.

We are at the beginning of a new epoch, fresh to it, the first babes of a new,
and certainly a better, day. The advocates of the order that we supersede are
still in a great majority. The obsequies of the dead period will be protracted,
and wastefully expensive. But it is nevertheless nailed down, cold, but with
none of the calm and dignity of death. The post-mortem has shown it to be
suffering from every conceivable malady.

No time has ever been more carefully demarcated from the one it succeeds than
the time we have entered on has been by the Great War of 1914-18. It is built
solidly behind us. All the conflicts and changes of the last ten years, intellectual
and other, are terribly symbolized by it. To us, in its immense meaningless
shadow, it appears like a mountain range that has suddenly risen as a barrier,
which should be interpreted as an indication of our path. There is no passage
back across that to the lands of yesterday. Those for whom that yesterday means
anything, whose interests and credentials are on the other side of that barrier,
exhort us dully or frantically to scale that obstacle (largely built by their blunders
and egotisms) and return to the Past. On the other hand, those whose interests
lie all ahead, whose credentials are in the future, move in this abrupt shadow
with satisfaction, forward, and away from the sealed and obstructed past.

So we, then, are the creatures of a new state of human life, as different from
nineteenth-century England, say, as the Renaissance was from the Middle Ages.
We are, however, weak in numbers as yet, and to some extent, uncertain and
untried. What steps are being taken for our welfare, how are we provided for.
Are the next few generations going to produce a rickety crop of Newcomers,
or is the new epoch to have a robust and hygienic start-off?

A phenomenon we meet, and are bound to meet for some time, is the existence
of a sort of No Man's Land atmosphere. The dead never rise up, and men will
not return to the Past, whatever else they may do. But as yet there is Nothing,




IIIa Neo-Claisicism and the Call to Order 245

r rather the corpse of the past age, and the sprinkling of children of the new.
There is no mature authority, outside of creative and active individual men, to
support the new and delicate forces bursting forth everywhere today.

So we have sometimes to entrench ourselves; but we do it with rage: and it
is our desire to press constantly on to realization of what is, after all, our
destined life.



11 Juan Gris (1887-1927) Reply to a Questionnaire

A leading member of the pre-war Cubist avant-garde, Gris here stresses the rational
<bases of his art and its continuity with the classical tradition enshrined in the Louvre.
These typically post-war claims were made in response to a questionnaire circulated
by the editors of L'Esprit Nouveau, Jeanneret and Ozenfant. Originally published in
VEsprit Nouveau, no. 5, Paris, February 1921, pp. 533-4.

His aesthetic system: 'I work with elements of the spirit, with the imagination.
I try to concretize that which is abstract. I go from the general to the particular;

"that is to say, I depart from an abstraction to arrive at a real fact. My art is
an art of synthesis, a deductive art, as Raynal says.'
<I want to attain a new description. I want to be able to create special

individuals by departing from a general type.'

'I consider that the architectural side of painting is mathematical, the abstract

r side; I want to humanize it. Cezanne created a cylinder from a bottle; for my
part, I depart from the cylinder to create a special type of individual; I create

T a bottle from a cylinder, a certain bottle. Cezanne heads towards architecture,
whereas I depart from it. It's for this reason that I compose with abstractions
(colours) and I determine when these colours have become objects; for example,
I compose with black and white and I determine when the white has become a
paper and the black a shadow; I mean that I fix the white so that it becomes
4 J>aper, and the black to turn it into a shadow. This type of painting is to the
other type what poetry is to prose.'

( His method: 'If in the system I distance myself from all idealist and naturalist
W, in method I do not want to escape from the Louvre, My method is the

^perennial method, that which the masters used; these are the means, they are
constant.'




iiib Dissent and Disorder 247



IIIB

Dissent and Disorder



1 Hugo Ball (1886-1927) 'Dada Fragments'

Together with Emmy Hennings, Ball founded the Cabaret Voltaire in Zurich on 5 February
1916. The aim, as he later declared, was 'to remind the world that there are independent
men "beyond war and Nationalism" who live for other ideals'. These 'Fragments' and
diary entries from 1916-17, originally published in BaW's book FluchtausderZeit (Flight
from Time), Munich/Leipzig, 1927. The present translation is taken from Motherwell, The
Dada Painters and Poets (op. cit). (The ellipses are integral.)

March 12, 1916 - Introduce symmetries and rhythms instead of principles.
Contradict the existing world orders . . .

What we are celebrating is at once a buffoonery and a requiem mass . . .

June 12, 1916 - What we call Dada is a harlequinade made of nothingness
in which all higher questions are involved, a gladiator's gesture, a play with
shabby debris, an execution of postured morality and plenitude . . .

The Dadaist loves the extraordinary, the absurd, even. He knows that life
asserts itself in contradictions, and that his age, more than any preceding it,
aims at the destruction of all generous impulses. Every kind of mask is therefore
welcome to him, every play at hide and seek in which there is an inherent power
of deception. The direct and the primitive appear to him in the midst of this
huge anti-nature, as being the supernatural itself. . .

The bankruptcy of ideas having destroyed the concept of humanity to its very
innermost strata, the instincts and hereditary backgrounds are now emerging
pathologically. Since no art, politics or religious faith seems adequate to dam
this torrent, there remain only the blague and the bleeding pose . . .

The Dadaist trusts more in the sincerity of events than in the wit of persons.
To him persons may be had cheaply, his own person not excepted. He no longer
believes in the comprehension of things from one point of departure, but is
nevertheless convinced of the union of all things, of totality, to such an extent
that he suffers from dissonances to the point of self-dissolution . . .



r fhe Dadaist fights against the death-throes and death-drunkenness of his
&!& Averse to every clever reticence, he cultivates the curiosity of one who
\ gjpperiences delight even in the most questionable forms of insubordination. He
!|$ows that this world of systems has gone to pieces, and that the age which

^manded cash has organized a bargain sale of godless philosophies. Where bad
foUiscience begins for the market-booth owners, mild laughter and mild kindli-

ipgs begin for the Dadaist . . .

^fune 13, 1916- The image differentiates us. Through the image we comprehend.
#hatever it may be - it is night - we hold the print of it in our hands . . .

A^flie word and the image are one. Painting and composing poetry belong
f Jjgether. Christ is image and word. The word and the image are crucified . . .

^June 18, 1916 - We have developed the plasticity of the word to a point
:|fcich can hardly be surpassed. This result was achieved at the price of the
jically constructed, rational sentence, and therefore, also, by renouncing the
cument (which is only possible by means of a time-robbing grouping of
ntences in a logically ordered syntax). We were assisted in our efforts by the
ecial circumstances of our age, which does not allow a real talent either to
filst or ripen, forcing it to a premature test of its capacities, as well as by the
^ionphatic elan of our group, whose members sought to surpass each other by
..I'^ffiven greater intensification and accentuation of their platform. People may
v : ^j$e, if they want to; language will thank us for our zeal, even if there should
J-jpt be any directly visible results. We have charged the word with forces and
y^ergies which made it possible for us to rediscover the evangelical concept of
: < /word' (logos) as a magical complex of images . . .

t .November 21, 1916 - Note about a criticism of individualism: The accentuated
gf^has constant interests, whether they be greedy, dictatorial, vain or lazy. It
^yvays follows appetites, so long as it does not become absorbed in society.
Ii-Whoever renounces his interests, renounces his 'I.' The T and the interests are
Identical. Therefore, the individualistic-egoistic ideal of the Renaissance ripened
o^the general union of the mechanized appetites which we now see before us,
Impeding and disintegrating.

^^ftlarch 30, 1917 - The new art is sympathetic because in an age of total

;;^*uption it has conserved the will-to-the-image; because it is inclined to force

 ; :$& image, even though the means and parts be antagonistic. Convention

 ^Himphs in the moralistic evaluation of the parts and details; art cannot be

^>ncerned with this. It drives toward the in-dwelling, all-connecting life nerve;

v^s indifferent to external resistance. One might also say: morals are withdrawn

r *$Qm convention, and utilized for the sole purpose of sharpening the senses of

|fteasure and weight . . .

-&$*  *

IH%**pril 18, 1917 ~ Perhaps the art which we are seeking is the key to every
er art: a salomonic key that will open all mysteries.




248 Rationalization and Transformation

May 23, 1917 - Dadaism - a mask play, a burst of laughter? And behind it, a
synthesis of the romantic, dandyistic and - daemonistic theories of the 1 9th century.



2 Marcel Duchamp (1887-1968) 'The Richard Mutt Case'

Duchamp, having abandoned painting and emigrated to America, began to produce
'Readymades', works calculated to reveal, among their other effects, the workings of
the art institution as inseparable from the attribution of artistic value. In 1917, under
the pseudonym Richard Mutt, he submitted a urinal to an open sculpture exhibition; the
piece was refused entry (as he no doubt intended). The present text was originally
published in The Blind Man, New York, 1917. It is reproduced here from Lucy Lippard
(ed.), Dadas on Art, New Jersey, 1971.

They say any artist paying six dollars may exhibit.

Mr Richard Mutt sent in a fountain. Without discussion this article disap-
peared and never was exhibited.

What were the grounds for refusing Mr Mutt's fountain: -

1 Some contended it was immoral, vulgar.

2 Others, it was plagiarism, a plain piece of plumbing.

Now Mr Mutt's fountain is not immoral, that is absurd, no more than a
bathtub is immoral. It is a fixture that you see every day in plumbers' show
windows.

Whether Mr Mutt with his own hands made the fountain or not has no
importance. He CHOSE it. He took an ordinary article of life, placed it so that
its useful significance disappeared under the new title and point of view -
created a new thought for that object.

As for plumbing, that is absurd. The only works of art America has given
are her plumbing and her bridges.



3 Tristan Tzara (1896-1963) 'Dada Manifesto 1918'

Rumanian by birth, Tzara arrived in Zurich in 1915 where he participated in the Cabaret
Voltaire. He later edited Dada, the most important of the French Dada reviews. The
'Manifesto 1918' was originally read in Zurich on 23 July 1918. It was first published
in Dada, no, 3, 1918 and reprinted in Sept Manifestes Dada, Paris, 1924. The present
extract is taken from Motherwell, The Dada Painters and Poets (op. cit.).

The magic of a word - Dada - which has brought journalists to the gates of a
world unforeseen, is of no importance to us.

To put out a manifesto you must want: ABC

to fulminate against 1, 2, 3,

to fly into a rage and sharpen your wings to conquer and disseminate little abcs

and big abcs, to sign, shout, swear, to organize prose into a form of absolute




IIIb Dissent and Disorder 249

^d irrefutable evidence, to prove your non plus ultra and maintain that novelty
*esembles life just as the latest-appearance of some whore proves the essence
of God. His existence was previously proved by the accordion, the landscape,
the wheedling word. To impose your ABC is a natural thing - hence deplorable.
Everybody does it in the form of crystalbluffmadonna, monetary system, phar-
Hiaceutical product, or a bare leg advertising the ardent sterile spring. The love
of novelty is the cross of sympathy, demonstrates a naive je m'enfoutisme, it is
at transitory, positive sign without a cause.

r .JJut this need itself is obsolete. In documenting art on the basis of the supreme
^nplicity: novelty, we are human and true for the sake of amusement, impulsive,
Vibrant to crucify boredom. At the crossroads of the lights, alert, attentively
 awaiting the years, in the forest. I write a manifesto and I want nothing, yet I
say certain things, and in principle I am against manifestoes, as I am also against
principles (half-pints to measure the moral value of every phrase too too
convenient; approximation was invented by the impressionists). I write this
Kitnifesto to show that people can perform contrary actions together while taking
one fresh gulp of air; I am against action; for continuous contradiction, for
fffirmation too, I am neither for nor against and I do not explain because I
hate common sense. [. . .]
:h  

Dada Means Nothing

H you find it futile and don't want to waste your time on a word that means
t&thing. . . . The first thought that comes to these people is bacteriological in
character: to find its etymological, or at least its historical or psychological
Origin. We see by the papers that the Kru Negroes call the tail of a holy cow
Qada. The cube and the mother in a certain district of Italy are called: Dada.
A hobby horse, a nurse both in Russian and Rumanian: Dada. Some learned
journalists regard it as an art for babies, other holy jesusescallingthelittlechildren
$?our day, as a relapse into a dry and noisy, noisy and monotonous primitivism.
Sensibility is not constructed on the basis of a word; all constructions converge
#i perfection which is boring, the stagnant idea of a gilded swamp, a relative
Hainan product. A work of art should not be beauty in itself, for beauty is dead;
^Should be neither gay nor sad, neither light nor dark to rejoice or torture the
dividual by serving him the cakes of sacred aureoles or the sweets of a vaulted
&ce through the atmospheres. A work of art is never beautiful by decree,
kjectively and for all. Hence criticism is useless, it exists only subjectively, for
**ch man separately, without the slightest character of universality. Does anyone
*ink he has found a psychic base common to all mankind? The attempt of
Jssus and the Bible covers with their broad benevolent wings: shit, animals,
7*ys. How can one expect to put order into the chaos that constitutes that
Winite and shapeless variation: man? The principle: 'love thy neighbor' is a
%pocrisy. 'Know thyself is Utopian but more acceptable, for it embraces
: wkedness. No pity. After the carnage we still retain the hope of a purified
^nkind. I speak only of myself since I do not wish to convince, I have no
"to to drag others into my river, I oblige no one to follow me and everybody



250 Rationalization and Transformation

practices his art in his own way, if he knows the joy that rises like arrows to the
astral layers, or that other joy that goes down into the mines of corpse-flowers
and fertile spasms. Stalactites: seek them everywhere, in mangers magnified by
pain, eyes white as the hares of the angels.

And so Dada was born of a need for independence, of a distrust toward unity.
Those who are with us preserve their freedom. We recognize no theory. We
have enough cubist and futurist academies: laboratories of formal ideas. Is the
aim of art to make money and cajole the nice nice bourgeois? Rhymes ring with
the assonance of the currencies and the inflexion slips along the line of the belly
in profile. All groups of artists have arrived at this trust company after riding
their steeds on various comets. While the door remains open to the possibility
of wallowing in cushions and good things to eat. [. . .]

Cubism was born out of the simple way of looking at an object: Cezanne
painted a cup 20 centimeters below his eyes, the cubists look at it from above,
others complicate appearance by making a perpendicular section and arranging
it conscientiously on the side. (I do not forget the creative artists and the
profound laws of matter which they established once and for all.) The futurist
sees the same cup in movement, a succession of objects one beside the other,
and maliciously adds a few force lines. This does not prevent the canvas from
being a good or bad painting suitable for the investment of intellectual capital.

The new painter creates a world, the elements of which are also its imple-
ments, a sober, definite work without argument. The new artist protests: he no
longer paints (symbolic and illusionist reproduction) but creates - directly in
stone, wood, iron, tin, boulders - locomotive organisms capable of being turned
in all directions by the limpid wind of momentary sensation. All pictorial or
plastic work is useless: let it then be a monstrosity that frightens servile minds,
and not sweetening to decorate the refectories of animals in human costume,
illustrating the sad fable of mankind. -
# * *

Philosophy is the question: from which side shall we look at life, God, the
idea or other phenomena. Everything one looks at is false. I do not consider
the relative result more important than the choice between cake and cherries
after dinner. The system of quickly looking at the other side of a thing in order
to impose your opinion indirectly is called dialectics, in other words, haggling
over the spirit of fried potatoes while dancing method around it.

If I cry out:
Ideal, ideal, ideal,
Knowledge, knowledge, knowledge,
Boomboom, boomboom, boomboom,

I have given a pretty faithful version of progress, law, morality and all other
fine qualities that various highly intelligent men have discussed in so many
books, only to conclude that after all everyone dances to his own personal
boomboom, and that the writer is entitled to his boomboom: the satisfaction of
pathological curiosity; a private bell for inexplicable needs; a bath; pecuniary
difficulties; a stomach with repercussions in life; the authority of the mystic
wand formulated as the bouquet of a phantom orchestra made up of silent fiddle



iiib Dissent and Disorder 251

bows greased with philtres made of chicken manure. With the blue eye-glasses
of an angel they have excavated the inner life for a dime's worth of unanimous
gratitude. If all of them are right and if all pills are Pink Pills, let us try for
once not to be right. Some people think they can explain rationally, by thought,
what they think. But that is extremely relative. Psychoanalysis is a dangerous
disease, it puts to sleep the anti-objective impulses of man and systematizes the
bourgeoisie. There is no ultimate Truth. The dialectic is an amusing mechanism
which guides us / in a banal kind of way / to the opinions we had in the first
place. Does anyone think that, by a minute refinement of logic, he has
demonstrated the truth and established the correctness of these opinions? Logic
imprisoned by the senses is an organic disease. To this element philosophers
always like to add: the power of observation. But actually this magnificent
quality of the mind is the proof of its impotence. We observe, we regard from
one or more points of view, we choose them among the millions that exist.
Experience is also a product of chance and individual faculties. Science disgusts
me as soon as it becomes a speculative system, loses its character of utility -
that is so useless but is at least individual. I detest greasy objectivity, and
harmony, the science that finds everything in order. Carry on, my children,
humanity . . . Science says we are the servants of nature: everything is in order,
make love and bash your brains in. Carry on, my children, humanity, kind
bourgeois and journalist virgins ... I am against systems, the most acceptable
system is on principle to have none. To complete oneself, to perfect oneself in
one's own littleness, to fill the vessel with one's individuality, to have the
Courage to fight for and against thought, the mystery of bread, the sudden burst
of an infernal propeller into economic lilies [ . . . ]

Active Simplicity

Inability to distinguish between degrees of clarity: to lick the penumbra and
float in the big mouth filled with honey and excrement. Measured by the scale
of eternity, all activity is vain - (if we allow thought to engage in an adventure
the result of which would be infinitely grotesque and add significantly to our
knowledge of human impotence). But supposing life to be a poor farce, without
aim or initial parturition, and because we think it our duty to extricate ourselves
as fresh and clean as washed chrysanthemums, we have proclaimed as the sole
basis for agreement: art. It is not as important as we, mercenaries of the spirit,
have been proclaiming for centuries. Art afflicts no one and those who manage
to take an interest in it will harvest caresses and a fine opportunity to populate
the country with their conversation. Art is a private affair, the artist produces
it for himself; an intelligible work is the product of a journalist, and because
at this moment it strikes my fancy to combine this monstrosity with oil paints:
a paper tube simulating the metal that is automatically pressed and poured
hatred cowardice villainy. The artist, the poet rejoice at the venom of the masses
condensed into a section chief of this industry, he is happy to be insulted:
it is a proof of his immutability. When a writer or artist is praised by the
newspapers, it is proof of the intelligibility of his work: wretched lining of a



252 Rationalization and Transformation

coat for public use; tatters covering brutality, piss contributing to the warmth
of an animal brooding vile instincts. Flabby, insipid flesh reproducing with the
help of typographical microbes.

We have thrown out the cry-baby in us. Any infiltration of this kind is candied
diarrhea. To encourage this act is to digest it. What we need is works that are
strong straight precise and forever beyond understanding. Logic is a complica-
tion. Logic is always wrong. It draws the threads of notions, words, in their
formal exterior, toward illusory ends and centers. Its chains kill, it is an
enormous centipede stifling independence. Married to logic, art would live in
incest, swallowing, engulfing its own tail, still part of its own body, fornicating
within itself, and passion would become a nightmare tarred with protestantism,
a monument, a heap of ponderous gray entrails. But the suppleness, enthusiasm,
even the joy of injustice, this little truth which we practise innocently and which
makes us beautiful: we are subtle and our fingers are malleable and slippery as
the branches of that sinuous, almost liquid plant; it defines our soul, say the
cynics. That too is a point of view; but all flowers are not sacred, fortunately,
and the divine thing in us is our call to anti-human action. I am speaking of a
paper flower for the buttonholes of the gentlemen who frequent the ball of
masked life, the kitchen of grace, white cousins lithe or fat. They traffic with
whatever we have selected. The contradiction and unity of poles in a single toss
can be the truth. If one absolutely insists on uttering this platitude, the appendix
of a libidinous, malodorous morality. Morality creates atrophy like every plague
produced by intelligence. The control of morality and logic has inflicted us with
impassivity in the presence of policemen - who are the cause of slavery, putrid
rats infecting the bowels of the bourgeoisie which have infected the only
luminous clean corridors of glass that remained open to artists.

Let each man proclaim: there is a great negative work of destruction to be
accomplished. We must sweep and clean. Affirm the cleanliness of the individual
after the state of madness, aggressive complete madness of a world abandoned
to the hands of bandits, who rend one another and destroy the centuries.
Without aim or design, without organization: indomitable madness, decomposi-
tion. Those who are strong in words or force will survive, for they are quick
in defense, the agility of limbs and sentiments flames on their faceted flanks.

Morality has determined charity and pity, two balls of fat that have grown like
elephants, like planets, and are called good. There is nothing good about them.
Goodness is lucid, clear and decided, pitiless toward compromise and politics.
Morality is an injection of chocolate into the veins of all men. This task is not
ordered by a supernatural force but by the trust of idea brokers and grasping
academicians. Sentimentality: at the sight of a group of men quarreling and bored,
they invented the calendar and the medicament wisdom. With a sticking of labels
the battle of the philosophers was set off (mercantilism, scales, meticulous and
petty measures) and for the second time it was understood that pity is a sentiment
like diarrhea in relation to the disgust that destroys health, a foul attempt by
carrion corpses to compromise the sun. I proclaim the opposition of all cosmic
faculties to this gonorrhea of a putrid sun issued from the factories of philo-
sophical thought, I proclaim bitter struggle with all the weapons of



w



IUb Dissent and Disorder 253

Dadaist Disgust

Every product of disgust capable of becoming a negation of the family is Dada;
a protest with the fists of its whole being engaged in destructive action: Dada;
knowledge of all the means rejected up until now by the shamefaced sex of comfortable
compromise and good manners: Dada; abolition of logic, which is the dance of those
impotent to create: Dada; of every social hierarchy and equation set up for the sake
of values by our valets: Dada; every object, all objects, sentiments, obscurities,
apparitions and the precise clash of parallel lines are weapons for the fight: Dada;
abolition of memory: Dada; abolition of archaeology: Dada; abolition of prophets:
Dada; abolition of the future: Dada; absolute and unquestionable faith in every god
that is the immediate product of spontaneity: Dada; elegant and unprejudiced leap
from a harmony to the other sphere; trajectory of a word tossed like a screeching
phonograph record; to respect all individuals in their folly of the moment:
whether it be serious, fearful, timid, ardent, vigorous, determined, enthusiastic;
to divest one's church of every useless cumbersome accessory; to spit out
disagreeable or amorous ideas like a luminous waterfall, or coddle them - with
the extreme satisfaction that it doesn't matter in the least - with the same
intensity in the thicket of one's soul - pure of insects for blood well-born, and
gilded with bodies of archangels. Freedom: Dada Dada Dada, a roaring of tense
colors, and interlacing of opposites and of all contradictions, grotesques, incon-
sistencies:
LIFE



4 Richard Huelsenbeck (1892-1974) 'First German
Dada Manifesto' ('Collective Dada Manifesto')

Having been active in Zurich Dada, Huelsenbeck returned to Germany in January 1917.
Berlin Dada became the most explicitly political part of the movement, associated with
German Bolshevism. This first manifesto nevertheless remains largely oriented to
artistic struggles, simultaneously mounting an attack on the failure of Expressionism,
and allying Dada with 'the new medium', viz. collage and montage. It was delivered at
the I. B. Neumann gallery in Berlin in February 1918, and originally published in Der
Zweemann, Hanover, c.1919; reprinted in Huelsenbeck (ed.), Dada Almanach, Berlin,
1920. It was then reissued in 1920 as 'Collective Dada Manifesto' signed by: Huelsen-
beck, Tristan Tzara, Franz Jung, George Grosz, Marcel Janco, Raoul Hausmann. Hugo
Ball, Pierre Albert-Birot, Hans Arp et at. The present translation is taken from Motherwell,
The Dada Painters and Poets (op. cit), pp. 242-6.

Art in its execution and direction is dependent on the time in which it lives,
and artists are creatures of their epoch. The highest art will be that which in
its conscious content presents the thousandfold problems of the day, the art
Which has been visibly shattered by the explosions of last week, which is forever
trying to collect its limbs after yesterday's crash. The best and most extraordi-
nary artists will be those who every hour snatch the tatters of their bodies out



254 Rationalization and Transformation

of the frenzied cataract of life, who, with bleeding hands and hearts, hold fast
to the intelligence of their time. Has expressionism fulfilled our expectations of
such an art, which should be an expression of our most vital concerns?

No! No! No!

Have the expressionists fulfilled our expectations of an art that burns the
essence of life into our flesh?

No! No! No!

Under the pretext of turning inward, the expressionists in literature and
painting have banded together into a generation which is already looking forward
to honorable mention in the histories of literature and art and aspiring to the
most respectable civic distinctions. On pretext of carrying on propaganda for
the soul, they have, in their struggle with naturalism, found their way back to
the abstract, pathetic gestures which presuppose a comfortable life free from
content or strife. The stages are filling up with kings, poets and Faustian
characters of all sorts; the theory of a melioristic philosophy, the psychological
naivete of which is highly significant for a critical understanding of expression-
ism, runs ghostlike through the minds of men who never act. Hatred of the
press, hatred of advertising, hatred of sensations are typical of people who prefer
their armchair to the noise of the street, and who even make it a point of pride
to be swindled by every smalltime profiteer. That sentimental resistance to the
times, which are neither better nor worse, neither more reactionary nor more
revolutionary than other times, that weak-kneed resistance, flirting with prayers
and incense when it does not prefer to load its cardboard cannon with Attic
iambics - is the quality of a youth which never knew how to be young.
Expressionism, discovered abroad, and in Germany, true to style, transformed
into an opulent idyll and the expectation of a good pension, has nothing in
common with the efforts of active men. The signers of this manifesto have,
under the battle cry:

Dada! ! ! !

gathered together to put forward a new art, from which they expect the
realization of new ideals. What then is DADAISM?

The word Dada symbolizes the most primitive relation to the reality of the
environment; with Dadaism a new reality comes into its own. Life appears as
a simultaneous muddle of noises, colors and spiritual rhythms, which is taken
unmodified into Dadaist art, with all the sensational screams and fevers of its
reckless everyday psyche and with all its brutal reality. This is the sharp dividing
line separating Dadaism from all artistic directions up until now and particularly
from FUTURISM which not long ago some puddingheads took to be a new
version of impressionist realization. Dadaism for the first time has ceased to




IIIb Dissent and Disorder 255

take an aesthetic attitude toward life, and this it accomplishes by tearing all the
slogans of ethics, culture and inwardness, which are merely cloaks for weak
muscles, into their components.

The Bruitist poem
represents a streetcar as it is, the essence of the streetcar with the yawning of
Schulze the coupon clipper and the screeching of the brakes.

The Simultaneist poem

teaches a sense of the merrygoround of all things; while Herr Schulze reads his
paper, the Balkan Express crosses the bridge at Nish, a pig squeals in Butcher
Nuttke's cellar.



The Static poem

makes words into individuals, out of the letters spelling woods, steps the woods
with its treetops, liveried foresters and wild sows, maybe a boarding house steps
out too, and maybe it's called Bellevue or Bella Vista. Dadaism leads to amazing
new possibilities and forms of expression in all the arts. It made cubism a dance
on the stage, it disseminated the BRUITIST music of the futurists (whose
purely Italian concerns it has no desire to generalize) in every country in Europe.
The word Dada in itself indicates the internationalism of the movement which
is bound to no frontiers, religions or professions. Dada is the international
expression of our times, the great rebellion of artistic movements, the artistic
reflex of all these offensives, peace congresses, riots in the vegetable market,
midnight suppers at the Esplanade, etc., etc. Dada champions the use of the

new medium in painting.

Dada is a CLUB, founded in Berlin, which you can join without commitments.
In this club every man is chairman and every man can have his say in artistic
matters. Dada is not a pretext for the ambition of a few literary men (as our
enemies would have you believe), Dada is a state of mind that can be revealed
in any conversation whatever, so that you are compelled to say: this man is a
DADAIST - that man is not; the Dada Club consequently has members all
over the world, in Honolulu as well as New Orleans and Meseritz. Under certain
circumstances to be a Dadaist may mean to be more a businessman, more a
political partisan than an artist - to be an artist only by accident - to be a
Dadaist means to let oneself be thrown by things, to oppose all sedimentation;
to sit in a chair for a single moment is to risk one's life (Mr Wengs pulled his
revolver out of his pants pocket). A fabric tears under your hand, you say yes
to a life that strives upward by negation. Affirmation - negation: the gigantic
hocuspocus of existence fires the nerves of the true Dadaist - and there he is,
reclining, hunting, cycling - half Pantagruel, half St Francis, laughing and
laughing. Blast the aesthetic-ethical attitude! Blast the bloodless abstraction of
expressionism! Blast the literary hollowheads and their theories for improving
the world! For Dadaism in word and image, for all the Dada things that go on
l n the world! To be against this manifesto is to be a Dadaist!



256 Rationalization and Transformation

5 Richard Huelsenbeck (1892-1974) and Raoul
Hausmann (1886-1971) 'What is Dadaism and
what does it want in Germany?'

The First German Dada Manifesto emphasized 'movement' and 'struggle'. The remaining
requirement for a 'program of action' was fulfilled by the present manifesto, its Utopian
character is evident. Some erstwhile Dadaists such as Grosz and Heartfield rapidly took
the more practical step of joining the German Communist Party (KPD) at its foundation
in January 1919. The manifesto appeared in Der Dada, no. 1 - 1919 where it was co-
signed by Jefim Golyscheff, and was reprinted in Huelsenbeck's En Avant Dada,
Hanover, 1920. The present translation is from Motherwell, The Dada Painters and Poets
(op. cit.).

1 Dadaism demands:

1) The international revolutionary union of all creative and intellectual men
and women on the basis of radical Communism;

2) The introduction of progressive unemployment through comprehensive
mechanization of every field of activity. Only by unemployment does it
become possible for the individual to achieve certainty as to the truth of life
and finally become accustomed to experience;

3) The immediate expropriation of property (socialization) and the communal
feeding of all; further, the erection of cities of light, and gardens which will
belong to society as a whole and prepare man for a state of freedom.

2 The Central Council demands:

a) Daily meals at public expense for all creative and intellectual men and women
on the Potsdamer Platz (Berlin);

b) Compulsory adherence of all clergymen and teachers to the Dadaist articles
of faith;

c) The most brutal struggle against all directions of so-called 'workers of the
spirit' (Hiller, Adler), against their concealed bourgeoisism, against express-
ionism and post-classical education as advocated by the Sturm group;

d) The immediate erection of a state art center, elimination of concepts of
property in the new art (expressionism); the concept of property is entirely
excluded from the super-individual movement of Dadaism which liberates
all mankind;

e) Introduction of the simultaneist poem as a Communist state prayer;

f) Requisition of churches for the performance of bruitism, simultaneist and
Dadaist poems;

g) Establishment of a Dadaist advisory council for the remodelling of life in
every city of over 50,000 inhabitants;

h) Immediate organization of a large scale Dadaist propaganda campaign with

150 circuses for the enlightenment of the proletariat;
i) Submission of all laws and decrees to the Dadaist central council for

approval;




iiib Dissent and Disorder 257

Immediate regulation of all sexual relations according to the views of
international Dadaism through establishment of a Dadaist sexual center.

The Dadaist revolutionary central council.

German group: Hausmann, Huelsenbeck

Business Office: Charlottenburg, Kantstrasse 118.

Applications for membership taken at business office.



I Richard Huelsenbeck (1892-1974) from En Avant Dada

fjuelsenbeck wrote a major article surveying the history of the Dada movement from its
inception in Zurich to its virtual dissolution by 1920. The closing passages, reprinted
here, repeat the alignment of Dada to Bolshevism while reserving to it a wider pro-
|ramme than mere economic amelioration. The article is also suspicious of the wide-
spread ethos of (re-)construction, and maintains a hostile attitude to both German and
French national traditions in culture. Originally published as En Avant Dada: Eine
Sbschichte des Dadaismus t Hanover 1920. This extract is taken from Motherwell, The
Dada Painters and Poets (op. cit.).

|.j..] In an article on expressionism Kornfeld makes the distinction between
the ethical man and the psychological man. The ethical man has the child-like
piety and faith which permit him to kneel at some altar and recognize some
Gbd, who has the power to lead men from their misery to some paradise. The
psychological man has journeyed vainly through the infinite, has recognized the
limits of his spiritual possibilities, he knows that every 'system 1 is a seduction
with all the consequences of seduction and every God an opportunity for
financiers.

ft >The Dadaist, as the psychological man, has brought back his gaze from the
distance and considers it important to have shoes that fit and a suit without
holes in it. The Dadaist is an atheist by instinct. He is no longer a metaphysician
ffl the sense of finding a rule for the conduct of life in any theoretical principles,
for him there is no longer a 'thou shalt'; for him the cigarette-butt and the
tttftbrella are as exalted and as timeless as the 'thing in itself Consequently,
*e good is for the Dadaist no 'better' than the bad - there is only a simultaneity,
to values as in everything else. This simultaneity applied to the economy of
&tts is communism, a communism, to be sure, which has abandoned the
Principle of 'making things better' and above all sees its goal in the destruction
^everything that has gone bourgeois. Thus the Dadaist is opposed to the idea
of paradise in every form, and one of the ideas farthest from his mind is that
|*ke spirit is the sum of all means for the improvement of human existence.'
-The word 'improvement' is in every form unintelligible to the Dadaist, since
^hind it he sees a hammering and sawing on this life which, though useless,
^ttiless and vile, represents as such a thoroughly spiritual phenomenon, requir-
es no improvement in a metaphysical sense. To mention spirit and improve-
JJ^t in the same breath is for the Dadaist a blasphemy. 'Evil' has a profound
a ing, the polarity of events finds in it a limit, and though the real political



258 Rationalization and Transformation

thinker (such as Lenin seems to be) creates a movement, i.e., he dissolves
individualities with the help of a theory, he changes nothing. And that, as
paradoxical as it may seem, is the import of the Communist movement.

The Dadaist exploits the psychological possibilities inherent in his faculty for
flinging out his own personality as one flings a lasso or lets a cloak flutter in
the wind. He is not the same man today as tomorrow, the day after tomorrow
he will perhaps be 'nothing at all,' and then he may become everything. He is
entirely devoted to the movement of life, he accepts its angularity - but he
never loses his distance to phenomena, because at the same time he preserves
his creative indifference, as Friedlaender-Mynona calls it. It seems scarcely
credible that anyone could be at the same time active and at rest, that he should
be devoted, yet maintain an attitude of rejection; and yet it is in this very
anomaly that life itself consists, naive, obvious life, with its indifference toward
happiness and death, joy and misery. The Dadaist is naive. The thing he is
after is obvious, undifferentiated, unintellectual life. For him a table is not a
mouse-trap and an umbrella is definitely not to pick your teeth with. In such
a life art is no more and no less than a psychological problem. In relation to
the masses, it is a phenomenon of public morality.

The Dadaist considers it necessary to come out against art, because he has
seen through its fraud as a moral safety valve. Perhaps this militant attitude is
a last gesture of inculcated honesty, perhaps it merely amuses the Dadaist,
perhaps it means nothing at all. But in any case, art (including culture, spirit,
athletic club), regarded from a serious point of view, is a large-scale swindle.
And this . . . most especially in Germany, where the most absurd idolatry of all
sorts of divinities is beaten into the child in order that the grown man and
taxpayer should automatically fall on his knees when, in the interest of the state
or some smaller gang of thieves, he receives the order to worship some 'great
spirit.' I maintain again and again: the whole spirit business is a vulgar utilitarian
swindle. In this war the Germans (especially in Saxony where the most infamous
hypocrites reside) strove to justify themselves at home and abroad with Goethe
and Schiller. Culture can be designated solemnly and with complete naivety as
the national spirit become form, but also it can be characterized as a compen-
satory phenomenon, an obeisance to an invisible judge, as veronal for the
conscience. The Germans are masters of dissembling, they are unquestionably
the magicians (in the vaudeville sense) among nations, in every moment of their
life they conjure up a culture, a spirit, a superiority which they can hold as a
shield in front of their endangered bellies. It is this hypocrisy that has always
seemed utterly foreign and incomprehensible to the French, a sign of diabolical
malice. The German is unnaive, he is twofold and has a double base.

Here we have no intention of standing up for any nation. The French have
the least right of anyone to be praised as a grande nation, now that they have
brought the chauvinism of our times to its greatest possible height. The German
has all the qualities and drawbacks of the idealist. You can look at it whichever
way you like. You can construe the idealism that distorts things and makes them
function as an absolute (the discipline of corpses) whether it be vegetarianism,
the rights of man or the monarchy, as a pathological deformation, or you can



w



HIb Dissent and Disorder 259

call it ecstatically 'the bridge to eternity,' 'the goal of life,' or more such
platitudes. The expressionists have done quite a bit in that direction. The
Dadaist is instinctively opposed to all this. He is a man of reality who loves
wine, women and advertising, his culture is above all of the body. Instinctively
he sees his mission in smashing the cultural ideology of the Germans. I have no
desire to justify the Dadaist. He acts instinctively, just as a man might say he
was a thief out of 'passion,' or a stamp-collector by preference. The 'ideal' has
shifted: the abstract artist has become (if you insist, dear reader) a wicked
materialist, with the abstruse characteristic of considering the care of his stomach
and stock jobbing more honorable than philosophy. 'But that's nothing new,'
those people will shout who can never tear themselves away from the 'old.' But
it is something startlingly new, since for the first time in history the consequence
has been drawn from the question: What is German culture? (Answer: Shit),
and this culture is attacked with all the instruments of satire, bluff, irony and
finally, violence. And in a great common action.

Dada is German Bolshevism. The bourgeois must be deprived of the oppor-
tunity to 'buy up art for his justification.' Art should altogether get a sound
thrashing, and Dada stands for the thrashing with all the vehemence of its
limited nature. The technical aspect of the Dadaist campaign against German
eulture was considered at great length. Our best instrument consisted of big
demonstrations at which, in return for a suitable admission fee, everything
connected with spirit, culture and inwardness was symbolically massacred. It is
ridiculous and a sign of idiocy exceeding the legal limit to say that Dada (whose
actual achievements and immense success cannot be denied) is 'only of negative
value.' Today you can hardly fool first-graders with the old saw about positive
and negative.

The gentlemen who demand the 'constructive' are among the most suspicious
types of a caste that has long been bankrupt. It has become sufficiently apparent
in our time that law, order and the constructive, the 'understanding for an
organic development,' are only symbols, curtains and pretexts for fat behinds
and treachery. If the Dadaist movement is nihilism, then nihilism is a part of
life, a truth which would be confirmed by any professor of zoology. Relativism,
Dadaism, Nihilism, Action, Revolution, Gramophone. It makes one sick at heart
to hear all that together, and as such (insofar as it becomes visible in the form
of a theory), it all seems very stupid and antiquated. Dada does not take a
dogmatic attitude. If Knatschke proves today that Dada is old stuff, Dada
doesn't care. A tree is old stuff too, and people eat dinner day after day without
experiencing any particular disgust. This whole physiological attitude toward
the world, that goes so far as to make - as Nietzsche the great philologist did
- all culture depend on dry or liquid nutriment, is of course to be taken with
a grain of salt. It is just as true and just as silly as the opposite. But we are
a fter all human and commit ourselves by the mere fact of drinking coffee today
*nd tea tomorrow. Dada foresees its end and laughs. Death is a thoroughly
Dadaist business, in that it signifies nothing at all. Dada has the right to dissolve
itself and will exert this right when the time comes. With a businesslike gesture,
freshly pressed pants, a shave and a haircut, it will go down into the grave,



260 Rationalization and Transformation

after having made suitable arrangements with the Thanatos Funeral Home. The
time is not far distant. We have very sensitive fingertips and a larynx of glazed
paper. The mediocrities and the gentry in search of 'something mad' are
beginning to conquer Dada. At every corner of our dear German fatherland,
literary cliques, with Dada as a background, are endeavoring to assume a heroic
pose, A movement must have sufficient talent to make its decline interesting
and pleasant. In the end it is immaterial whether the Germans keep on with
their cultural humbug or not. Let them achieve immortality with it. But if Dada
dies here, it will some day appear on another planet with rattles and kettledrums,
pot covers and simultaneous poems, and remind the old God that there are still
people who are very well aware of the complete idiocy of the world.



7 Alexander Blok (1880-1921) 'The Decline of
Humanism'

Almost alone in his milieu Blok allied himself with the Bolshevik revolution of October
1917. His poem The Twelve' of January 1918 celebrates the struggle of a group of
Red Guards through a blinding snowstorm; they are being led, the poem's conclusion
discloses, by the figure of Jesus Christ carrying a red banner. This contemporaneous
lecture was delivered on 9 April 1918. After it, Blok reportedly said for me, it [the
revolution] is not just a fundamental change in all our outward life but something much
more. First of all, it is the birth of a new kind of man such has never been seen on
earth before.' The present extract is taken from the translation by I. Frieman in Alexander
Blok, The Spirit of Music, London, 1946.

Every movement has its birth in the spirit of music, through which it acts, but
after a lapse of time it degenerates and begins to lose the musical, the primal
element out of which it was born and, as a result, perishes. It ceases to be
culture and becomes civilization. Thus it was in the ancient world - thus it is
with us.

The guardian of the spirit of music becomes just those elements to which
music always reverts (revertitur in terram suam unde erat): namely the people or
the barbaric masses. Those masses who have never had anything but the spirit
to call their own remain, therefore, the guardians of culture in those epochs in
which a limping and no longer resounding civilization has become the enemy
of culture - and this in spite of the fact that civilization governs all the factors
of progress such as science and technique and the rest. This is no paradox, A
civilization dies and a new one, similar to the perishing movement, rises out of
the same musical elements.

The culture of the future was not being nourished by the discordant efforts
of civilization to remedy that which cannot be improved, not by resuscitating
the dead, or by trying to unify Humanism anew, but by those synthesized,
revolutionary exertions, by those musical and will-stressed floods and forces to
which Wagner, in particular, has given expression. The entire complicated
system of poetic and musical rhythms (especially towards the end of the



IIIb Dissent and Disorder 261

nineteenth century) against which the Philistines of Humanism took up a more
and more hostile and stubborn attitude, was nothing but the musical preparation
of a new cultural movement, a reflection of those elemental rhythms of nature
out of which emerged the overture of the present epoch.

Music followed its accustomed ways. It floated like a shimmering cloud above
the last of the Humanists and then, darkened, descended as rain or enveloped
mankind of the nineteenth century in a shroud of mist through which those
errant beings who had lost their way, called out trying to find each other.

In Europe's most important lyrics of those times the musical sounds perceived
through rain and mist resounded. Under the sodden earth there trembled a
musical rustling and roaring as the elemental voices of the barbaric masses and
the utterances of the great artists of the century rose. That new flood, which
had been flowing underground for a century, swelled more and more, breached
the surface of civilization now here, now there, until with irresistible force it
broke through, intoxicated and saturated with the spirit of music.

The civilized ear apprehended that music as a wild choir of discordant voices.
For a great many the music of that time was intolerable, and I do not exaggerate
by any means when I maintain that many of us, overwhelmed by it, broke down
under its stridency. It was destructive of all those achievements of civilization
which were considered unassailable. It ran counter to all our established melodies
of 'Truth, Goodness and Beauty' and it confronted, almost with hostility, the
education and cultural development which Humanist Europe had inherited from
the preceding century.

It is an established fact that a new movement, hostile to the civilized world,
extended itself, a movement which disrupted civilization and so shook the
continent that at the very outset it resembled a group of scattered islands in
danger of being swept away by the all-destroying flood. The most important
things which civilization had produced, from the Humanistic viewpoint of ethics,
aesthetics and justice, were menaced. As civilized Humanists we can never
submit to the new movement's persuasion. But if we cannot submit, if we must
cling rather to the values which the Humanistic civilization had proclaimed as
indestructible, shall we not then soon be isolated from that culture and that
world which perceives in the broken flood the rustling and roaring of the
elemental music of the masses?

Man is animal; man is plant and flower; in him slumbers the beast, in him
lives mimosa-like softness. Both are transitory appearances, sometimes masks.
This flight of appearances involves a change of methods; man's entire being is
in revolt; he has risen from a century-long stupor of civilization. Spirit, soul and
body have been caught up by the storm and, in the turmoil of the spiritual, political
and social revolutions which have their causes in the cosmos, there takes place a
transformation - the birth of the new man.

I have attempted to determine the climacteric in the past of Humanism's
decline. The artists who remained faithful to the spirit of music I look upon
as witnesses of that decline because they participated in it. It is time to order
and revalue that crisis according to these characteristics: according to its artistic
sensibility and to the degree of perfection with which its rhythms mirrored the



262 Rationalization and Transformation

world's life. All other characteristics, national characteristics not excepted, are,
to my mind, of secondary or of no consideration at all.

We Russians have no historical memories, but in us lives the elemental, and
is sufficiently strong; it is still reserved for our immeasurable country to realize
the significant. We have not heard of Petrarch or Hutten - only of the wind
which courses across the steppes and the musical notes of our own wild nature
which resound in the ears of Gogol, Tolstoy and Dostoyevsky.

I sum up and draw the conclusion that there can be no shadow of doubt as
to the final outcome of the struggle and that a new movement, born out of the
spirit of music, has taken the place of the old human civilization. So far, it still
resembles a runaway stream which carries with it the debris of civilization. But
already in this movement a metamorphosis out of which the new personality is
to emerge is taking shape: not the ethical, political or humanist, being but, in
the words of Wagner, the creative being, the artistic person, who alone will be
capable of living life in the epoch of storms and whirlwinds into which mankind
unwittingly has jettisoned itself.



8 Novembergruppe: Draft Manifesto 1918 and
'Guidelines' 1919

The Novembergruppe was an organisation of artists formed in response to the German
revolution of November 1918, on 3rd December 1918. Leading figures included Max
Pechstein and Cesar Klein. Others involved were Rudolf Belling, Heinrich Campendonk and
Otto Muller. After the defeat of the Revolution, and the establishment of the bourgeois
Weimar Republic, differences of opinion emerged about the group's role and commit-
ments. These early statements mark the Utopian moment of the group's enthusiastic
foundation. The present translations are taken from V. H. Miesel (ed.), Voices of German
Expressionism, New Jersey, 1970.



Manifesto

We are standing on the fertile soil of the revolution.

Our slogan is: Freedom, Equality, and Fraternity!

We are uniting because we have human and artistic convictions in common.

We believe that our first duty is to dedicate all our energies to the moral
regeneration of a young and free Germany.

We plead for excellence in all things and we shall support this plea with all
the means at our disposal.

We insist upon an unlimited freedom of expression as well as public acknow-
ledgement of it.

We believe it is our special duty to gather together all significant artistic
talent and dedicate it to the collective well-being of the nation.

We belong to no party, no class. We are human beings, human beings who
work tirelessly at the task appointed us by nature. It is a task, like any other
if it is to benefit the whole Volk, which must take into consideration the



iiib Dissent and Disorder 263

general public good and requires the appreciation and recognition of that general

public.
We respect every achievement in every sphere and we are of the opinion that
f! ; the most competent men will assume the heaviest duties, submitting themselves
II to such duties for the sake and benefit of the whole Volk.
f Our goal - each at his place in hard, tireless, collective, creative work.
| We feel young, free, and pure.

I Our spotless love belongs to a young, free Germany and we shall fight against
t all backwardness and reaction, bravely, without reserve, and with all the power
-| at our command.

p We send our fondest greetings to all those who have heard the call and feel
f responsible - Cubists, Futurists, and Expressionists. Join us!

-$

| Guidelines

 I. The November Group is the (German) alliance of radical artists.

II. The November Group is not a union for the defence of economic interests,
| nor is it (merely) an association for exhibition purposes.

III. The November Group wishes to exercise a decisive influence upon all
': artistic matters by merging into a general alliance all like-minded creative forces.

IV. We demand a voice and an active role in:

1. All architectural projects as a matter of public concern: city planning, new

settlements, the public buildings of government, industry and the social services,
/ private building projects, the preservation of monuments, the suppression of
J artistically worthless architectural monuments.

I 2. The reorganization of art schools and their curricula: the suspension of
t authoritarian supervision, the election of teachers by artists 1 associations and
f students, the elimination of scholarships, the unification of architecture, sculp-
 ture, painting, and design schools, the establishment of studios for work and
1 experimentation.

: 3. The transformation of museums: the suppression of biased collecting
J policies, the elimination of an overemphasis upon the acquiring of objects having
v only scholarly value; their transformation into people's art centres, unprejudiced

centres of timeless principles.
j 4. The allotment of exhibition halls: the elimination of special privileges and

capitalistic influences.

5. Legislation on artistic matters: giving artists equal rights as spiritual creators,

the protection of artistic property, the elimination of all duties and taxes on

works of art.

V. The November Group will demonstrate their solidarity and their achievement
by continuous public announcements and by an annual exhibition in November.
The central committee will supervise these continuing announcements and exhi-
bitions. All members are entitled to equal exhibition space and will not be judged
by any jury. The central committee will also arrange all special exhibits.



264 Rationalization and Transformation

9 Novembergruppe Opposition: 'Open Letter to the
Novembergruppe'

A Left Opposition to the Novembergruppe leadership coalesced as the group appeared
to vacillate over its commitments to the Revolution. In artistic terms the Opposition was
opposed to the individualism associated with Expressionism and sought to develop
instead either a 'new objectivity' or a 'non-objective art'. Its 'Open Letter' was originally
published in Der Gegner, II, nos. 8-9, June, 1921. The present translation by Elizabeth
Lane-Thussu for the Open University, 1983.

The present leaders of the November Group are continually insisting that
the November Group is no more than a purely aesthetic-revolutionary
organization, founded also for economic reasons. They are lying. The first
circular, which called for its setting up, expressly stressed the 'revolutionary'
artists' commitment to the Revolution. The first statement of aims begins
with the sentences: 'At last our call to arms has been taken up. The
Revolution has come down on our side. The Revolution demands that we
painters, sculptors and architects of the new spirit join together!' [. . .]

The November Group was founded ostensibly by artists who wanted to realize
a revolutionary desire for a new ideal community and for cooperation with the
working people, free from the machinations of elitist art clubs and dealers'
speculations. That is why young and proletarian-oriented artists joined up with
the November Group. In innumerable meetings and statements they stressed
that the November Group should only exclude the Right and in no way the
Left. Not for a moment did any of the leading members seriously confront the
problem of hierarchy common to all other bourgeois artists' groups, even with
the awareness afforded them by the proletarian revolution - all they did was to
confuse the issue with their slippery rhetoric, so that they could foster their
own egos in the old sordid way of artists, by having the largest possible
membership, a despised herd they looked down upon from the heights of their
fame. [. . .]

Those at the top realized that among the younger members there was a certain
number who believed in the proletarian revolution, and felt the necessity of integrating
artists into the body of the workers; and that a certain section of the membership
did not wish to be artists in the bourgeois-cultural sense, because they saw the
way to fulfil themselves not in promoting an apparently revolutionary aesthetic, but
instead sought the justification of the artist's existence as the instrument of the
people's latent desires for a new, untainted way of life, and because they did
not want to appear to be superior, conceited experts, dismissing in a high-handed
way any attempts for a better way of working, condemning them on the basis
of values borrowed from a bourgeois aesthetic. All the hopes and wishes of this
section of the membership were squashed by these leaders, who used all kinds of
dodges and misleading references to the 'well-known lack of unity among artists'
on the one hand, and a brutal exploitation of their powers, on the other. [. . .]




IIIb Dissent and Disorder 265

What was the use of the revolutionary members demanding a clear-cut stand
against the authorities over the pressures and difficulties they made with the
November Group's participation in the Great Berlin Art Exhibition at the
Lehrter Bahnhof? None, because these leaders had their reputations and sine-
cures to protect despite the views of the group's vital forces. The Ministry had
threatened not to open the November Group section if, as last year, works were
exhibited which did not correspond with the authorities' ideas about art. So
they submitted; the President of the Great Berlin Exhibition committee, Schlich-
ting, mobilized a completely false moral campaign against two pictures by Rudolf
Schlichter and Otto Dix that didn't find favour with him, threatened them with
the Public Prosecutor, and even the Group, it appeared, had to submit;
Reichspresident Ebert sauntered through the galleries at the opening, showing
the futility of the exercise. And these sycophants of artists were happy - their
egos could bask in the presence of their 'rulers' - those lackeys of exploitation
and supporters of courts martial.

These leading lights have received a box on the ears for their lack of principle,
but we, who feel responsible for promoting an ideal society, have never had nor
ever will have anything in common with them. Our love is for the proletariat,
because only the proletariat will bring about, through communism, equality for
all people and forms of work, and freedom from slavery and exploitation. We
have not become artists in order to have a comfortable and irresponsible life,
living off the exploiters' demand for luxury. We feel solidarity with the proleta-
riat's struggle for the realization of a humane society, in which there is no
oppression, in which we will not, as we do now, have the contradiction of
working in opposition to society only to exist by its permission, like parasites.

We feel bound by the task laid on us by the world's proletariat in their
struggle for a new existence inspired by a new spirit. We are aware of our duty
to work together with the masses towards the achievement of this society. And
so we say this to those prominent figures: Our goal must be seen to be the overthrow
of this aesthetic-formalistic pedantry, either by a new objectivity, born of a disgust
with exploitative, bourgeois society; or by the explorative preliminary attempts of a
non-objective art form which is equally seeking a victory over individualism in
rejecting this aesthetic and this society, to benefit a new kind of person. There
is neither understanding nor room for these ideas in the November Group as
it is presently constituted; the leaders dismiss such demands as nonsensical rubbish
and on the contrary emphasize their own position, which comes close to being
a dictatorship of fashionable' people and businessmen over the energetic, progressive
members. The November Group should not let its name become a term for
fellow-travellers, a label which could hang on for years, and we must resist this
dictatorship, we must shake off these leaders and by our secession force other
individuals to that decision. The actions of the leading figures who neither have
ideas nor have ever been capable of leading, who suppress us out of pure
self-interest, have resulted in the most deplorable compromises such as submit-
ting to the orders of the Ministry of Culture and the Berlin Artists' Association;
their actions have also led to the November Group being totally unaware of the
public, although their sufferance of the efforts of the proletarian-minded artists



266 Rationalization and Transformation

has served to lend the group a revolutionary image; but they have stamped on
all the progressive spirits in so far as there were any, instead of extending a
friendly hand to them. But a group that is not capable these days of recognizing
and adopting the strivings and goals of these independent spirits has no
justification for its existence.

This is the decisive hour: expressing the will of the people, carrying out productive
work for a new, emerging community demands relentless rejection of the trade in
compromises. We call on those members who grasp that today Art means protest
against the sleep-walking bourgeoisie, against continual exploitation and Philistinism,
to join in our opposition and help to carry out the necessary purge.

We know that we have to be the expression of the revolutionary forces, the
instrument of the needs of the age and the people, and we reject any connection
with the aesthetic profiteers and pedants from tomorrow onwards. We must
bear witness to the revolution, to the new society, and this must be no mere
lip-service, and so we want to put our explicit aims into effect, to co-operate
in establishing the new humane society, the community of workers!

The November Group Opposition:

Otto Dix, Max Dungert, George Grosz, Raoul Hausmann, Hanna Hoch, Ernst

Krantz, Mutzenbecher, Thomas Ring, Rudolf Schlichter, Georg Scholz, Willy

Zierath.



10 Walter Gropius (1883-1969) Reply to Arbeitsrat
fur Kunst Questionnaire

In early 1919 a questionnaire was circulated by the Arbeitsrat fur Kunst (Workers
Council for Art), an artists' organization, like the Novembergruppe generated by the
November Revolution. Thirteen questions addressed issues ranging from art education
and public housing to the best ways for modern art to 'harmonize' with the people.
Gropius, founder and director of the Bauhaus, was at this time a member of the
Arbeitsrat, and succeeded Bruno Taut as Chairman in March 1919. His answers to
questions V and VI concerned the position of the artist in a socialist state and the nature
and role of art exhibitions. Originally published in Yes! Voices of the Workers' Council for
Art, Berlin, 1919. The present translation is taken from Miesel, op. cit.

V. Art and state are irreconcilable concepts. They are by their very nature
opposed. The creative spirit, vital and dynamic, unique and unpredictable,
refuses to be limited by the laws of the state or by the straitjacket of bourgeois
values. And if the state uses force to interfere with the free development of
such 'abnormal' creators it is actually cutting its own life's blood supply. Thus
our age is suffocated by a world of shopkeepers, is trapped in a quagmire of
materialism. The real task of socialism is to destroy the evil demon of commer-
cialism in order that the creative spirit of the Volk might once more flourish.
The mentality of our nation has already been profoundly shaken by the recent
disaster and after the total collapse of the old life it has been made so sensitive



iiIb Dissent and Disorder 267

that it might make Germany more receptive to the new spirit than any of the
other European nations. For war, hunger, and pestilence have jarred us out of
our obstinacy, they have aroused us out of our inertia and self-satisfaction, they
have finally awakened our sleepy and lazy hearts. Through pain we have been
taught once again to feel. Feeling is, after all, the source of inspiration, feeling
leads to finding, to that creative power which organizes and structures, in short
- in the broadest sense - to a passion for building. And this passion for building,
for structure - this architectural spirit - is the natural antithesis to the world of
shopkeepers, to the spirit of disintegration and destruction which is the deadly
enemy of all art.

VI. Art exhibitions are the misbegotten creatures of an art starved Europe.
Since art is dead in the actual life of civilized nations it has been relegated to
these grotesque morgues and there prostituted. Today a work of art no longer
occupies a well-defined and hallowed place in the midst of the Volk, it is free
as a bird and has become merely a luxury object in the salons of the bourgeoisie.
An art exhibition is its warehouse and market. The Volk leaves empty-handed
and has no conception of a living art. Therefore, in place of the old salon art
exhibition, let us have traveling art shows in temporary, brightly painted huts
or even tents, shows featuring not only paintings and sculptures but also
architectural models, large and small or stereo and cinematic presentations of
architecture. The task of future art exhibitions is to show painting and sculpture
in the context of architecture, to show how they function in buildings and thus
to make art once again living and vital.



11 Max Beckmann (1884-1950) 'Creative Credo'

The author was invalided out of the German Army in 1915. His 'Credo' was composed
in 1918 at the moment of the Empire's defeat and the subsequent revolution of
November 1918, but before the defeat of the revolution and the establishment of the
Weimar Republic, which took place in 1919. Originally published in Kasimir Edschmid
(ed.) f Schopferische Konfession, Tribune der Kunst undZeit, XIII, Berlin, 1920. The pre-
sent translation is taken from Miesel, op. cit.

I paint and I'm satisfied to let it go at that since I'm by nature tongue-tied and
only a terrific interest in something can squeeze a few words out of me.

Nowadays whenever I listen to painters who have a way with words, frequently
with real astonishment, I become a little uneasy about whether I can find
language beautiful and spirited enough to convey my enthusiasm and passion
for the objects of the visible world. However, I've finally calmed myself about
this. I'm now satisfied to tell myself: 'You are a painter, do your job and let
those who can, talk.' I believe that essentially I love painting so much because
it forces me to be objective. There is nothing I hate more than sentimentality.
The stronger my determination grows to grasp the unutterable things of this
world, the deeper and more powerful the emotion burning inside me about our
existence, the tighter I keep my mouth shut and the harder I try to capture the



268 Rationalization and Transformation

terrible, thrilling monster of life's vitality and to confine it, to beat it down and
to strangle it with crystal-clear, razor-sharp lines and planes.

I don't cry. I hate tears, they are a sign of slavery. I keep my mind on my
business - on a leg, on an arm, on the penetration of the surface thanks to the
wonderful effects of foreshortening, on the partitioning of space, on the rela-
tionship of straight and curved lines, on the interesting placement of small,
variously and curiously shaped round forms next to straight and flat surfaces,
walls, tabletops, wooden crosses, or house facades. Most important for me is
volume, trapped in height and width; volume on the plane, depth without losing
the awareness of the plane, the architecture of the picture.

Piety? God? Oh beautiful, much misused words. I'm both when I have done
my work in such a way that I can finally die. A painted or drawn hand, a
grinning or weeping face, that is my confession of faith; if I have felt anything
at all about life it can be found there.

The war has now dragged to a miserable end. But it hasn't changed my ideas
about life in the least, it has only confirmed them. We are on our way to very
difficult times. But right now, perhaps more than before the war, I need to be
with people. In the city. That is just where we belong these days. We must be
a part of all the misery which is coming. We have to surrender our heart and
our nerves, we must abandon ourselves to the horrible cries of pain of a poor
deluded people. Right now we have to get as close to the people as possible.
It's the only course of action which might give some purpose to our superfluous
and selfish existence - that we give people a picture of their fate. And we can
only do that if we love humanity.

Actually it's stupid to love mankind, nothing but a heap of egoism (and we
are a part of it too). But I love it anyway. I love its meanness, its banality, its
dullness, its cheap contentment, and its oh-so-very-rare heroism. But in spite
of this, every single person is a unique event, as if he had just fallen from a
star. And isn't the city the best place to experience this? They say that the air
in the country is cleaner and that there are fewer temptations. But I believe
that dirt is the same wherever you are. Cleanliness is a matter of the will.
Farmers and landscapes are all very beautiful and occasionally even refreshing.
But the great orchestra of humanity is still in the city.

What was really unhealthy and disgusting before the war was that business
interests and a mania for success and influence had infected all of us in one
form or another. Well, we have had four years of staring straight into the stupid
face of horror. Perhaps a few people were really impressed. Assuming, of course,
anyone had the slightest inclination to be impressed.

Complete withdrawal in order to achieve that famous purity people talk about
as well as the loss of self in God, right now all that is too bloodless and also
loveless for me. You don't dare do that kind of thing until your work is finished
and our work is painting.

I certainly hope we are finished with much of the past. Finished with the
mindless imitation of visible reality; finished with feeble, archaistic, and empty
decoration, and finished with that false, sentimental, and swooning mysticism!
I hope we will achieve a transcendental objectivity out of a deep love for nature



HIb Dissent and Disorder 269

and mankind. The sort of thing you can see in the art of Malesskircher,
Griinewald, Breughel, Cezanne, and Van Gogh.

Perhaps with the decline of business, perhaps (something I hardly dare hope)
with the development of communism, the love of objects for their own sake
will become stronger, I believe this is the only possibility open to us for
achieving a great universal style.

That is my crazy hope which I can't give up, which in spite of everything is
stronger in me than ever before. And someday I want to make buildings along
with my pictures. To build a tower in which mankind can shriek out its rage
and despair and all their poor hopes and joys and wild yearning. A new church.
Perhaps this age may help me.



12 Max Pechstein (1881-1955) 'Creative Credo'

An Expressionist painter since the formation of the Brucke group in Dresden in

1905, Pechstein here offers a singularly expressionist 'Credo'. His individualism would
at this date have sat in a somewhat strained relationship with the more overtly left-wing
elements of the post-war German avant-garde. Originally published in Edschmid, op. cit.
The present translation is taken from Miesel, op. cit.

Work!

Ecstasy! Smash your brains! Chew, stuff your self, gulp it down, mix it around!
The bliss of giving birth! The crack of the brush, best of all as it stabs the
canvas. Tubes of color squeezed dry. And the body?

It doesn't matter.

Health?

Make yourself healthy!

Sickness doesn't exist! Only work and I'll say that again - only blessed work!
Paint! Dive into colors, roll around in tones! in the slush of chaos! Chew the
broken off mouthpiece of your pipe, press your naked feet into the earth. Crayon
and pen pierce sharply into the brain, they stab into every corner, furiously
they press into the whiteness. Black laughs like the devil on paper, grins in
bizarre lines, comforts in velvety planes, excites and caresses. The storm roars
- sand blows about - the sun shatters to pieces - and nevertheless, the gentle
curve of the horizon quietly embraces everything.

Beaten down, exhausted, just a worm, collapse into your bed. A deep s ^ ee P
will make you forget your defeat. A new day! A new struggle! Ecstasy again!
One day after the other, a sparkling, constantly changing chain of days- One
experience after the other. That damned brain! What is it that churns and
twitches and jumps in there? Hah! Tear your head off, r grab it with both
hands, turn it around, twist it off. Then we'll scrape it out and scratch it out.
Get rid of every last little bit. Sand! Water! Scrub it clean. There now!! A lm ost
as good as new! an unused skull. Night! Night! No stars, pitch black. Without
desire!

Tomorrow is another dav.



270 Rationalization and Transformation

13 George Grosz (1893-1959) 'My New Pictures'

Grosz had made a series of transitions from an amalgam of Futurism and Expression-
ism, to Berlin Dada, and to membership of the German Communist Party on its
foundation in January 1919. By 1920 he had virtually abandoned painting and had
produced several portfolios of prints attacking bourgeois society. These were published
by the Communist-oriented press Malik Verlag. The 'new pictures' to which he refers in
this text of 1920 mark a resumption of painting in a style influenced on the one hand,
ideologically, by the demands for a socialist objectivity, and on the other, technically,
by the more traditional forms of pictorial space paradoxically exemplified in the con-
current work of conservatives like Carra. Originally published in Das Kunstblatt, V, no.
1, Berlin, 1921. The present translation is taken from Miesei, op. cit.

Today art is absolutely a secondary affair. Anyone able to see beyond their
studio walls will admit this. Just the same, art is something which demands a
clearcut decision from artists. You can't be indifferent about your position in
this trade, about your attitude toward the problem of the masses, a problem
which is no problem if you can see straight. Are you on the side of the exploiters
or on the side of the masses who are giving these exploiters a good tanning?

You can't avoid this issue with the old rigmarole about the sublimity and
holiness and transcendental character of art. These days an artist is bought by
the best-paying jobber or Maecenas - this business of commissions is called in
a bourgeois state the advancement of culture. But today's painters and poets
don't want to know anything at all about the masses. How else can you explain
the fact that virtually nothing is exhibited which in any way reflects the ideals
and efforts, the will of the aspiring masses.

The artistic revolutions of painters and poets are certainly interesting and
aesthetically valuable - but still, in the last analysis, they are studio problems
and many artists who earnestly torment themselves about such matters end up
by succumbing to skepticism and bourgeois nihilism. This happens because
persisting in their individualistic artistic eccentricities they never learn to
understand revolutionary issues with any clarity; in fact, they rarely bother with
such things. Why, there are even art-revolutionary painters who haven't freed
themselves from painting Christ and the apostles; now, at the very time when
it is their revolutionary duty to double their efforts at propaganda in order to
purify the world of supernatural forces, God and His angels, and thereby
sharpen mankind's awareness of its true relationship to the world. Those
symbols, long since exhausted, and the mystical raptures of that stupid saint
hocus-pocus, today's painting is full of that stuff and what can it possibly mean
to us? All this painted nonsense certainly can't stand up to reality. Life is much
too strong for it.

What should you do to give content to your paintings?

Go to a proletarian meeting; look and listen how people there, people just
like you, discuss some small improvement of their lot.

And understand - these masses are the ones who are reorganizing the world.
Not you! But you can work with them. You could help them if you wanted to!




IIIb Dissent and Disorder 271

And that way you could learn to give your art a content which was supported
Ky the revolutionary ideals of the workers.

As for my works in this issue, I want to say the following: I am again
irying to give an absolutely realistic picture of the world. I want every man to
understand me - without that profundity fashionable these days, without those
depths which demand a veritable diving outfit stuffed with cabalistic and
Metaphysical hocus-pocus. In my efforts to develop a clear and simple style I
Can't help drawing closer to Carra. Nevertheless, everything which is metaphysi-
al and bourgeois about Carres work repels me. My work should be interpreted
as training, as a hard workout, without any vision into eternity! I am trying in
my so-called works of art to construct something with a completely realistic
foundation. Man is no longer an individual to be examined in subtle psycho-
logical terms, but a collective, almost mechanical concept. Individual destiny no
toiger matters. Just as the ancient Greeks, I would like to create absolutely
simple sport symbols which would be so easily understood that no commentary
would be necessary,

n I am suppressing colour. Lines are used in an impersonal, photographic
way to construct volumes. Once more stability, construction, and practical
purpose - e.g., sport, engineer, and machine but devoid of Futurist romantic
dynamism.

/Once more to establish control over line and form - it's no longer a question
of conjuring up on canvas brightly coloured Expressionistic soul-tapestries - the
objectivity and clarity of an engineer's drawing is preferable to the uncontrolled
twaddle of the cabala, metaphysics, and ecstatic saints.

; It isn't possible to be absolutely precise when you write about your own work,
especially if you're always in training - then each day brings new discoveries
and a new orientation. But I would like to say one thing more: I see the future
development of painting taking place in workshops, in pure craftsmanship, not
in any holy temple of the arts. Painting is manual labor, no different from any
Other; it can be done well or poorly. Today we have a star system, so do the
other arts - but that will disappear.

}i Photography will play an important role: nowadays a photographer can give
you a better and cheaper picture of yourself than a painter. Besides, modern
Wists prefer to distort things after their own fashion - and they have a peculiar
aversion to a good likeness. The anarchism of Expressionism must stop! Today
Painters are forced into this situation because they are unenlightened and have
no links with working people. But a time will come when artists - instead of
ksing scrubby bohemian anarchists - will be clean, healthy workers in a
eollectivistic community. Until this goal is realized by the working class the
intellectual will remain cynical, skeptical, and confused. Not until then will art
b e able to break out of its narrow and shallow confines where it flows anaemically
through the life of the 'upper ten-thousand', not until then will it become a
Sreat stream capable of nourishing all of working humanity. Then capitalism's
Monopoly of spiritual things will be ended. -

And here also communism will lead to a truly classless society, to an
e nrichment and further development of humanity.



272 Rationalization and Transformation

14 Francis Picabia (1879-1953) 'Thank you, Francis!'

The author passed through a succession of avant-garde styles before becoming a
leading figure in international Dada, moving between Paris and New York. He founded
the Dada review 391 in 1917 and edited it until 1924. The present text, which includes
a refusal of the then ascendant classicism, was originally published as 'Francis Merci!'
in Litterature, new series no. 8, Paris, January 1923. The present translation is taken
from Lippard, 1971, op. cit.

One must become acquainted with everybody except oneself; one must not know
which sex one belongs to; I do not care whether I am male or female, I do not
admire men more than I do women. Having no virtues, I am assured of not
suffering from them. Many people seek the road which can lead them to their
ideal: I have no ideal; the person who parades his ideal is only an arriviste.
Undoubtedly, I am also an arriviste, but my lack of scruples is an invention for
myself, a subjectivity. Objectively it would consist of awarding myself the legion
d'honneur, of wishing to become a minister or of plotting to get into the
Institute! Well, for me, all that is shit!

What I like is to invent, to imagine, to make myself a new man every moment,
then forget him, forget everything. We should be equipped with a special eraser,
gradually effacing our works and the memory of them. Our brain should be
nothing but a blackboard, or white, or, better, a mirror in which we would see
ourselves for a moment, only to turn our backs on it two minutes later. My
ambition is to be a man sterile for others; the man who sets himself up as a
school disgusts me, he gives his gonorrhea to artists for nothing and sells it as
dearly as possible to amateurs. Actually, writers, painters, and other idiots have
passed on the word to fight against the 'monsters,' monsters who, naturally, do
not exist, who are pure inventions of man.

Artists are afraid; they whisper in each other's ears about a boogey man which
might well prevent them from playing their dirty little tricks! No age, I believe,
has been more imbecilic than ours. These gentlemen would have us believe that
nothing is happening anymore; the train reversing its engines, it seems, is very
pretty to look at, cows are no longer enough! The travelers to this backward
Decanville are named: Matisse, Morandi, Braque, Picasso, Leger, de Segonzac,
etc., etc. . . . What is funniest of all is that they accept, as stationmaster, Louis
Vauxcelles, whose great black napkin contains only a foetus!

Since the war, a ponderous and half-witted sentiment of morality rules the
entire world. The moralists never discern the moral facts of appearances, the
Church for them is a morality like the morality of drinking water, or of not
daring to wash one's ass in front of a parrot! All that is arbitrary; people with
morals are badly informed, and those who are informed know that the others
will not inform themselves.

There is no such thing as a moral problem; morality like modesty is one of
the greatest stupidities. The asshole of morality should take the form of a
chamber-pot, that's all the objectivity I ask of it.




IIIb Dissent and Disorder 273

This contagious disease called morality has succeeded in contaminating all of
the so-called artistic milieux; writers and painters become serious people, and
g^n we shall have a minister of painting and literature; I don't doubt that there
w ill be still more frightful assininities. The poets no longer know what to say,
s o some are becoming Catholics, others believers; these men manufacture their
little scribblings as Felix Potin does his cold chicken preserves; people say that
Dada is the end of romanticism, that I am a clown, and they cry long live
classicism which will save the pure souls and their ambitions, the simple souls
so dear to those afflicted by dreams of grandeur!

However, I do not abandon the hope that nothing is finished yet, I am here,
and so are several friends who have a love of life, a life we do not know and
which interests us for that very reason.





IIIc

Abstraction and Form



1 Man Ray (1890-1977) Statement

American by birth, though involved for most of his career with the European avant-garde
centred in Paris, Man Ray is normally associated with his development of photographic
techniques in the orbit first of Dada, and later, Surrealism. In this early statement he
articulates a more orthodox formalist point of view. The 'Statement' was originally
printed in The Forum Exhibition of Modern American Painters', Anderson Galleries, New
York, March 1916. It is reproduced here from Lippard, 1971, op. cit.

Throughout time painting has alternately been put to the service of the church,
the state, arms, individual patronage, nature appreciation, scientific phenomena,
anecdote, and decoration.

But all the marvelous works that have been painted, whatever the sources of
inspiration, still live for us because of absolute qualities they possess in common.

The creative force and the expressiveness of painting reside materially in the
color and texture of pigment, in the possibilities of form invention and organ-
ization, and in the flat plane on which these elements are brought to play.

The artist is concerned solely with linking these absolute qualities directly to
his wit, imagination, and experience, without the go-between of a 'subject.'
Working on a single plane as the instantaneously visualizing factor, he realizes
his mind motives and physical sensations in a permanent and universal language
of color, texture, and form organization. He uncovers the pure plane of
expression that has so long been hidden by the glazings of nature imitation,
anecdote, and the other popular subjects.

Accordingly the artist's work is to be measured by the vitality, the invention,
and the definiteness and conviction of purpose within its own medium.



2 Viktor Shklovsky (1893-1984) from 'Art as
Technique 1

The author was a participant in the Russian school of formalist linguistics which
addressed crucial problems about the technical nature of art and literature in the years



IIIc Abstraction and Form 275

around the Revolution. Taking as his stalking horse a Symbolist literary theory, Shklovsky
outlines an opposing view of the nature of art. According to this, the purpose of art is
'de-familiarization'. As Shklovsky wrote elsewhere: 'A new form appears not in order to
express a new content, but in order to replace an old form, which has already lost its
artistic value.' Originally published as Iskusstvo kak priyom' in Sbomiki, II, Petrograd,
1917. These excerpts are drawn from the English translation ('Art as Technique', or
'Art as Device') in L. T. Lemon and M. J. Reis (eds.), Russian Formalist Criticism, Lincoln,
Nebraska, 1965.

'Art is thinking in images.' This maxim, which even high school students parrot,
is nevertheless the starting point for the erudite philologist who is beginning to
put together some kind of systematic literary theory. The idea, originated in
part by Potebnya, has spread. 'Without imagery there is no art, and in particular
no poetry,' Potebnya writes. And elsewhere, 'Poetry, as well as prose, is first
and foremost a special way of thinking and knowing.'

Poetry is a special way of thinking; it is, precisely, a way of thinking in
images, a way which permits what is generally called 'economy of mental effort,'
a way which makes for 'a sensation of the relative ease of the process.' Aesthetic
feeling is the reaction to this economy. This is how the academician Ovsyaniko-
Kulikovsky, who undoubtedly read the works of Potebnya attentively, almost
certainly understood and faithfully summarized the ideas of his teacher. Poteb-
nya and his numerous disciples consider poetry a special kind of thinking -
thinking by means of images; they feel that the purpose of imagery is to help
channel various objects and activities into groups and to clarify the unknown
by means of the known. [. . .]

'Without imagery there is no art' - 'Art is thinking in images.' These maxims
have led to far-fetched interpretations of individual works of art. Attempts have
been made to evaluate even music, architecture, and lyric poetry as imagistic
thought. After a quarter of a century of such attempts Ovsyaniko-Kulikovsky
finally had to assign lyric poetry, architecture, and music to a special category
of imageless art and to define them as lyric arts appealing directly to the
emotions. And thus he admitted an enormous area of art which is not a mode
of thought. A part of this area, lyric poetry (narrowly considered), is quite like
the visual arts; it is also verbal. But, much more important, visual art passes
quite imperceptibly into nonvisual art; yet our perceptions of both are similar.

Nevertheless, the definition 'Art is thinking in images,' which means (I omit
the usual middle terms of the argument) that art is the making of symbols, has
survived the downfall of the theory which supported it. It survives chiefly in
the wake of Symbolism, especially among the theorists of the Symbolist move-
ment.
* * *

Potebnya's conclusion, which can be formulated 'poetry equals imagery,' gave
rise to the whole theory that 'imagery equals symbolism,' that the image may
serve as the invariable predicate of various subjects. [. . .] The conclusion stems
partly from the fact that Potebnya did not distinguish between the language of
poetry and the language of prose. Consequently, he ignored the fact that there
are two aspects of imagery: imagery as a practical means of thinking, as a means



le&



276 Rationalization and Transformation

of placing objects within categories; and imagery as poetic, as a means of
reinforcing an impression. I shall clarify with an example. I want to attract the
attention of a young child who is eating bread and butter and getting the butter
on her fingers. I call, 'Hey, butterfingers!' This is a figure of speech, a clearly
prosaic trope. Now a different example. The child is playing with my glasses
and drops them. I call, 'Hey, butterfingers!' This figure of speech is a poetic
trope. (In the first example, 'butterfingers' is metonymic; in the second,
metaphoric - but this is not what I want to stress.)

Poetic imagery is a means of creating the strongest possible impression. As a
method it is, depending upon its purpose, neither more nor less effective than
other poetic techniques; it is neither more nor less effective than ordinary or
negative parallelism, comparison, repetition, balanced structure, hyperbole, the
commonly accepted rhetorical figures, and all those methods which emphasize
the emotional effect of an expression (including words or even articulated
sounds). But poetic imagery only externally resembles either the stock imagery
of fables and ballads or thinking in images [ . . . ]

The law of the economy of creative effort is also generally accepted. [Herbert]
Spencer wrote:

On seeking for some clue to the law underlying these current maxims, we may
see shadowed forth in many of them, the importance of economizing the reader's
or the hearer's attention. To so present ideas that they may be apprehended with
the least possible mental effort, is the desideratum towards which most of the
rules above quoted point. . . . Hence, carrying out the metaphor that language is
the vehicle of thought, there seems reason to think that in all cases the friction
and inertia of the vehicle deduct from its efficiency; and that in composition, the
chief, if not the sole thing to be done, is to reduce this friction and inertia to the
smallest possible amount.

These ideas about the economy of energy, as well as about the law and aim
of creativity, are perhaps true in their application to 'practical' language; they
were, however, extended to poetic language. Hence they do not distinguish
properly between the laws of practical language and the laws of poetic language.
The fact that Japanese poetry has sounds not found in conversational Japanese
was hardly the first factual indication of the differences between poetic and
everyday language. Leo Jakubinsky has observed that the law of the dissimilation
of liquid sounds does not apply to poetic language. This suggested to him that
poetic language tolerated the admission of hard-to-pronounce conglomerations
of similar sounds. In his article, one of the first examples of scientific criticism,
he indicates inductively the contrast . . . between the laws of poetic language and
the laws of practical language.

We must, then, speak about the laws of expenditure and economy in poetic
language not on the basis of an analogy with prose, but on the basis of the laws
of poetic language.

If we start to examine the general laws of perception, we see that as perception
becomes habitual, it becomes automatic. Thus, for example, all of our habits



IIIc Abstraction and Form 277

retreat into the area of the unconsciously automatic; if one remembers the
sensations of holding a pen or of speaking in a foreign language for the first
time and compares that with his feeling at performing the action for the ten
thousandth time, he will agree with us. Such habituation explains the principles
by which, in ordinary speech, we leave phrases unfinished and words half
expressed. [. . .]

[ . . . ] By this 'algebraic' method of thought we apprehend objects only as
shapes with imprecise extensions; we do not see them in their entirety but rather
recognize them by their main characteristics. We see the object as though it
were enveloped in a sack. We know what it is by its configuration, but we see
only its silhouette. The object, perceived thus in the manner of prose perception,
fades and does not leave even a first impression; ultimately even the essence of
what it was is forgotten. Such perception explains why we fail to hear the prose
word in its entirety . . . and, hence, why (along with other slips of the tongue)
we fail to pronounce it. The process of 'algebrization,' the over-automatization
of an object, permits the greatest economy of perceptive effort. [. . .]

[. . .] Habitualization devours works, clothes, furniture, one's wife, and the
fear of war. 'If the whole complex lives of many people go on unconsciously,
then such lives are as if they had never been.' And art exists that one may
recover the sensation of life; it exists to make one feel things, to make the stone
stony. The purpose of art is to impart the sensation of things as they are
perceived and not as they are known. The technique of art is to make objects
'unfamiliar,' to make forms difficult, to increase the difficulty and length of
perception because the process of perception is an aesthetic end in itself and
must be prolonged. Art is a way of experiencing the artfulness of an object; the
object is not important.

[. . .] Art removes objects from the automatism of perception in several ways.

* * *

[. . .] I personally feel that defamiliarization is found almost everywhere form
is found. In other words, the difference between Potebnya's point of view and
ours is this: An image is not a permanent referent for those mutable complexities
of life which are revealed through it; its purpose is not to make us perceive
meaning, but to create a special perception of the object - it creates a 'vision '
of the object instead of serving as a means for knowing it.

* * *

In studying poetic speech in its phonetic and lexical structure as well as in
its characteristic distribution of words and in the characteristic thought struc-
tures compounded from the words, we find everywhere the artistic trademark
- that is, we find material obviously created to remove the automatism of
Perception; the author's purpose is to create the vision which results from that
deautomatized perception. A work is created 'artistically' so that its perception
is impeded and the greatest possible effect is produced through the slowness of
the perception. [...] Leo Jakubinsky has demonstrated the principle of
phonetic 'roughening' of poetic language in the particular case of the repetition
of identical sounds. The language of poetry is, then, a difficult, roughened,
impeded language. In a few special instances the language of poetry approximates



278 Rationalization and Transformation

the language of prose, but this does not violate the principle of 'roughened'
form.

Her sister was called Tatyana.
For the first time we shall
Wilfully brighten the delicate
Pages of a novel with such a name.

wrote Pushkin. The usual poetic language for Pushkin's contemporaries was the
elegant style of Derzhavin; but Pushkin's style, because it seemed trivial then,
was unexpectedly difficult for them. We should remember the consternation of
Pushkin's contemporaries over the vulgarity of his expressions. He used the
popular language as a special device for prolonging attention, just as his
contemporaries generally used Russian words in their usually French speech
(see Tolstoy's examples in War and Peace).

Just now a still more characteristic phenomenon is under way. Russian literary
language, which was originally foreign to Russia, has so permeated the language
of the people that it has blended with their conversation. On the other hand,
literature has now begun to show a tendency towards the use of dialects
(Remizov, Klyuyev, Essenin, and others, so unequal in talent and so alike in
language, are intentionally provincial) and of barbarisms (which gave rise to the
Severyanin group). And currently Maxim Gorky is changing his diction from
the old literary language to the new literary colloquialism of Leskov. Ordinary
speech and literary language have thereby changed places (see the work of
Vyacheslav Ivanov and many others). And finally, a strong tendency, led by
Khlebnikov, to create a new and properly poetic language has emerged. In the
light of these developments we can define poetry as attenuated, tortuous speech.
Poetic speech is formed speech. Prose is ordinary speech [ . . . ]



3 De Stijl: 'Manifesto 1'

The De Stiji group was founded in Holland in 1917, dedicated to a synthesis of art,
design and architecture. Its leading figure was Theo van Doesburg. Other members
included Gerrit Rietveld and J. J. P. Oud, both architect-designers, and the painters
Georges Vantongerloo and Piet Mondrian. Links were established with the Bauhaus in
Weimar Germany, and with similar projects in Russia, particularly through contacts with
El Lissitsky, The 'Manifesto', principally the work of van Doesburg, was composed in
1918. It was published in the group's journal De Stijl, V, no. 4, Amsterdam, 1922. The
present translation by Nicholas Bullock is taken from Stephen Bann (ed.), The Tradition
of Constructivism, London, 1974.

1 There is an old and a new consciousness of time.
The old is connected with the individual.
The new is connected with the universal.

The struggle of the individual against the universal is revealing itself in the
world war as well as in the art of the present day.



jiff



Illc Abstraction and Form 279

The war is destroying the old world and its contents: individual domination

in every state.

The new art has brought forward what the new consciousness of time

contains: a balance between the universal and the individual.

The new consciousness is prepared to realize the internal life as well as the

external life.

Traditions, dogmas, and the domination of the individual are opposed to

this realization.

The founders of the new plastic art, therefore, call upon all who believe in

the reformation of art and culture to eradicate these obstacles to development,

as in the new plastic art (by excluding natural form) they have eradicated

that which blocks pure artistic expression, the ultimate consequence of all

concepts of art.

The artists of today have been driven the whole world over by the same

consciousness, and therefore have taken part from an intellectual point of

view in this war against the domination of individual despotism. They

therefore sympathize with all who work to establish international unity in

life, art, culture, either intellectually or materially. [. . .]



4 Theo van Doesburg (1883-1931) from Principles of
Neo-Plastic Art

This was van Doesburg's main statement of the principles of De Stijl. It was begun as
early as 1915, first published in Dutch in 1919, and subsequently issued in German by
the Bauhaus, as Grundbegriffe der Neuen Gestalden Kunst, Bauhausbuch, vol. 6,
Munich, 1925. The present extract is taken from the English translation by Janet
Seligman, London, 1969.

XX If an object of experience as such enters visibly into the work this
object is an auxiliary means within the expressional means. The mode
of expression will in this event be inexact.

XXI When the aesthetic experience is expressed directly through the
creative means of the branch of art in question, the mode of expression
will be exact. 1

Example 5

When we look at old paintings, e.g., one by someone like Nicolas Poussin, we
are struck by the fact that the human figures are portrayed in physical attitudes
which we are unaccustomed to see in daily life, yet their corporeality is
convincingly reproduced; the landscape too has clearly been improved. The
leaves on the trees, the grass on the ground, the hills, the sky, all are true to
life and yet the painter did not intend all this to be so. The attitudes and
gestures of these people, the exact spot on which the individual figures stand
and the relationship of the groups of figures to the surrounding space and the
areas of space in between are far from being fortuitous or natural. Stress has
clearly been laid upon attitudes and relationships. Everything has obviously been



280 Rationalization and Transformation

carefully pondered. Everything is governed by fixed laws. Even the light,
uniformly strong over the whole canvas, differs from natural light.

Such a painting is in a high degree true to life and yet, as a result of definite
intentions on the part of the painter, it differs from nature. Why? Because the
artist was working according to artistic and aesthetic laws (constructively
organizing) and not purely from the point of view of natural objective legibility.
The painter was more concerned about aesthetic purposes than about natural
forms.

Instead of allowing the picturesque fortuitousness and diversity of nature to
predominate, he seeks to achieve expression of a universal idea by purposeful
organization of the figures and subordination of the details. Thus he appears to
neglect the laws of nature in favour of those of artistic creation. He uses natural
forms only as a means of attaining his artistic aim. 2

The aim is: to create a harmonious whole in which the equilibrium of the
whole, an aesthetic unity, is achieved by means of multiple exchanges and by
cancelling out the positions and postures of the figures, the areas of space and
masses and lines of movement in the picture (by relationships).

Indeed up to a point this artistic harmony is achieved. Up to a point, because
the artistic aim is not sought directly through the artistic means, but only
indirectly, obscured behind natural forms. Neither colour nor form appears in
its pure state as colour and form. Rather colour and form are used to assist in
producing an illusion of some other thing, e.g., leaves, glass, limbs, silk, stone,
etc.

Such a work of art is the artistic idea expressed by naturalistic means.

It is an aesthetic-naturalistic work of art.

It deviates from external nature in so far as it is aesthetic (more inward); it
deviates from the aesthetic idea in so far as it is naturalistic. It is, so to speak,
split and is thus not an unambiguously and exactly formative work.

The aim of the formative artist is simply this: to give form to his aesthetic
experience of reality or, one might also say, his creative experience of the
fundamental essence of things. The visual artist can leave the repetition of
stories, fairy-tales, etc., to poets and writers. The only way in which visual art
can be developed and deployed is by revaluing and purifying the formative
means. Arms, legs, trees, and landscapes are not unequivocally painterly means.
Painterly means are: colours, forms, lines, and planes.

Taking the development of visual art as a whole, we can, in fact, see the
means becoming increasingly clearly defined and providing the possibility of
purely formative expression for the artistic experience. Since these formative
means have made their appearance as the principal visible factor, everything
in painting, sculpture, and, to some extent, in architecture which has no
immediate place among the purely expressional means has been relegated to the
background.

It is unnecessary to record every stage in the development of their importance
in the evolution towards an exact artistic expression. We may summarize all
these various currents, whether or not they belong to systems as: the conquest
of an exact expressional form of the aesthetic experience of reality.



w



Hie Abstraction and Form 281

The essence of the formative idea (of aesthetics) is expressed by the term
cancellation.

One element cancels out another.

This cancelling out of one element by another is expressed in nature as well
as in art. In nature, more or less concealed behind the accidents of the particular
case, in art (at least in the exact, formative kind), clearly revealed.

Although we cannot grasp the perfect harmony, the absolute equilibrium of
the universe, each and everything in the universe (every motif) is nevertheless
subordinated to the laws of this harmony, this equilibrium. It is the artist's
business to discover and give form to this concealed harmony, this universal
equilibrium of things, to demonstrate its conformity to its own laws, etc.
' The (truly exact) work of art is a metaphor of the universe obtained with
artistic means.

We saw in example 5 that artistic equilibrium was achieved in the work of
art of an earlier age by the repeated cancelling out of one figural position by
another, one dimension by another, etc.; by, therefore, a reciprocal cancelling
out of means borrowed from nature.

The great step forward made by the exact formative work of art consists in
the fact that it achieves aesthetic equilibrium by pure artistic means and by
these alone.

In the exact, formative work of art the formative idea is given direct and
actual expression by continual cancelling out of the expressional means: thus a
horizontal position is cancelled out by a vertical one, similarly dimension (large
by small) and proportion (broad by narrow). One plane is cancelled out by
another which circumscribes it or one which is related to it, etc., the same
applies to colour: one colour is cancelled out by another (e.g., yellow by blue,
white by black), one group of colours by another group of colours and all
coloured planes are cancelled out by non-coloured planes and vice versa. 3 In
this way (according to Piet Mondrian: 'Neue Gestaltung' in the Bauhausbiicher,
Vol. 5), by means of a constant cancelling out of position, dimension, proportion
and colour, a harmonious overall relationship, artistic equilibrium, is achieved
and with it, in the most exact manner, the aim of the artist: to create a formative
harmony, to give truth in the way of beauty. The artist no longer embodies his
idea by indirect representation: symbols, slices of life, genre scenes, etc.; he gives
form to his idea directly and purely by the artistic means available for the purpose.

The work of art becomes an independent, artistically alive (plastic) organism
in which everything counterbalances everything else.

The artist is, of course, entirely free to make use of any science (e.g., mathematics), any technique

2 ( e -8- printing-press, machine, etc.) and any material whatever, to achieve this exactitude.
What the decadents of Cubism with their 'superrealism' are now almost without exception aiming
at is exactly the same thing: a classical, painterly harmony achieved by means borrowed from
nature. That in this process the natural forms are not intended as such but are to be regarded
only as objective phenomena, makes, from the artistic point of view, no fundamental difference.

3 One might label this movement Neo-Baroque.

In Impressionism this cancelling out was expressed intuitively. In order to achieve a harmonious
impression one colour was cancelled out by another. Hence the expression: colour-relationship.



282 Rationalization and Transformation

5 Piet Mondrian (1872-1944) 'Dialogue on the New
Plastic'

Mondrian absorbed the lessons of Cubism during a stay in Paris before the First World
War. He returned to Holland in 1914. There he developed both the practice of a new
abstract art and the theoretical principles underlying it. One of the most extensive early
attempts to explain the principles of his new art took the form of a dialogue with a
doubting critic. By the device of identifying this critic as a singer, Mondrian was enabled
to use musical analogies in his explanations. The essay was originally published as
'Dialoog over de Nieuwe Beelding' in two issues of De Stijl, Leiden, February and March
1919. (It should be noted that the Dutch term beelding carries connotations of forming
and making absent from the more basically material sense of 'plastic'.) The present
extract is taken from the English translation in Harry Holzman and Martin S. James
(eds. and trans.), The New Art - The New Life: The Collected Writings of Piet Mondrian,
Boston, 1986.

A: A Singer

B\ A Painter

A: I admire your earlier work. Because it means so much to me, I would like
better to understand your present way of painting. I see nothing in these
rectangles. What are you aiming at?

B: My new paintings have the same aim as the previous ones. Both have the
same aim, but my latest work brings it out more clearly.

A: And what is that?

B: To express relationships plastically through oppositions of color and line.

A: But didn't your earlier work represent nature}

B: I expressed myself by means of nature. But if you carefully observe the
sequence of my work, you will see that it progressively abandoned the
naturalistic appearance of things and increasingly emphasized the plastic
expression of relationships.

A: Do you find, then, that natural appearance interferes with the plastic
expression of relationships?

B: You must agree that if two words are sung with the same strength, with
the same emphasis, each weakens the other. One cannot express both natural
appearance as we see it and plastic relationships with the same determinate-
ness. In naturalistic form, in naturalistic color, and in naturalistic line, plastic
relationships are veiled. To be expressed plastically in a determinate way,
relationships must be represented only through color and line. In the capa-
ciousness of nature, form and color are weakened by curvature and by the
corporeality of things. To give the means of expression of painting their full value
in my earlier work, I increasingly allowed color and line to speak for themselves.

A: But how can color and line as such, without the form we perceive in nature,
express anything determinately?

B: To express plastically color and line means to establish opposition through
color and line; and this opposition expresses plastic relationship. Relationship
is what I have always sought, and that is what all painting seeks to express.



IIIc Abstraction and Form 283

A: But painting always used nature for plastic expression and through the
beauty of nature was elevated to the ideal.

B: Yes, it rose to the ideal through the beauty of nature; but in plastic expression
the ideal is something other than the mere representation of natural appear-
ance.

A: But doesn't the ideal exist only in us?

B: It exists in us and outside of us. The ancients said that the ideal is everywhere
and in everything. In any case, the ideal is manifested aesthetically as beauty.
But what did you mean a moment ago by 'the beauty of nature'?

A: I had in mind, for example, an ancient work, an image said to contain all
the beauty of the human form,

B: Well, think for a moment of masterpieces of the so-called realistic schools,
which show none of this ideal beauty and nevertheless express beauty.
Comparing these two types of art, you will already see that not only the
beauty of nature but also its so-called ugliness can move us or, as you say,
elevate us toward the ideal. Neither subject matter, the representation, nor
nature itself creates the beauty of painting. They merely establish the type of
beauty by determining the composition, the color, and the form.

A: But that is not how a layman thinks of it, although what you say seems
plausible. Nevertheless, I cannot imagine relationships expressed otherwise
than by means of some subject matter or representation and not just through
a composition of color and line alone; just as I can't appreciate sounds without
melody - a sound composition by one of our modern composers means nothing
to me.

B: In painting you must first try to see composition, color, and line and not the
representation as representation. Then you will finally come to feel the subject
matter a hindrance.

A: When I recall your transitional work, where color that was not true to nature
to some extent destroyed the subject matter, I do see more clearly that beauty
can be created, even far more forcefully created, without verisimilitude. For
those paintings gave me a far stronger aesthetic sensation than purely natur-
alistic painting. But surely the color must have form}

B: Form or the illusion of form; anyway, color must be clearly delimited if it
is to represent anything plastically. In what you call my transitional work,
you rightly saw that the subject matter was neutralized by a free expression
of color. But you must also see that its plastic expression was determined by
form that still remained largely true to nature. To harmonize color and form,
the subject matter of the painting, and therefore the form, was carefully
selected. If I aimed, for instance, to express vastness and extension, the subject
was chosen with this in mind. The plastic idea took on various expressions,
according to whether it was a dune landscape or the sea or a church that
formed the subject. You remember my flowers; they too were carefully
'chosen' from the many varieties there are. Didn't you find that they had yet
'another' expression than my seascapes, dunes, and churches?

A: Indeed! To me the flowers conveyed something more intimate, as it were;
while the sea, dunes, and churches spoke more directly of 'space.'



284 Rationalization and Transformation

B: So you see the importance of form. A closed form, such as a flower, says
something other than an open curved line as in the dunes, and something
else again than the straight line of a church or the radiating petals of some
other flowers, for example. By comparing, you see that a particular form
makes a particular impression, that line has plastic power and that the most
tensed line most purely expresses immutability, strength, and vastness.

A: But I still don't understand why you favor the straight line and have come
entirely to exclude the curved.

B: The search for the expression of vastness led to the search for the greatest
tension: the straight line; because all curvature resolves into the straight, no
place remains for the curved.

A: Did you come to this conclusion suddenly?

B: No, very gradually. First I abstracted the capricious, then the freely curved,
and finally the mathematically curved.

A: So it was through this abstracting that you came to exclude all naturalistic
representation and subject matter?

B: That's right, through the work itself. The theories I just mentioned concern-
ing these exclusions came afterward. Consistent abstracting led me to exclude
the visible-concrete completely from my plastic expression. In painting a tree
I progressively abstracted the curves: you can understand that very little 'tree'
remained.

A: But can't a tree be represented with straight lines?

B: Perfectly true. Now I see something is lacking in my explanation: abstraction
alone is not enough to eliminate the naturalistic from painting. Line and color
must be composed otherwise than in nature.

A: Then what the painter calls composition also changes too?

B: Yes, an entirely different composition, more mathematical but not symmet-
rical, is needed in order to achieve pure plastic expression of equilibrated
relationship. Merely to express the natural with straight lines still remains
naturalistic reproduction even though the effect is already much stronger.

A: But won't such abstracting and transformed composition make everything
look alike}

B: That is a necessity rather than a hindrance, if we wish to express plastically
what all things have in common instead of what sets them apart. Thus the
particular, which diverts us from what is essential, disappears; only the
universal remains. The depiction of objects gives way to pure plastic express-
ion of relationship.

A: Our talk yesterday showed me that Abstract Painting grew out of naturalistic
painting. It became clear to me mainly because I know your earlier work.
Then Abstract Painting is not just intellectual but also the product of feeling}

B: Of both: deeper feeling and deeper intellect. When feeling is deepened, in
many eyes it is destroyed. That is why the deeper emotion of the New Plastic
is so little understood. But one must learn to see Abstract-Real painting, just
as the painter had to learn to create in an abstract-real way. It represents the
process of life that is reflected in the plastic expression of art. People too often



Illc Abstraction and Form 285

view the work of art as a luxury, something merely pleasant, even as a
decoration, as something that lies outside life. Yet art and life are one; art and
life are both expressions of truth. If, for instance, we see that equilibrated
relationships in society signify what is just, then one realizes that in art too
the demands of life press forward when the spirit of the time is ripe.

A: I am very sympathetic to the unity of art and life, yet life is the main thing!

B: All expressions of life - religion, social life, art, etc. - always have a common
basis. We should go into that further; there is so much to say. Some have
felt this strongly and it led one of us to found De Stijl.

A: I have looked at De Stijl, but it was not very easy for me to understand.

B: I recommend repeated reading. But the ideas that De Stijl expounds can
give you no more than a conception of the essence of the New Plastic and its
connection with life: the content of the New Plastic can be seen only in the
work itself. Only through intuitive feeling, through long contemplation and
comparison, can one come to complete appreciation of the new.

A: Perhaps so, but I still feel that art will be much impoverished if the natural
is eliminated.

B: How can its expression be impoverished if it conveys more clearly what is
important and essential to the work of art?

A: But the straight line alone can say so little.

B: The straight line tells the truth; and the significance you want it to have is
of no value for painting; such significance is literary, preconceived. Painting
has to be purely plastic, and in order to achieve this it must use plastic means
that do not signify the individual. This also justifies the use of rectangular
color planes.

A: Does this hold for classical painting, in fact for all previous painting, which
always represented appearance?

B: Indeed, if you really understand that all pure painting aimed to be purely
plastic, then the consequent application of this idea not only justifies universal
plastic means but demands it. Unintentionally, naturalistic painting gives too
much prominence to the particular. The universal is what all art seeks to
express: therefore, the New Plastic is justified relative to all painting.

A: But is the New Plastic justified in relation to nature}

B: If you understood that the New Plastic expresses the essential of everything,
you would not ask that question. Besides, art is a duality of nature-and-man
and not nature alone. Man transforms nature according to his own image;
when man expresses his deepest being, thus manifesting his inwardness, he
must necessarily interwrize natural appearance.

A: Then you don't despise nature?

B: On the contrary. For the New Plastic, too, nature is that great manifestation
through which our deepest being is revealed and assumes concrete appearance.

A: Nevertheless, to follow nature seems to me the true path.

B: The appearance of nature is far stronger and much more beautiful than any
imitation of it can ever be; if we wish to reflect nature, fully, we are compelled
to find another plastic. Precisely for the sake of nature, of reality, we avoid
its natural appearance.



286 Rationalization and Transformation



Hie Abstraction and Form 287



But nature manifests itself in an indefinite variety of forms; do you show
nothing of this?

I see reality as a unity; what is manifested in all its appearances is one and
the same: the immutable. We try to express this plastically as purely as possible.

It seems reasonable to take the immutable as the basis: the changeable
provides nothing solid. But what do you call immutable?

The plastic expression of immutable relationship: the relationship of two straight
lines perpendicular to each other.

Is there no danger of monotony in so consistently expressing the immutable?

The danger exists, but the artist, not the plastic method, would create it.
The New Plastic has its oppositions, its rhythm, its technique, its composition,
and these not only give scope for the plastic expression of life, of movement,
but they still contain so much of the changeable that it is still difficult for
the artist to find pure plastic expression of the immutable.

Nevertheless, in what little I have seen of the New Plastic, I noticed just
this monotony; I failed to experience the inspiration, the deep emotion that
more naturalistic painting gives me. It is what I fail to hear in the composi-
tions of modern music; as I said earlier, the recent tone combinations without
melody fail to stir me as music with melody does.

But surely an equilibrated composition of pure tone relationships should be
able to stir one even more deeply.

How can you say that, not being a musician!

I can say it because, fundamentally, all art is one. Painting has shown me
that the equilibrated composition of color relationships ultimately surpasses
naturalistic composition and naturalistic plastic - when the aim is to express
equilibrium, harmony, as purely as possible.

I agree that the essential of art is the creation of harmony, but . . .

But harmony does not mean the same thing to everyone and does not speak
to everyone in the same way. That is why it is so easy to understand that
there are differences in the modes of plastic expression.

Then this leaves room for naturalistic painting and melody in music. But
do you mean they will be outgrown in the future?

The more purely we perceive harmony, the more purely we will plastically
express relationships of color and of sound; this seems logical to me.

So the New Plastic is the end of painting?

Insofar as there can be no purer plastic expression of equilibrated relation-
ships - in art. The New Plastic was born only yesterday and has yet to reach
its culmination.

Then it could become completely different?

Not completely. But in any case, the New Plastic could not return to
naturalistic or form expression, for it grew out of these. It is bound to the
fixed law of art, which as I said, is the unity of man and nature. If in this
duality the New Plastic is to create pure relationships and therefore unity, it
cannot allow the natural to predominate; therefore, it must remain abstract.

I now see more and more that I thought of painting as representation of
the visible, whereas it is possible in painting to express beauty in quite another



way. Perhaps one day I will come to love the New Plastic as you do, but so
far". . .
p: If you see both naturalistic painting and the New Plastic from a purely
plastic point of view, that is, distinct from subject matter or the expressive
means, then you will see but one thing in both: the plastic expression of
relationship. If from the point of view of painting you can thus see beauty in
one mode of expression, you will also see it in the other. [. . .]



6 Piet Mondrian (1872-1944) Neo-Plasticism: the
General Principle of Plastic Equivalence

Mondrian returned to Paris in 1919. The present essay was written in 1920 and marked
the first exposition of his ideas in French. Mondrian himself considered it definitive,
claiming in 1932 to have done 'nothing further' in writing. Mondrian was included by
Leonce Rosenberg in his exhibition 'Masters of Cubism' of 1921, and the essay was
published as a pamphlet, Le Neo-Plasticisme: Principe general de /'equivalence plas-
tique, by Rosenberg's Galerie de I'Effort Moderne in Paris, January 1921. The present
version is taken from Holzman and James, op. cit.

Although art is the plastic expression of our aesthetic emotion, we cannot
therefore conclude that art is only 'the aesthetic expression of our subjective
Sensations/ Logic demands that art be the plastic expression of our whole being:
therefore, it must be equally the plastic appearance of the nonindividual, the
absolute and annihilating opposition of subjective sensations. That is, it must
also be the direct expression of the universal in us - which is the exact appearance
of the universal outside us.

The universal thus understood is that which is and remains constant: the more
or less unconscious in us, as opposed to the more or less conscious - the individual,
which is repeated and renewed.

Our whole being is as much the one as the other: the unconscious and the
conscious, the immutable and the mutable, emerging and changing form through their
reciprocal action.

This action contains all the misery and all the happiness of life: misery is
caused by continual separation, happiness by perpetual rebirth of the changeable.
The immutable is beyond all misery and all happiness: it is equilibrium.

Through the immutable in us, we are united with all things; the mutable
destroys our equilibrium, limits us, and separates us from all that is other than
us. It is from this equilibrium, from the unconscious, from the immutable that art
comes. It attains its plastic expression through the conscious. In this way, the
appearance of art is plastic expression of the unconscious and of the conscious. It
shows the relationship of each to the other: its appearance changes, but art
remains immutable.

In 'the totality of our being' the individual or the universal may dominate,
or equilibrium between the two may be approached. [...] In all the arts
objective fought against subjective, universal against individual: pure plastic



288 Rationalization and Transformation

expression against descriptive expression. Thus art tended toward equilibrated
plastic.

Disequilibrium between individual and universal creates the tragic and is
expressed as tragic plastic. In whatever exists as form or corporeality, the natural
dominates: this creates the tragic . . .

The tragic in life leads to artistic creation: art, because it is abstract and in
opposition to the natural concrete, can anticipate the gradual disappearance of
the tragic. The more the tragic diminishes, the more art gains in purity.

The new spirit can manifest itself only in the midst of the tragic. It finds
only the old form, for the new plastic is yet to be created. Born in the
environment of the past, it can be expressed only in the vital reality of the
abstract. . . .

Because it is part of the whole, the new spirit cannot free itself entirely from
the tragic. The New Plastic, expressing the vital reality of the abstract, has not
entirely freed itself from the tragic but it has ceased to be dominated by it.

In contrast, in the old plastic the tragic dominates. It cannot dispense with
the tragic and tragic plastic.

So long as the individual dominates, tragic plastic is necessary, for that is
what creates its emotion. But as soon as a period of greater maturity is reached,
tragic plastic becomes insupportable.
* * *

For let us not forget that we are at a turning point of culture, at the end of
everything ancient: the separation between the two is absolute and definite. Whether
it is recognized or not, one can logically foresee that the future will no longer
understand tragic plastic, just like an adult who cannot understand the soul of
the child.

At the same time as it suppresses the dominating tragic, the new spirit
suppresses description in art. Because the obstacle of form has been destroyed,
the new art affirms itself as pure plastic. The new spirit has found its plastic
expression. In its maturity, the one and the other are neutralized, and they are
coupled into unity. Confusion in the apparent unity of interior and exterior has
been resolved into an equivalent duality forming absolute unity. The individual
and the universal are in more equilibrated opposition. Because they are merged in
unity, description becomes superfluous: the one is known through the other. They
are plastically expressed without use of form: their relationship alone (through
direct plastic means) creates the plastic.

It is in painting that the New Plastic achieved complete expression for the
first time. This plastic could be formulated because its principle was solidly
established, and it continues to perfect itself unceasingly.

Neo-Plasticism has its roots in Cubism. It can equally be called Abstract-Real
painting because the abstract (just like the mathematical sciences but without
attaining the absolute, as they do) can be expressed by plastic reality. In fact,
this is the essential characteristic of the New Plastic in painting. It is a
composition of rectangular color planes that expresses the most profound reality-
It achieves this by plastic expression of relationships and not by natural appearance.
It realizes what all painting has always sought but could express only in a veiled



IIlc Abstraction and Form 289

manner. The colored planes, as much by position and dimension as b\- the
greater value given to color, plastically express only reldtionships and not forms.

The New Plastic brings its relationships into aesthetic equilibrium and therebv
expresses the new harmony.

The future of the New Plastic and its true realization in painting H es j n
chromoplastic in architecture ... It governs the interior as well as the exterior of
the building and includes everything that plastically expresses relationships
through color. No more than the 'New Plastic-as-painting, ' which prepares the
way for it, can chromoplastic be regarded as 'decoration.' It is entirely new
painting in which all painting is resolved, pictorial as well as decorative. It unites
the objective character of decorative art (but much more strongly) with the
subjective character of pictorial art (but much more profoundly). At this moment
for material and technical reasons, it is very difficult to foresee its exact image!

At present each art strives to express itself more directly through its plastic
means and seeks to free its means as much as possible.

Music tends toward the liberation of sound, literature toward the liberation of
word. Thus, by purifying their plastic means, they achieve the pure plastic of
relationships. The degree and mode of purification vary with the art and the
epoch in which they can be attained.

In fact, the new spirit is revealed by the plastic means: it is expressed through
composition. Composition must express equilibrated plastic as a function f the
individual and of the universal. Dominating tragic must be abolished by com-
position and plastic means together: for if plastic appearance is not composed
in constant and neutralizing opposition, the plastic means would return to the
expression of 'form' and would be veiled anew by the descriptive.

Thus Neo-Plasticism in art is not simply a question of 'technique.' In the New
Plastic, and through it, technique changes. The touchstone of the new spirit
next to composition, is precisely what is so often lightly called 'technique:

'It is by appearance that one judges whether a work of art is really pure plastic
expression of the universal'. . . .

Because sculpture and painting have been able to reduce their primitive plastic
means to universal plastic means, they can find effective plastic expression in
exactness and in the abstract. Architecture by its very nature already has at its
disposal a plastic means free of the capricious form of natural appearance.

In the New Plastic, painting no longer expresses itself through the corporeality
f appearance that gives it a naturalistic expression. To the contrary, painting
is expressed plastically by plane within plane. By reducing three-dimensional
corporeality to a single plane, it expresses pure relationship.
* * *

 . . the new spirit must be manifested in all the arts without exception. That
there are differences between the arts is no reason that one should be valued
fess than the other; that can lead to another appearance but not to an opposed
a Ppearance. As soon as one art becomes plastic expression of the abstract the
others can no longer remain plastic expressions of the natural. The two do not
$o together: from this comes their mutual hostility down to the present. The
New Plastic abolishes this antagonism: it creates the unity of all the arts,. [. 1



290 Rationalization and Transformation

Sculpture and architecture, until the present, destroy space as space by
dividing it. The new sculpture and architecture must destroy the work of art as
an object or thing.

Each art possesses its own specific expression, its particular nature. 'Although
the content of all art is one, the possibilities of plastic expression are different
for each art. Each art discovers these possibilities within its own domain and
must remain limited by its bounds. Each art possesses its own means of expression:
the transformation of its plastic means has to be discovered independently by
each art and must remain limited by its own bounds. Therefore the potentialities
of one art cannot be judged according to the potentialities of another, but must
be considered independently and only with regard to the art concerned . . . '.

'With the advancing culture of the spirit, all the arts, regardless of differences
in their expressive means, in one way or another become more and more the
plastic creation of determinate, equilibrated relationship: for equilibrated rela-
tionship must purely express the universal, the harmony, the unity that are
proper to the spirit.'

. . . through the new spirit, man himself creates a new beauty, whereas in the
past he only painted and described the beauty of nature. This new beauty has
become indispensable to the new man, for in it he expresses his own image in
equivalent opposition with nature. THE NEW ART IS BORN.



7 Kasimir Malevich (1878-1935) 'Non-Objective Art
and Suprematism'

Malevich claimed that Suprematism began in 1913. Its first exposition took place,
however, in December 1915; the works of 1913 to which he refers were set designs
(involving squares) for the Futurist opera Victory over the Sun, which he saw as
significant in the genesis of Suprematism. The Black Square of 1915 had served as a
zero point from which Malevich could develop a vocabulary of coloured forms, mostly
rectangular and often giving the appearance of 'flying' in pictorial space. By 1919 he
believed he had burst through colour into white, the 'colour' of infinity. This text was
originally published in the catalogue to the 10th State Exhibition, Moscow 1919, at
which Malevich exhibited his 'White on White' canvases. The present translation is taken
from Larissa Zhadova, Malevich: Suprematism and Revolution in Russian Art 1910-
1920, London, 1982.

The plane which formed a square was the progenitor of Suprematism, the new
colour realism, as non-objective art (see the pamphlet Cubism, Futurism and
Suprematism, 1st, 2nd and 3rd editions, 1915 and 1916). [see IIa14]

Suprematism arose in Moscow in 1913 and the first works which appeared
at an exhibition of painting in Petrograd aroused indignation among 'papers that
were then in good standing' and critics, as well as among professionals - the
leading painters.

In referring to non-objectivity, I merely wished to make it plain that Suprem-
atism is not concerned with things, objects, etc., and more: non-objectivity in





Illc Abstraction and Form 291

general has nothing to do with it. Suprematism is a definite system in accordance
tfith which colour has developed throughout the long course of its culture.

Painting arose from the mixing of colours and - at moments when aesthetic
warmth brought about a flowering - turned colour into a chaotic mix, so that
jt was objects as such which served as the pictorial framework for the great
painters. I found that the closer one came to the culture of painting, the more
the frameworks (i.e. objects) lost their systematic nature and broke up, thus
establishing a different order governed by painting.

It became clear to me that new frameworks of pure colour must be created,
based on what colour demanded and also that colour, in its turn, must pass out
of the pictorial mix into an independent unity, a structure in which it would
be at once individual in a collective environment and individually independent.

The system is constructed in time and space, independently of any aesthetic
considerations of beauty, experience or mood, but rather as a philosophical colour
system, the realization of new trends in my thinking - as a matter of knowledge.

At the present moment man's path lies across space. Suprematism is the
semaphore of light in its infinite abyss.

* The blue colour of the sky has been overcome by the Suprematist system, it has
Jieen broken through and has entered into while, which is the true actual repre-
sentation of infinity and therefore freed from the colour background of the sky.
r. L A hard, cold system, unsmilingly set in motion by philosophical thought.
Indeed, its real power may already be in motion within this system.

All the daubings produced by utilitarian intentions are insignificant and
limited in scope. Their point is merely a matter of application and the past,
and it arises from recognition and deduction by philosophical thought at the
level at which we see the cosy nooks that cater for commonplace taste, or create
anew one.

bin one of its phases, Suprematism has a purely philosophical impetus,
cognitive by means of colour: in another, it is a form capable of application by
making available a new style of Suprematist decoration.

But it may manifest itself in objects as a transformation or embodiment of
space within them, thereby removing their singularity from the mind.

It has become clear as a result of Suprematist philosophical colour thinking
that the will is able to develop an artistic system when the object has been
annulled in the artist's mind as a pictorial framework and a vehicle, and that,
*&long as objects remain a framework and a vehicle, his will must go on gyrating
Within a compositional circle and among objective forms.
 Everything that we see arose from the colour mass transformed into plane
fcfld volume. Every machine, house, person and table, all are pictorial volume
Systems intended for particular purposes.

 The artist too must transform the colour masses and create an artistic system,
*** he must not paint little pictures of fragrant roses since all this would be
 e ad representation pointing back to life.

* And even if his construction is non-objective, but is based on the inter-relation
^colours, his will cannot but be confined between the walls of aesthetic planes,
^stead of achieving philosophical penetration.



292 Rationalization and Transformation

I am only free when my will, basing itself critically and philosophically on
that which exists, is able to formulate a basis for new phenomena.

I have ripped through the blue lampshade of the constraints of colour. I have
come out into the white. Follow me, comrade aviators. Swim into the abyss. I
have set up the semaphores of Suprematism.

I have overcome the lining of the coloured sky, torn it down and into the
bag thus formed, put colour, tying it up with a knot. Swim in the white free
abyss, infinity is before you.



8 Kasimir Malevich (1878-1935) The Question of
Imitative Art

Malevich has been frequently represented as an other-wordly mystic, and after the
Revolution in Russia he was indeed criticized for Idealism by artists and commentators
whose own orientation was more explicitly political. Despite his idiosyncrasies, however,
the present text demonstrates Malevich's cognizance of contemporary events and his
determination to relate Suprematism to them while refusing the claims of previous styles
of art adequately to represent the new life. Originally published Smolensk, 1920. The
present translation is taken from T. Andersen (ed.), K. S. Malevich: Essays on Art
1915-1933, Vol. I, Copenhagen, 1969. (The 'constituent assembly', it should be noted,
was the political body of the Provisional Government under Kerensky set up following
the February Revolution of 1917, and dissolved by the Bolsheviks in the name of the
Soviets - workers' councils - in October of that year.)

[ . . . ] After long centuries marking the destruction of the bearers of youth the
day has come for the clash between youth and age. Today a desperate struggle
is being carried on with the old man who is trying to stifle youth. Today we
are witnessing one of the usual mistakes of the old, which does not comprehend
the movements of new life; today the old men are striving to ensure that there
may never be another spring: but there will be, for in it lies the birth of a new
universal step. Today the avant-gardes of economics and politics are fighting to
gain territory, in order to prepare a place for the foundations of the new world:
all the young forces are collecting on it and will create a world in their new
image. Today the man has awoken who shouts for all the world to hear and
calls all humanity to unity. Our unity is essential for his being: not to obtain
rights and liberty or to build an economic, utilitarian life, but in order that, by
the safeguarding of our bodily needs, our being may advance to the single unity
and wholeness on the path of universal movement, as our main and, indeed,
only goal. The unity of all humanity is essential, for a new single man of action
is needed. We wish to form ourselves according to a new pattern, plan and
system; we wish to build in such a way that all the elements of nature will
unite with man and create a single, all-powerful image. With this aim the
economic principle leads us along its path and collects all the lives that have
been scattered in the chaos of nature, separate and isolated, uniting them in his
path: thus every personality, every individual, formerly isolated, is now incor-
porated in the system of united action.




Ilk; Abstraction and Form 293

This is why nowadays no individual personality is allowed to have the freedom
f isolation or to live as it pleases, arranging a personal economic programme
for its own vegetable-garden, since it must be included in the system of sharing
and of common freedom and rights; hence the individual has no rights, for the
rights are common to all, and the individual personality itself is simply a
fragment from a united being, all of whose fragments must be joined together
in one, since they originated from one. Thus all the many lives in nature, with
ail their various advantages, have become incorporated in man and have brought
him their entire will and wisdom; now only he - man - as a centre can turn
nature into another new image, which will be nothing less than man himself: a
completed step on the eternal path. Our new society should occupy itself in
this way, but in order to begin building we need a plan of action and a system.
We already know that every aspect of our life is based on the economics of
subsistence and of movement in general, whence stem politics, rights and liberty.
Of these the most important is economics, which is the measure of our
contemporary life: this is how we measure it, and anything that does not come
tmder this measure is not contemporary. We should, accordingly, apply this
measure absolutely, to all forms of our expression, in order to be in accordance
With the general plan for the contemporary development of an organism. Thanks
fo the economic system, every individual is subject to it, whilst it can no longer
produce anything apart from the system of sharing. The communist town is not
arising from the chaos of private buildings, but according to a general plan: the
form of each building will stem from this plan and not from the whim of
individual personalities.

Freedom of the individual can only be in accordance with the common
freedom; hence no personality has any private property, for all its forms are a
phenomenon of the general economic movement. Hence arises the collective -
a group of personalities linked by the agreement of collective individualism on
the basis of common economic action, and forming a unit of the general unity.
The joining together of all the collectives is the unity towards which contem-
porary life is moving. [. . .] None of the forms of economic development and
bf human consciousness that were found in the old world can exist any longer,
for a new meaning has appeared. No form of the old can exist, for revolutionary
perfection is ceaselessly bearing its being further and further by means of our
consciousness, broadening and deepening space by energic economic reasoning.
If, on the other hand, we leave the old form, we are serving counter-revolution-
ary perfection. Each day, in economic and political life, brings purification from
^hat is old - this is where perfection lies. But in art everything is the other
w ay round: the older a work the more it is considered valuable, beautiful, artistic
and skilful, just as in the wine trade old wine is the most prized. They always
* r y to show the people that old art is valuable and beautiful, at the same time
stifling, muffling and slandering everything modern. Today, when Revolutionary
Perfection is bringing a new, youthful world of forms as the body of being,
reactionary elements dig up and bring out into the street the remains of past
Perfection, showing them to the masses. It is not shown to aid understanding
f the development of form, as an example of old life; no, they strive to prove



294 Rationalization and Transformation

and convince that the world of art they have dug up is beautiful, that its beauty
is the greatest of all, and that it is lofty and difficult; they say that to repeat
it one would have to possess talent, to be highly skilful and study a great deal,
whilst modern art is very simple: any fool can draw a square, but no one can
repeat Raphael or Rubens. But these reactionaries forget that perfection demands
instantaneous action. Any boy can light a match and get fire in an instant. No
one remembers the original primitive method of getting fire by rubbing wood
together, and no one would advocate the old method. They are striving to
inculcate the new meaning of revolutionary movement into old art. Life threw
the icon out of people's houses, but now they are showing it dressed up in a
new meaning.
* * *

The movement of the new world is divided in two: on the one hand the
fighting, destructive avant-garde with the banner of economics, politics, rights
and freedom, and, on the other hand, the creative army which appears after it,
creating form for the whole utilitarian and spiritual world of things. Creativity
is the essence of man, as the highest being in nature, and everyone should take
up this activity. Creativity changes in the same way as the party's revolutionary
attitude. People who were formerly considered revolutionaries have now turned
out to be counter-revolutionaries: the same thing happens in art. In academism
people saw creativity, painting and form, but with the arrival of new trends it
turned out to contain neither creativity nor painting nor form. Many people
think that anything except communism is beneficial to the people; the same sort
of people think that only academism can produce real art: both are cases of
blindness to their own real perfection.

Just as up to now many people have been unable to conceive clearly the form
of the commune, so many have failed to see form in new art; but those that
have seen it have also seen a new world for their life. For no better reason than
that they could see neither form nor art in new art, attacks and persecutions
were carried out, just as they were in political affairs. Formerly art rested on
artistic beauty, but now we must embark on the purely creative path of economic
movement. This is the only road of development for all humanity and from it
stem all the forms which are international: the car, aeroplane, telephone,
machine, etc. The spreading of this conception amongst the people and its
introduction to the channel of creative inventions will place it in world-wide
unity. Economy in movement is the same for everyone, whilst, on the other
hand, everyone has different aesthetic tastes, and therefore move towards not
unity but division and separation; contemporary life leaves this by means of
communism.

It is necessary to consciously place creativity as the aim of life, as the
perfection of oneself, and therefore current views on art must be changed: art
is not a picture of pleasures, decoration, mood, experience or the conveyance
of beautiful nature. This type of art no longer exists; nor do jesters, dancers
and other miscellaneous theatrical grimacers (these monkeyish grimaces have
also come to an end). There has appeared a silent, dynamic creation of new
art's edifice in the red image of the world. [. . .]



IIIc Abstraction and Form 295

[...] How we must study and what we must stand on is an important
question, for your deed depends upon the stand you take. What is comprehended
is also realized; this takes place in my consciousness and passing through
experimental action is fixed in real existence; hence I appear to be divided into
two parts: on the one hand, the experimental consciousness of a laboratory model
fact, and, on the other, the real, utilitarian, living action. Studios should
naturally be divided in this way. This is the chief basis from which the different
types of comprehension may stem. And so the new construction studios will
pass from the artistic culture of aesthetic beauties to the action of natural
investigation, losing all the quirks of imitative studios: a plan of unity is needed
for all technical constructions. Every phenomenon of form is the result of our
energic movement, directed along the path of economy, which results in this
or that form of a thing. Each artistic trend is a form of this type, a striving to
.convey by the briefest possible movement this or that state of a thing, as a
question that has arisen externally. But all the trends, basing themselves on the
taestheticism of art's beauty, have forgotten the important thing: the economy
?of movement. It was only in Cubism that this basis began to come more clearly
ito the fore, pouring itself out in the bright form of the Suprematist trend. New
art is no longer organized under the flag of aesthetic taste, but is passing over
to party organization. UNOVIS is now a party which has put economy as its
obasis. Thus art becomes closely linked with the communism of humanity's
rcconomic wellbeing. [. . .]

> [. . .] Academism as art, as philosophical comprehension, and as a psycho-
logical phenomenon is already a definite form which has closed the ring of the
Ihorizon around imitative art. The new creation can no longer remain within
.this horizon, any more than the economic, political, civil life of rights and liberty
scan.

fi The form of academism as representation, as agitation, as a means for

^propaganda, is essentially temporary in the same way as grocers' shop signs are.

^Literacy will do away with the representation of objects on signs, whereas the

-expression of power sensations can only be made through the abstract forms of

<the red moving against the white. Just as one cannot convey the power

^movements of a machine by portraying a man, so, likewise, one cannot convey

he actual force of red, by portraying a worker in a red apron. At the essence

\ *0f the new arts lies not representation but creative construction: raising ourselves

&y means of constructions we achieve the highest natural development in all

: Ihumanity. We are moving towards a world where everyone will create, rather

#han repeating and mechanizing a form that an inventor has rejected. We must

*et creativity's path in such a way that all the masses will take part in the

development of every creative thought that appears, without turning it into

Mechanized production or cliche. [. . .] Humanity contains the idea of unity,

^d this is its being; but it is so blocked up that it can only be reached with

^'gFeat difficulty. Our contemporary communist principle leads to it, but thanks

:j to the fact that the path is blocked by chaotic forms one cannot get through

J except by war, although great achievements are to be made by the creative

l^uilding of life's forms. If the masses were freed from the limitations of national



296 Rationalization and Transformation

and every other kind of patriotism and property which have been wound around
their being by false leaders, the whole people would be fused into one and
would naturally be drawn into general fusion, a unity of all forces in one form.
As it is, it is destroyed by nationalism, and, preserving the latter, cannot be
united as a result of which it produces a multitude of forms for its national,
self-centered construction.

The contemporary being of modern man strives for a unity that will break
up the boundaries between national vegetable gardens, summoning all the nations
to a single pole, that in unity they might create the image of all humanity.
There is only one path to this unification and unity - the economic path. This
is the carrot that man chases in order to complete the form of pure action. This
is the path of the economic and political avant-garde which is preparing territory
for the pure action of creative work. Here lies the supremacy of contemporaneity.
Imitative art has always been dependent on the various peculiarities of nation-
alism. It has developed in exact accordance with every phenomenon of economic,
political, moral, religious, anecdotal, historical and everyday life; it has also had
people waking up and shouting about the pure unity of pictorial action. But
these people belonged not to imitative art but to creative construction, as a
result of which many of them were banished by the state and ridiculed by
society and the shameful critical press. They were subjected to cold and hunger,
but their youthfulness kept them warm, and thanks to this they are still alive
despite all these hardships. And thus we have lived to see a great revolution in
imitative art. 1910 marked the conflagration, the clash between the revolutionary
creative construction of Cubism and imitative art.

This civil war between new and old art is still going on. The academism of
art's arriere-garde has been waging a desperate struggle with the innovators by
means of the press and the censorship, but the October Revolution, having
smashed the foundations of the old state, has partly recognized the innovators
in art also. The innovators have been recognized and even given a place in the
arriere-garde 's college, but this is not enough to satisfy us: imitative art must
be destroyed like the imperialist army. We innovators protest against a constit-
uent assembly in art, for agreement is ridiculous when it means uniting two
opposing trends which form some third monster - this is what constituent
imitative art means. Today, as yesterday, engaged in ceaseless struggle we are
moving towards a new path for art's innovators, which we shall make the method
and system for establishing the utilitarian world of things, as a tender to the
moving being. We shall make for creative work which will be not merely personal
but belong to the united masses. Our imitative art studios represent a constituent
assembly, for they accommodate all the trends and even some individual
personalities not belonging to any of the trends - the apolitical.

A strip of the new world has today been formed on Russian territory and the
entire old world has arisen against it. The leaders of the economic-political
armies are engaged in a struggle for rights and liberty.

Just as in the old days the West, East and South oppressed us economically,
so it was in art. Now we have an army, faithful towards a new principle in




Hie Abstraction and Form 297

economic life, and the vanguard of art. The economic life of the new world has
produced the commune. The creative construction of the new art has produced
the Suprematism of the square. [. . .]

9 Naum Gabo (1890-1977) and Anton Pevsner
(1886-1962) 'The Realistic Manifesto'

The artists, who were brothers, had become familiar with avant-garde art in the west
before the First World War, but by the time of the Revolution were back in Russia working
at the Free Art Studios in Moscow. They issued their manifesto both as an affirmation
of the value of formal 'constructive' aims in avant-garde art, and as a refusal of the
more physical and ultimately utilitarian tendency which was beginning to be associated
with Tatlin. Orginally issued as a poster in Moscow, 5 August 1920, to accompany the
artists' joint open-air exhibition on Tverskoie Boulevard. The present translation, by Gabo
himself, is taken from H. Read, Gabo, London, 1957. (The internal ellipses in this text
are integral and do not indicate editorial excisions.)

Above the tempests of our weekdays,

Across the ashes and cindered homes of the past,

Before the gates of the vacant future,

We proclaim today to you artists, painters, sculptors, musicians, actors, poets
... to you people to whom Art is no mere ground for conversation but the
source of real exaltation, our word and deed.

The impasse into which Art has come to in the last twenty years must be
broken.

The growth of human knowledge with its powerful penetration into the
mysterious laws of the world which started at the dawn of this century,

The blossoming of a new culture and a new civilization with their unpre-
cedented-in-history surge of the masses towards the possession of the riches of
Nature, a surge which binds the people into one union, and last, not least, the
war and the revolution (those purifying torrents of the coming epoch), have
made us face the fact of new forms of life, already born and active.

What does Art carry into this unfolding epoch of human history?

Does it possess the means necessary for the construction of the new Great
Style?

Or does it suppose that the new epoch may not have a new style?

Or does it suppose that the new life can accept a new creation which is
constructed on the foundations of the old?

In spite of the demand of the renascent spirit of our time, Art is still nourished
by impression, external appearance, and wanders helplessly back and forth from
Naturalism to Symbolism, from Romanticism to Mysticism.

The attempts of the Cubists and the Futurists to lift the visual arts from the
bogs of the past have led only to new delusions.
* * *

Neither Futurism nor Cubism has brought us what our time has expected of
them.



298 Rationalization and Transformation

Besides those two artistic schools our recent past has had nothing of import-
ance or deserving attention.

But Life does not wait and the growth of generations does not stop and we
who go to relieve those who have passed into history, having in our hands the
results of their experiments, with their mistakes and their achievements, after
years of experience equal to centuries . . . we say . . .

No new artistic system will withstand the pressure of a growing new culture
until the very foundation of Art will be erected on the real laws of Life.

Until all artists will say with us . . .

All is a fiction . . . only life and its laws are authentic and in life only the
active is beautiful and wise and strong and right, for life does not know beauty
as an aesthetic measure . . . efficacious existence is the highest beauty.

Life knows neither good nor bad nor justice as a measure of morals . . . need
is the highest and most just of all morals.

Life does not know rationally abstracted truths as a measure of cognizance,
deed is the highest and surest of truths.

Those are the laws of life. Can art withstand these laws if it is built on
abstraction, on mirage, and fiction?

We say . . .

Space and time are re-born to us today.

Space and time are the only forms on which life is built and hence art must
be constructed.

States, political and economic systems perish, ideas crumble, under the strain
of ages ... but life is strong and grows and time goes on in its real continuity.

Who will show us forms more efficacious than this . . . who is the great one
who will give us foundations stronger than this?

Who is the genius who will tell us a legend more ravishing than this prosaic
tale which is called life?

The realization of our perceptions of the world in the forms of space and time is
the only aim of our pictorial and plastic art.

In them we do not measure our works with the yardstick of beauty, we do not
weigh them with pounds of tenderness and sentiments.

The plumb-line in our hand, eyes as precise as a ruler, in a spirit as taut as a
compass . . . we construct our work as the universe constructs its own, as the engineer
constructs his bridges, as the mathematician his formula of the orbits.

We know that everything has its own essential image; chair, table, lamp, telephone,
book, house, man . . . they are all entire worlds with their own rhythms, their own
orbits.

That is why we in creating things take away from them the labels of their owners
. . . all accidental and local, leaving only the reality of the constant rhythm of the
forces in them.

1. Thence in painting we renounce colour as a pictorial element, colour is the
idealized optical surface of objects; an exterior and superficial impression of them;
colour is accidental and it has nothing in common with the innermost essence of a
thing.



f



Illc Abstraction and Form 299

, We affirm that the tone of a substance, i.e. its light-absorbing material body is
$ts only pictorial reality.

2. We renounce in a line, its descriptive value; in real life there are no descriptive
fanes, description is an accidental trace of a man on things, it is not bound up with
tfie essential life and constant structure of the body. Descriptiveness is an element of
graphic illustration and decoration.

v We affirm the line only as a direction of the static forces and their rhythm in
Ejects.

3. We renounce volume as a pictorial and plastic form of space; one cannot measure
Space in volumes as one cannot measure liquid in yards: look at our space . . . what
Is it if not one continuous depth?

'i We affirm depth as the only pictorial and plastic form of space.

4. We renounce in sculpture, the mass as a sculptural element.

IrJt is known to every engineer that the static forces of a solid body and its material
strength do not depend on the quantity of the mass. . . example a rail, a T-beam,

toe.

.But you sculptors of all shades and directions, you still adhere to the age-old
prejudice that you cannot free the volume of mass. Here (in this exhibition) we take
four planes and we construct with them the same volume as of four tons of mass.

Thus we bring back to sculpture the line as a direction and in it we affirm depth
as the one form of space.

5. We renounce the thousand-year-old delusion in art that held the static rhythms
as the only elements of the plastic and pictorial arts.

, We affirm in these arts a new element the kinetic rhythms as the basic forms of
our perception of real time.

These are the five fundamental principles of our work and our constructive
technique. [. . .]






10 UNOVIS: 'Programme of a United Audience in
Painting of the Vitebsk State Free Workshops'

Malevich began teaching in Vitebsk in 1919, shortly ousting the incumbent Chagall and
introducing his own course based on Suprematism. The same year, or in 1920, inspired
partly no doubt by the contemporary fashion for collectivity, he organized UNOVIS, the
tJnion of the New Art' or the 'Affirmers of the New Art'. This included, inter alia, Lissitsky,
Puni, Klucis, Ermolaeva, Suetin and Chasnik. Members of the group travelled with
Malevich to Petrograd in 1922 where the name continued to be used to designate the
products of Malevich and his circle until at least the late 1920s. The present text outlines
the educational programme organized under the auspices of UNOVIS in the Academy
at Vitebsk in 1920. The present translation is from Zhadova, op. cit.

[ . .] Those studying in the art workshops in Vitebsk have mustered with the
leaders of the UNOVIS collective as a united audience for problems of painting
Without shutting themselves off from problems of architecture the philosophy
f the new art the theatre etc. The work of UNOVIS proceeds multilaterally:



300 Rationalization and Transformation

painting is in the course, decorative art, the applied modelling of useful objects
and sculpture. A special week is appointed for each problem. It has proved
possible to unite five workshops except for the academic workshop. When the
need to devise a method for the workshops has been understood we will be able
to create a new utilitarian world of objects and direct the rest of the overall
conception of the existing art trends to the actual life of that which is new.
The atomization of shuttered personalities within workshops is not in accordance
with the times and is counter-revolutionary in terms of general direction. These
also are landlords and owners of their personal programmes and systems which
were set aside by the new economic system for the sake of the common good.
The new economic trend in art must take this new road and enlist the individual
in the united programme of action at school and in life. Creating thereby a
method for the new trends in art we shall achieve a definite programme
corresponding to or fulfilling the movement of present times. Every step forward
in economic life comes about because a new form of life is structured in the
depths of the new awareness. New arts create a method and it is this method
that we apply in UNOVIS and it has yielded positive results. In devising the
programme we are also mindful of educational guidance as a contribution to the
creation of a modern system of teaching.

Basic themes:

1 general orientation of the workshop - Cubism, Futurism and Suprematism
as the new colour pictorial world formulation. Basic trends take shape as the
themes of all other tendencies develop.

2 systematization, articulation of structures in painting, balance of formal
structures in painting, paint and painting, material.

Section 1

Group 1 Abstraction of objects. Knowledge of pictorial and sculptural form,
volume, plane, as an introduction to Cubism. Painting - colour. Painting -
materials. Elements of structuring. Acquaintance with system and construction
of structure on canvas and in space.

Section 2

Group 2 Cubism.

1 Cezanne and his pictorial outlook as executed in pictorial images.

2 Theory of Cubism and system of form construction by means of pictorial
texture and materials.

3 Space and the form of the Cubist distribution of elements.

4 Construction of nature, displacement of construction and elaboration of a
new Cubist one.

5 Ordering of elements in purely pictorial form.

6 Cubism and nature. Static and mobile state.

Section 3

Group 1

1 Futurism as a theory of velocity.




nic Abstraction and Form 301

2 Van Gogh as an exponent of dynamics, the realization of his outlook.

3 Futurism and nature, town and village as objects affecting the structure of
an instant's velocity.

4 Theory of Futurism.

5 Construction of the velocity of objects. The academic approach.

Section 4

1 Pure dynamics of colour. System of construction. Economy. Decoration.

Ornament. Theatre.
% Uncoloured Suprematist motion.

3 Theory of movement of colour energy.

4 Architecture. Three-dimensional Suprematism of the structure.

5 The square - its economical development.

6 The philosophy of Suprematism. Science - the refutation of science. The
inner development of natural science constructions.

7 Personality and unity. The collective as a way to unity.

Decorative workshops

1 Theatre.

2 Dynamism.

3 Statics.

4 The making of objects, their form.

5 Wall painting and the plane. Decorative composition



11 Wassily Kandinsky (1866-1944) 'Plan for the

Physico-psychological Department of the Russian
Academy of Artistic Sciences'

Kandinsky had returned from Germany to Russia after the outbreak of the First World
War. After the Revolution he briefly became a leading figure in the reorganization of art
education. However, his mystical inclinations and his continued insistence on intuition
and subjectivity resulted in hostility to his proposals. He left again for Western Europe
and took up an appointment at the Bauhaus in 1922. The present text of a plan for the
Academy of Artistic Sciences, submitted in June 1921, is an abbreviation of the much
longer 'Programme' which he developed for the Institute of Artistic Culture (Inkhuk) in
Moscow in 1920. It was the rejection of this latter which led him to reformulate his
proposal for the Academy; the rejection of that in turn which led him to emigrate. The
'Plan' was originally published in the Journal of the Russian Academy of Artistic Science,
no. 1, Moscow, Summer 1923, pp. 415-16. The present translation is taken from John
Bowlt, Russian Art of the Avant Garde, London, 1976 and 1988.

The department sets as its task to disclose the inner, positive laws on the basis
of which aesthetic works are formed within every sphere of art and, in
connection with the results obtained, to establish the principles of synthetic
artistic expression. This task can be reduced to a number of concrete objectives:



302 Rationalization and Transformation

(1) the study of artistic elements as the material from which a work of art is
formed, (2) the study of construction in creation as a principle whereby the
artistic purpose is embodied, (3) the study of composition in art as a principle
whereby the idea of a work of art is constructed.

The work of the department must be carried out in two directions: (a) a series
of lectures based on the established program and (b) experimental research. We
have not managed to pursue this experimental research owing to a lack of funds
essential for the organization of laboratories.

The series of lectures 'Elements of Art' has been given, and now certain of
their materials, observations, and ideas are being processed. The series of
lectures on construction in nature, art, and technology is being developed. The
series 'Composition' is being prepared.

In accordance with these aims and tasks, the department's scientific plan for
1922-3 consists of the following:

I The completion of a session of preliminary research work concerning the
problem of construction in art. To this end, the following lectures on the
problem of construction should be given at plenary meetings: (a) construction
in extraaesthetic creation (utilitarian-productional construction), (b) architecture,
(c) sculpture, (d) painting, (e) printing industry, (f) music, (g) plastic rhythm,
(h) literature, (i) theater, (j) productional art.

II Research into primitive art and into all the aesthetic concepts that give
primitive art its style. In this respect a number of specific tasks have been
formulated: (1) Research into the laws of the statics and dynamics of primitive
art: (a) in an individual or typical/group context; (b) in the evolution of one
form from another. (2) Methods: (a) a formal, positive, art historians' approach,
inasmuch as the research is connected with the formal and descriptive study of
art objects; (b) a psychological approach, inasmuch as the research will concern
the psychology of artistic creation and perception. (3) Materials: children's art,
the art of primitive and backward peoples, primordial art, the primitives of early
Christian and medieval art; primitivism in modern art; aesthetic concepts that
characterize primitive art found, for the most part, in the art of the ancient
East. (4) The materials can be developed with regard to (a) specific branches
of art and (b) artistic groupings organically interconnected, and (c) they can be
directed toward a synthetic summary of general inferences.

The research plan concerning the problem of primitive art and the aesthetic
concepts that give art its style in the sphere of the spatial (visual) arts and
vis-a-vis the material mentioned and outlined above can be defined thus: (1)
Art that develops a plane or surface (so-called painting): (a) color, (b) line, (c)
spatial expression, (d) material, (e) means of processing the surface, (f) laws of
construction, (g) concept. (2) Art that organizes volumes (so-called sculpture):
(a) material, (b) mass, (c) volume, (d) chiaroscuro, (e) color, (f) line, (g) surface,
(h) laws of construction, (i) concept. (3) Art that organizes actual three-dimen-
sional space (so-called architecture): (a) architectural mass, (b) space, (c) light
and shade, (d) line, (e) surface, (f) color, (g) construction, (h) concept. (4) Types
and phases of development of the general artistic concept in primitive art, their




Illc Abstraction and Form 303

positive and aesthetic bases. (5) The psychology of aesthetic expression and
perception (within the framework of primitive art).



12 El Lissitsky (1890-1947) 'A. and Pangeometry'

Lissitsky was strongly affected by Malevich's Suprematism while working at Vitebsk in
1919. He in particular was responsible for the development of Suprematism as a
graphic - and hence reproducible - means of building support for the Revolution. In
the early and mid-1 920s he was influential in establishing contacts between Russian
revolutionary art and those with similar concerns in Western Europe. The present essay
(in which Lissitsky employs two abbreviations: A. = Art; F. = Form) was originally
published in German in Carl Einstein and Paul Westheim (eds.), Europa Almanach,
Potsdam, 1925. The present translation by Eric Dluhosch is taken from El Lissitsky,
Russia: an Architecture for World Revolution, London, 1970.

[. . .] The term A. resembles a chemist's graduated glass. Each age contributes
its own quantity: for example, 5 drams of the perfume 'Coty' to tickle the
nostrils of the fine gentry. Or another example, 10 cc of sulfuric acid to be
thrown into the face of the ruling classes. Or, 15 cc of some kind of metallic
solution that later changes into a new source of light. Thus, A. is an invention
of the mind, i.e., a complex, where rationality is f used with imagination, the
physical with the mathematical, the VT with V- 1. The series of analogies I
shall present below are not offered as proof - my work serves that purpose
much better - but in order to clarify my views. Parallels between A. and
mathematics must be drawn very carefully, for any overlap is fatal for A.

Planimetric Space

Plastic F. - like mathematics - begins with counting. Its space is made up of
physical, two-dimensional, flat surfaces. Its rhythm, the elementary harmony of
the natural numerical series 1, 2, 3, 4 . . .

The newly created object . . . let's say a relief, is compared with real objects
in nature. For example, if the relief shows the front part of an animal hiding
part of another animal behind, this then does not mean that the latter, the
hidden part, has ceased to exist; it simply means that a certain distance exists
between the two objects - a space. As a consequence, through experience the
knowledge is gained that distance exists between objects and that objects exist
in space.

Thus, the two-dimensional plane ceases to be merely a surface. The plane
begins to include space, and the mathematical series 1, Wi, 2, 2Vi ... is created.

Perspective Space

The simple flat surface perceived by the eye stretches and extends into vivid
space, evolving into a new system. The perspective mode finds its expression



304 Rationalization and Transformation

within this system. It is commonly assumed that perspective representation of
space is objective, unequivocal, and obvious. People say, 'The camera too sees
the world in terms of perspective/ but this ignores the fact that, contrary to
common practice in the West, the Chinese have built a camera with concave
rather than convex lenses, thereby producing an equally objective image of the
world in the mechanical sense, but obviously quite different in all other respects.
Perspective representation of space is based on a rigid three-dimensional view
of the world based on the laws of Euclidean geometry. The world is put into
a cubic box and transformed within the picture plane into something resembling
a pyramidal form. [. . .] Here, the apex of the visual cone has its location either
in our eye, i.e., in front of the object, or is projected to the horizon, i.e., behind
the object. The former approach has been taken by the East, the latter by the
West.

Perspective limits space; it has made it finite, closed. However, despite all of
this, the 'sum total' (here 'sum total' means the aggregate of all possible numbers
that may be geometrically expressed by a straight line - 'the fixed line') of A.
has been enriched in the sense that each point, even one infinitely close, can
be represented by a number. Planimetric space has produced the arithmetic
series. In it, objects are perceived according to the relationship 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. . . .
Perspective space resembles a geometric series, and objects are perceived
according to the relationship 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32. . . . Until our time the 'sum
total' of A. has not experienced any new extensions. However, a fundamental
reorientation has taken place in science. The geocentric cosmic order of Ptolemy
has been replaced by the heliocentric order of Copernicus. Rigid Euclidean space
has been destroyed by Lobachevski, Gauss, and Riemann. The impressionists
were the first artists who began to explode traditional perspective space. The
methods of the cubists were even more radical. They pulled the space-confining
horizon into the foreground and identified it with the surface of the painting.
They built up the solid surface of the canvas by means of psychological devices
(pasted-on wall tapestries, etc.) and by elementary destruction of form. They
built from the plane of the picture forward into space. The ultimate results of
this process: Picasso's reliefs and the contrereliefs of Tatlin. [. . .]

The establishment of the  by K. Malevich (Petersburg 1913) was the first
manifestation of the extension of the 'sum total' of A. (Mondrian accomplished
the ultimate solution in the development of Western painting. He reduces
surface to its primeval state, namely surface only, in the sense that there is no
longer any spatial in or out of a given surface. Whenever Mondrian's principle
is transposed by fashionable A.'s onto the three surfaces of a room, it turns into
decoration.)

Our numerical system, being a positional system, has been making use of
for a long time, but only in the sixteenth century did first cease to be regarded
as 'nothing,' and become a numeral (Cordano, Tartaglia), i.e., a real number.
And only now, in the twentieth century, has the D been recognized as a
plastic quantity, i.e., the of the total body of A. This fully chromatic,
fully color-saturated Don a white surface has begotten a new conception of
space.





nic Abstraction and Form 305

New optical experience has taught us that two surfaces of different intensity
must be conceived as having a varying distance relationship between them, even
though they may lie in the same plane.

Irrational Space

Strictly speaking, distances in this space are measured only by the intensity and
the position of rigidly defined color planes. Such space is structured within a
framework of the most unequivocal directions: vertically, horizontally, or diag-
onally. It is a positional system. These distances cannot be measured with a
finite scale, as for instance objects in planimetric or perspective space. Here
distances are irrational and cannot be represented as a finite relationship of two
whole numbers.

An example of such irrationality is the relationship of the diagonal of a square
to its side, i.e., =^2~ 1.4, or more precisely, 1.41, or still more precisely,
1.414, etc., becoming increasingly more accurate, ad infinitum.

Suprematism has extended the apex of the finite visual cone of perspective
into infinity.

It has broken through the 'blue lampshade of the heavens.' The color of space
is no longer assumed to be a single blue ray of the color spectrum, but the
whole spectrum - white. Suprematist space can be formed in front of the surface
as well as in depth. If one assigns the value to the picture surface, then one
may call the depth direction - (negative), and the frontal direction + (positive),
or vice versa. Thus, suprematism has swept away the illusion of three-dimen-
sional space on a plane, replacing it by the ultimate illusion of irrational space
with attributes of infinite extensibility in depth and foreground.

This brings us to an A. complex that can be brought into juxtaposition with
the mathematical analogy of an uninterrupted straight line, containing the whole
natural numerical series which embraces: whole, decimal, negative, positive, and
irrational numbers, including 0.

-However, that is not all. Mathematics has created a 'new thing': imaginary
(imaginary - not real, assumed) numbers. These include numbers which, when
multiplied by themselves, result in negative valu es. The square root of the
negative of 1 is an imaginary thing called i (V- 1 = i). We now enter a realm
that cannot be directly registered by the senses, that cannot be demonstrated,
that follows from a purely logical construction and therefore represents an
elementary crystallization of human thought. What does this have to do with
sense perception, or simple vividness in A.? In their vital quest for the
enlargement of F. in A., a number of modern artists - including some of my
friends - believe that they can build up multidimensional real spaces that may
fee entered without an umbrella, where space and time have been combined into
a mutually interchangeable single whole. Concurrently with this, they relate
their theories with an altogether much too agile superficiality to the most
advanced scientific theories, without having a genuinely deep understanding of
&ese theories (viz., multidimensional space, theory of relativity, Minkowski's
universe, etc.). Now the productive artist should certainly be allowed to expound



306 Rationalization and Transformation

any theory he wishes, provided his work remains positive. In our field, only
the direction of expansion has been positive up to now, but because of incorrect
interpretations of seductive scientific theories the works themselves remain
inadequate. [. . .] mathematically existing multidimensional spaces really cannot
be visualized, neither can they be represented; in short, it is impossible to give
them material form. We can only change the form of our physical space but
not its structure, i.e., its three-dimensionality. We cannot change the degree of
curvature of our space in a real way, i.e., the square or the cube cannot be
transformed into any other stable form. Only a mirage may be capable of giving
us such an illusion. The theory of relativity has provided evidence that quantities
of time and space are dependent on the motion of each respective system.
According to this theory, a man may die even before he was born. However,
insofar as actual pragmatic sense-experience teaches us, things move the other
way, forcing us to follow our own physical laws and building up A. F.'s which
must needs affect us through the medium of our five physical senses.
* * *

Time is only indirectly comprehended by our senses. The change of position
of an object in space indicates the passage of time. When the speed of these
changes approached the accelerated rate of our modern rhythms, artists thought
it necessary to register these phenomena. The Italian futurists have caught the
vibrations of quickly moving bodies flitting back and forth in space. However,
bodies are brought into motion by means of forces. Suprematism created the
dynamic tension of forces. The accomplishment of the futurists and the supre-
matists is represented by static surfaces characterized by dynamism. These are
irrationally transposed and concretized oscillograms of speed and dynamism.
Such an approach is quite unsatisfactory. [. . .]

We are now at the beginning of a period in which A. is, on the one hand,
degenerating into making pasticci of museum monuments, while, on the other
hand, struggling for the creation of a new conception of space. I have demon-
strated above that space and objects form a mutually functional relationship.
This creates the problem of creating imaginary space by means of material
objects.



Imaginary Space

Our capacity for visual perception is limited in the apprehension of motion and
of the total condition of an object in general: for example, a recurring motion
having a frequency of less than V30 sec. gives the impression of constant motion.
The motion picture is based on this principle. [...] However, the cinema
depends on dematerialized surface projection using merely a single facet of our
visual faculties. Of course it is well known that a material point in motion is
capable of forming a line; for example: a glowing piece of coal in motion gives
the impression of a luminous line, while the motion of a material line gives the
impression of a surface or a volume. That is only one indication of how
elementary solids can be used to construct an object that forms a whole in
three-dimensional space while in a state of rest; yet when brought into motion



Illc Abstraction and Form 307

it becomes an entirely new object, i.e., a new space impression that will exist
only during the duration of the motion, and is therefore imaginary. [. . .]

The infinitely variegated effects that may be achieved by the F. of imaginary
space can already be sensed to a limited extent even today. The whole range
of all of our visual capacities may thus be brought into play. To name a few:
stereoscopic effects of motion by passage through colored media; color impress-
ions produced by superimposition of chromatic clusters of light rays as the result
of polarization, etc.; the transformation of acoustic phenomena into visual form.
We can safely predict that everyday life will borrow widely from these A.
achievements. However, as far as we are concerned, the most important aspect
of this development is the fact that this A.-F. will be accompanied by the
destruction of the old A. notion of monumentality. Even today the opinion still
prevails that A. must be something created for eternity: indestructible, heavy,
massive, carved in granite or cast in bronze - the Cheops Pyramid, The Eiffel
Tower is not monumental, for it was not built for eternity but as an attraction
for a world fair; no solid masses, but a pierced space needle. We are now
producing work which in its overall effect is essentially intangible. For we do
not consider a work monumental in the sense that it may last for a year, a
century, or a millennium, but rather on the basis of continual expansion of
human performance.

In the preceding I have traced the variability of our space conceptions and
the subsequent F.'s of A., thus arriving at nonmaterial materialism. This sounds
like a paradox. However, experience proves that progress consists of our being
compelled to accept and, indeed, to regard as self-evident and essential, views that
our forefathers considered incomprehensible and were in fact incapable of compre-
hending.




HID

Utility and Construction



1 KOMFUT: 'Programme Declaration'

In a transitional phase between their pre-revolutionary and hence relatively a-political
art, and the post-revolutionary turn to utilitarian constructivism, Russian avant-garde
artists organized KOMFUT: an acronym for Communism and Futurism. The title was also
intended to differentiate Russian avant-garde artists, conventionally dubbed 'Futurists',
from the Italian group, who were being increasingly identified with Fascism. The 'Dec-
laration' was originally published in iskusstvo kommuny (Art of the Commune), no. 8,
Petrograd, 26 January 1919, p. 3. The present translation is taken from Bowlt, op. cit.

A Communist regime demands a Communist consciousness. All forms of life,
morality, philosophy, and art must be re-created according to Communist
principles. Without this, the subsequent development of the Communist Rev-
olution is impossible.

In their activities the cultural-educational organs of the Soviet government
show a complete misunderstanding of the revolutionary task entrusted to them.
The social-democratic ideology so hastily knocked together is incapable of
resisting the century-old experience of the bourgeois ideologists, who, in their
own interests, are exploiting the proletarian cultural-educational organs.

Under the guise of immutable truths, the masses are being presented with
the pseudo teachings of the gentry.

Under the guise of universal truth - the morality of the exploiters.

Under the guise of the eternal laws of beauty - the depraved taste of the
oppressors.

It is essential to start creating our own Communist ideology.

It is essential to wage merciless war against all the false ideologies of the
bourgeois past.

It is essential to subordinate the Soviet cultural-educational organs to the
guidance of a new cultural Communist ideology - an ideology that is only now
being formulated.

It is essential - in all cultural fields, as well as in art - to reject emphatically
all the democratic illusions that pervade the vestiges and prejudices of the
bourgeoisie.

It is essential to summon the masses to creative activity.




HId Utility and Construction 309

2 Vladimir Tallin (1885-1953) 'The Initiative
Individual in the Creativity of the Collective'

Tatlin passed through a variety of avant-garde styles, from primitivism to Cubism, in
the years before the First World War. From about 1915 onwards he became increasingly
identified as the leader of a trend in the Russian avant-garde opposed to Malevich's
Suprematism. This emphasized 'the culture of materials', and formed the basis of the
move to utilitarian constructivism and 'art into production' after the Revolution. Tatlin
frequently wrote in the condensed epigrammatic style of contemporary political slogans
(e.g.: 'Organized material is a utilitarian form' (1922); 'Not to the left, not to the right,
but to the necessary. Not the old, not the new, but the necessary' (1923)). The present
comparatively extended text was composed in 1919 for the first issue of the journal
International Iskusstv (International Art). It remained unpublished. The present translation
is taken from Larissa Zhadova (ed.), Tatlin, London, 1988.



Theses

1 The initiative individual is the collector of the energy of the collective,
directed towards knowledge and invention.

2 The initiative individual serves as a contact between the invention and the
creativity of the collective.

3 The viability of the collective is confirmed by the number of initiative units
distinguished by it.

4 The initiative individual is the refraction point of the collective's creativity
and brings realization to the idea.

5 Art, always being connected with life at the moment of change in the political
system (change of the Collective-consumer), and being cut off from the
collective in the person of the artist, goes through an acute revolution. A
revolution strengthens the impulse of invention. That is why there is a
flourishing of art following a revolution, when the inter-relationship between
the initiative individual and the collective is clearly defined,

6 Invention is always the working out of impulses and desires of the collective
and not of the individual.

7 The world of numbers, as the nearest to the architectonics of art, gives us:
1) confirmation of the existence of the inventor; 2) a complete organic
connection of the individual with the collective numeral. There is no error
in Khlebnikov's example. 1) 'In a series of natural numbers, prime numbers,
indivisible and non-recurring, are scattered. Each of these numbers carries
with it its new numerical world. From this it follows that among numbers
too there are inventors. ' 2) 'If we take the principle of addition, and add
one more to a thousand individuals, the arrival and departure of this
individual will be unnoticed. If we take the principle of multiplication, then
a positive singular multiplied by a thousand makes the entire thousand
positive. A negative singular multiplied by a thousand makes the whole
thousand negative. From this it follows that there exists a complete organic
connection between the individual and the collective numeral. '



310 Rationalization and Transformation

3 Lyubov Popova (1889-1924) Statement in
catalogue of Tenth State Exhibition'

Popova was one of a notable generation of women artists in the Russian avant-garde
in the years immediately preceding and succeeding the Revolution of 1917. She had
become familiar with Cubism in Paris before the First World War. Her statement seems
to distinguish autonomous work on painting from the problems of depicting a world
outside art; though such apparently 'autonomous' art became increasingly dubbed
laboratory research' in order to validate it in terms of the general need to participate
in building the new, post-revolutionary life. The 'Statement' was originally published in
the catalogue to the Tenth State Exhibition: Non-objective Creation and SuprematisnY,
Moscow, April 1919. The present translation is taken from Bowlt, op. cit.



( + )
Painting

I. Architectonics

(a) Painterly space
(cubism)

(b) Line

(c) Color (suprematism)

(d) Energetics
(futurism)
Texture



(-)
Not painting but
the depiction of reality



I. Aconstructiveness
(a) Illusionism
(b) Literariness
(c) Emotions
(d) Recognition



(e)

II. The necessity for
transformation by
means of the
omission of
parts of
form

(began in
cubism)

Construction in painting = the sum of the energy of its parts.

Surface is fixed but forms are volumetrical.

Line as color and as the vestige of a transverse plane participates in, and directs

the forces of, construction.

Color participates in energetics by its weight.

Energetics = direction of volumes + planes and lines or their vestiges + all

colors.

Texture is the content of painterly surfaces.



IIId Utility and Construction 31 1

Form is not of equal value throughout its whole sequence. The artistic con*,
sciousness must select those elements indispensable to a painterly context, in
which case all that is superfluous and of no artistic value must be omitted.

Hence depiction of the concrete - artistically neither deformed nor transformed
i- cannot be a subject of painting.

Images of 'painterly/ and not 'figurative,' values are the aim of the present
painting.



4 Nikolai Punin (1888-1953) The Monument to the
Third International'

The author was an art historian and critic who was active after the Russian revolution
in the Fine Art department (1Z0) of the Commissariat of Enlightenment (Narkompros) in
Petrograd. Through his work on Lenin's plan for 'Monumental Propaganda' he became
involved with Tatlin's projected 'Monument to the Third International', the organization
which the Bolsheviks had set up to coordinate the international socialist revolution. The
essay was originally published as a pamphlet by IZO - Narkompros, Petrograd, 1920.
The present translation was made by Christina Lodder for the Open University, 1983.

In 1919 the Department of Fine Arts within the People's Commissariat for
Enlightenment commissioned the artist V. E. Tatlin to develop a design for a
monument to the Third International. The artist Tatlin immediately set to work
and produced a design. The artists V. E. Tatlin, I. A. Meerzon, M. P.
Vinogradov and T. M. Shapiro formed a 'Creative Collective', then developed
the design in detail and constructed a model.

The main idea of the monument is based on an organic synthesis of the
principles of architecture, sculpture and painting and was intended to produce
a new type of monumental structure, uniting in itself a purely creative form
with a utilitarian form. In accordance with this idea, the design of the monument
consists of three large glass structures, erected by means of a complex system
of vertical struts and spirals. These structures are arranged one above the other
and are contained within different, harmoniously related forms. A special type
of mechanism would enable them to move at different speeds. The lower
structure (A), in the form of a cube, moves on its axis at the speed of one
revolution a year and is intended for legislative purposes. Here may be held
conferences of the International, meetings of international congresses and other
broadly legislative meetings. . . . The next structure (B), in the form of a
Pyramid, rotates on its axis at the speed of one full revolution a month and is
intended for executive functions (the Executive Committee of the International,
the secretariat and other administrative and executive bodies). Finally, the upper
cylinder (C), rotating at a speed of one revolution a day, is intended to be a
resource centre for the following facilities: an information office; a newspaper;
tr *e publication of proclamations, brochures and manifestoes - in a word, all
the various means of broadly informing the international proletariat, and in



312 Rationalization and Transformation

particular a telegraph, projectors for a large screen located on the axes of a
spherical segment (a, - B 3 ), and a radio station, the masts of which rise above
the monument. There is no need to point out the enormous possibilities for
equipping and organizing these structures. The details of the design have not
yet been specified, they can be discussed and worked out during subsequent
elaboration of the monument's interior. It is necessary to explain that according
to the artist Tatlin's conception, the glass structures should have vacuum walls
(a thermos) which will make it easy to maintain a constant temperature within
the edifice. The separate parts of the monument will be connected to one another
and to the ground by means exclusively of complexly structured electrical
elevators, adjusted to the differing rotation speeds of the structures. Such are
the technical bases of the project.

The artistic significance of the project

A social revolution by itself does not change artistic forms, but it does provide
a basis for their gradual transformation. The idea of monumental propaganda
has not changed sculpture or sculptors, but it has struck at the very principle
of plastic appearance which prevails in the bourgeois world. Renaissance tradi-
tions in the plastic arts appear modern only while the feudal and bourgeois roots
of capitalist states remain undestroyed. The Renaissance burned out, but only
now is the charred ruin of Europe being purged.

It is true that Communist governments for a certain time will use, as a means
of monumental propaganda, figurative monuments in the style of Greek and
Italian classicism, but this is only because these governments are forced to use
them in the same way as they are compelled to use specialists of the pre-
revolutionary school. Figurative monuments (Greek and Italian) are at variance
with contemporary reality in two respects. They cultivate individual heroism
and conflict with history: torsos and heads of heroes (and gods) do not
correspond to the modern interpretation of history. Their forms are too private
for places where there are ten versts of proletarians in rows. At best they express
the character, feelings and thoughts of the hero, but who expresses the tension
of the emotions and the thoughts of the collective thousand? A type? But a type
concretizes, limits and levels the mass. The mass is richer, more alive, more
complicated and more organic.

But even if a type is portrayed, figurative monuments contradict actuality
even more through the limitation of their expressive means, their static quality.
The agitational action of such monuments is extraordinarily weak amidst the
noise, movement and dimensions of the streets. Thinkers on granite plinths
perhaps see many, but few see them. They are constrained by the form which
evolved when sailing ships, transport by mule and stone cannon balls flourished.
A wartime telephone wire hits the hero's nose, a tram stop is more of an obelisk;
townspeople recall Lassalle more times each day through book covers and
newspaper headlines in libraries, than through passing by, beneath his proud
head. Lassalle stands unseen and unneeded ever since the end of the unveiling
ceremony. . . .




HID Utility and Construction 313

A monument must live the social and political life of the city and the city
must live in it. It must be necessary and dynamic, then it will be modern. The
forms of contemporary, agitational plastic arts lie beyond the depiction of man
as an individual. They are found by the artist who is not crippled by the feudal
and bourgeois traditions of the Renaissance, but who has laboured like a worker
on the three unities of contemporary plastic consciousness: material, construc-
tion, volume. Working on material, construction and volume, Tatlin has pro-
duced a form which is new in the world of monumental creation. Such a form
is the monument to the Third International.

The best artist in the Russia of the Workers and Peasants (his life proving
his knowledge of the working masses), was commissioned a year ago to develop
a design for a monument to the Third International. The project which has
been designed is not only completely remarkable as a manifestation of contem-
porary artistic life, but it can also be interpreted as a profound break in the
deadening circle of the over-ripe and decadent art of our time. Art is embracing
the twentieth century, delineating areas of development in all aspects of creative
activity. Regarding myself, to some extent, competent in artistic matters, I
o>nsider that this project is an international event in the art world.

One of the most complex cultural problems is solved before our very eyes: a
utilitarian form appears as a purely creative form. Once again a new classicism
becomes possible, not as a renaissance but as an invention. The theorists of the
international workers' movement have long sought a classical content for socialist
culture. Here it is. We maintain that the present project is the first revolutionary
artistic work, and one which we can send to Europe.

Form in the project is placed along two axes (aai and bb 3 ), which are in a
constant state of conflict. The line a to ai develops into a movement upwards
which is broken at each point by the movement of the spirals from b, bi, b 2 ,
b h to the line aa^ The collision of these two movements (by their very nature
mutually contradictory) must produce a break - such as characterized 'cubism'
<k>ng since left behind), and entail the destruction of the utilitarian idea. But
the converging spirals, adopting the movement of aai (and bb 3 ), carry these lines
above and beyond the movement of the main support (girder aaO to the same
point, producing a dynamic image, imbued with the powerful tension of
endlessly disturbed and clashing axes. The whole form oscillates like a steel
snake, constrained and organized by the one general movement of all the parts,
to raise itself above the earth. The form wants to overcome the material and
the force of gravity, the strength of the resistance is enormous and massive:
straining every muscle, the form finds an outlet through the most elastic and
rapid lines which the world knows, through spirals. They are full of movement,
aspiration, and speed: they are taut like the creative will and like a muscle tensed
*ith a hammer.

The application of the spiral and its organization into a modern form is, by
itself, an enrichment of the composition. In the same way as the equilibrium
*f the parts in a triangle makes it the best expression of the Renaissance, so
*he best expression of our spirit is the spiral. The interaction of weight and
support is the most pure (classical) form of stasis; the classical form of dynamism



314 Rationalization and Transformation

is the spiral. Societies divided by class fought to own the earth, the line of their
movement is horizontal. The spiral is the movement of liberated humanity. The
spiral is the ideal expression of liberation: with its base set in the earth, it flees
from the ground and becomes a symbol of the suspension of all animal, earthly
and grovelling interests.

Bourgeois societies love to develop the animal life on top of the earth, working
its surface: they build shops, arcades, banks. Bourgeois life, based on the urban
squares, was played out in full view and for show. Creative humanity disappears
with its animal life into the earth, where the co-operatives' work is not visible.
The square is a place for agitation, games and for festivals. Emancipated life
rises above the earth, above grey and earthly materials. As living accommodation
and social space carried to a level above the earth, the building is an expression
of modernity and the content of contemporary life. At the same time, it
comprises the content of a great artistic form.

The content of any form can be taken and condensed by utility, because the
utility of a form is nothing other than the organization of its content. Forms
devoid of practical significance (the majority of artistic forms which have existed
up to now), are simply forms which are not organized. And perhaps the principle
of organization has for the first time actually been realized in art. The monument
is calculated on the concentration of legislative (Structure A), executive (Struc-
ture B) and informative (Structure C) initiatives; furthermore, in accordance
with the stated principle of expressing modernity, these structures are raised
into a higher level of space. In this way, and through the material (glass), the
purity of the initiatives, their liberation from material constraints and their ideal
qualities are stressed. An art devoid of creative idealism which is the content
of intuition, is an art of impure rhythm. Up to now no one has succeeded in
breaking rhythms down into the elements of material culture which define the
growth and conditions of existence. But life itself consists of rhythms. Intuition
flows in accordance with these rhythms. The purity and the intensity of the
rhythms define the degree of talent, but I know of no more pure or intense
rhythms than those in Tatlin's work. He possesses an eye of the greatest
sensitivity with respect to material and it is precisely the juxtaposition of
materials which defines the limits of the rhythmic waves. We accept, as a basis,
that the unit of a rhythm is the section of a wave, enclosed between the qualities
of the glass and the qualities of the iron. Just as the production of a number
of oscillations along a wave is a spatial measure of sound, so the relationship of
glass to iron is a measure of material rhythm. There is a stern and incandescent
simplicity hidden in the juxtaposition of these two most elementary materials,
both in a similar way brought into existence by fire. These materials are the
elements of modern art. The form, defined by their juxtaposition, produces a
rhythm of such broad and powerful oscillation that it seems like the birth of
an ocean.

To translate this form into reality means to realize a dynamism of the same
unsurpassed greatness as that embodied in the stasis of the pyramid. We
maintain that only the full power of the multi-million strong proletarian
consciousness could bring into the world the idea of this monument and its



hid Utility and Construction 315

forms. The monument must be realized by the muscles of this power, because
we have an ideal, living and classical expression in the pure and creative form
of the international union of the workers of the whole world.



5 Alexander Rodchenko (1891-1956) 'Slogans' and
'Organizational Programme' of the Workshop for
the Study of Painting in State Art Colleges

After being involved in the avant-garde group around Tatlin, Rodchenko became the
leading representative, firstly of laboratory research' and then of the movement from
'art into production' in the years after the Revolution. He was involved in drawing up
courses for the Vkhutemas, the State Higher Artistic and Technical Studios, where he
taught from 1920 to 1930. From the mid-1920s, he turned mainly to photography.
Both the 'Slogans' and the 'Organizational Programme', drawn up in 1920-21, were
first published in Khudozhestvenno-konstructorskoe obrazovanie (Artistic-Constructive
Education), no. 4, Moscow, 1973, pp. 203-6. The present translation is taken from
5.-0. Khan Magomedov, Rodchenko: The Complete Work, London, 1986.

Slogans

(The discipline of construction, chief director Rodchenko)

Construction = organization of elements.

Construction is a modern concept.

Art is a branch of mathematics, like all sciences.

Construction is the modern requirement for organization and utilitarian use
of material.

Constructivist life is the art of the future.

Art which does not enter into life will be put under a No. of the archaeological
museum of antiquity.

It is time that art entered into life in an organized fashion.

Life organized along Constructivist lines is superior to the delirious magic art
of the sorcerers.

The future will not construct monasteries for the priests, prophets and
minstrels of art.

Down with art as a beautiful patch on the squalid life of the rich.

Down with art as a precious stone in the midst of the dismal and dirty life
of the poor.

Down with art as a means of escaping from a life that is not worth living.

Conscious and organized life, that knows how to see and build, is contem-
porary art.

The man who has organized his life, his work and himself is a genuine
artist.

Work for life and not for palaces, cathedrals, cemeteries and museums.

Work in the midst of everything and with everybody; down with monasteries,
institutes, studios, ateliers and islands. Awareness, experience, purpose,



316 Rationalization and Transformation



IIId Utility and Construction 317



construction, technique and mathematics, these are the companions of contem-
porary art.

Organizational programme of the workshop for the study
of painting in State Art Colleges

1 The workshop for the study of painting has an educational and an experimen-
tal function.

a The scientific duties of the workshop are the analysis and elaboration of
problems in art and in pictorial technique. In order to carry out this part
of its work the workshop will conduct experiments:

1 in the field of colour

2 in the field of form

3 following the laws of construction

4 studying the treatment of the surface layer of materials, i.e. their
preparation.

b The educational aims of the workshop involve giving students a technical
and scientific preparation and practice in the various techniques of
painting, independently of creative individualism.

2 The workshop is divided up into special sections for analysis of the separate
elements of painting:

1 colour

2 form

3 construction

4 faktura

5 materials.

The study breaks down into:

a elaboration of the elements taken individually

1 analysis of the fundamental characteristics of each element (on the prac-
tical and the theoretical plane)

2 observation of examples of the treatment of elements in works of art from
different periods

3 analysis of elements in objects

4 practical handling of special problems in the elaboration of individual
elements

b comparison of elements

1 study of the interrelationship of different elements

2 observation of the way elements are combined in works of art

3 study of the combination of elements in objects

4 practical handling of problems concerned with the combination of ele-
ments.

Rodchenko
12 December 1920



6 Alexander Rodchenko (1891-1956) and Varvara
Stepanova (1894-1958) 'Programme of the First
Working Group of Constructivists'

Although the term has been widely applied to the Russian avant-garde in general, indeed
to a later school of abstract art in the West in the shape of an 'international constructive
tendency' (see IVaIO), 'Constructivism' in a strict sense came into being in Russia in
1921 as part of moves to realign avant-garde art to the productive demands of building
up the new, post-revolutionary society. It was intimately bound up with practical,
theoretical and educational work taking place at Vkhutemas and Inkhuk. In addition to
Rodchenko and Stepanova (who were married), leading members were Alexei Gan,
Konstantin Medunetsky and the brothers Vladimir and Georgii Stenberg. Originally published
in Ermitazh, no. 13, Moscow, August 1922, pp. 3-4. Other versions of the Programme
exist in translation. This version was the only one printed in Russian during the 1920s.
Translated by Christina Lodder for the Open University, 1983.

The Group of Constructivists has set itself the task of finding the communistic
expression of material structures.

In approaching its task the group insists on the need to synthesize the
ideological aspect with the formal for the real transference of laboratory work
on to the rails of practical activity.

Therefore, at the time of its establishment, the group's programme in its
ideological aspect pointed out that:

1 Our sole ideology is scientific communism based on the theory of historical
materialism.

2 The theoretical interpretation and assimilation of the experience of Soviet
construction must impel the group to turn away from experimental activity
'removed from life 1 towards real experimentation.

3 In order to master the creation of practical structures in a really scientific
and disciplined way the Constructivists have established three disciplines:
Tectonics, Faktura and Construction.

A Tectonics or the tectonic style is tempered and formed on the one hand
from the properties of communism and on the other from the expedient
use of industrial material.

B Faktura is the organic state of the worked material or the resulting new
state of its organism. Therefore, the group considers that faktura is
material consciously worked and expediently used, without hampering the
construction or restricting the tectonics.

C Construction should be understood as the organizational function of
Constructivism.

If tectonics comprises the relationship between the ideological and the formal
which gives unity to the practical design, and faktura is the material, the
Construction reveals the very process of that structuring.

In this way the third discipline is the discipline of the realization of the design



318 Rationalization and Transformation

through the use of the worked material.

The Material. The material as substance or matter. Its investigation and
industrial application, properties and significance. Furthermore, time, space
volume, plane, colour, line and light are also material for the Constructivists'
without which they cannot construct material structures.

The Immediate Tasks Of The Group

1 In the ideological sphere:

To prove theoretically and practically the incompatibility of aesthetic activity
with the functions of intellectual and material production.
The real participation of intellectual and material production as an equal
element in the creation of communist culture.

2 In the practical sphere:
To publish a statement.

To publish a weekly paper, VIP [Vestnik IntellektuaTnogo Proizvodstva; The

Herald of Intellectual Production].

To print brochures and leaflets on questions relating to the activities of the

group.

To construct designs.

To organize exhibitions.

To establish links with all the Production Boards and Centres of that unified

Soviet machine which in fact practically shapes and produces the emergent

forms of the communist way of life.

3 In the agitational sphere:

i The Group declares uncompromising war on art.
ii It asserts that the artistic culture of the past is unacceptable for the
communistic forms of Constructivist structures.



7 Alexei Gan (1889-1942) from Constructivism

The author was a designer as well as an artist and theorist active in Inkhuk and the
First Working Group of Constructivists. Gan's book is the most extensive exposition of
the principles of Constructivism, but is marked by an extremity of formulation which
caused disagreement even within the group. The book itself embodied Constructivist
typographical and design principles. The brief extract reproduced here discusses the
key triad of Constructivist concepts: 'tectonics', 'faktura' and 'construction'. 'Faktura'
essentially concerns the properties of materials and the processes of their working;
'construction' ways of combining and organizing them; and 'tectonics' the vague, but
from a constructivist perspective none the less essential, area of these principles'
relation to the theory of Communism. Originally published as Konstruktivizm, Tver,
1922. The present translation is taken from Camilla Gray, The Great Experiment,
London, 1962.

Tectonic emerges and forms itself based on the one hand on the characteristics
of Communism, and on the other on the expedient use of industrial materials.



hid Utility and Construction 319

The word tectonic is taken from geology where it is used to define eruption
from the earth's centre.

Tectonic is a synonym for the organic, for the explosion from an inner being.

The tectonic as a discipline should lead the Constructivist in practice to a
synthesis of the new content and the new form. He must be a Marxist educated
man who has once and for all outlived art and really advanced on industrial
material. The tectonic is his guiding star, the brain of experimental and practical
activity.

Factum is the whole process of the working of material. The working of
material as a whole and not the working of one side.

Here the material is understood in its raw state. The expedient use of material
means its selection and working over, but the character of this working over
[of the material] in its integrity is factura: the organic condition of the worked
over material or the new condition of its organism.

The material is the body, the matter. The transformation of this raw material
into one form or another continues to remind us of its primary form and conveys
to us the next possibility in its transformation.

In so far as we transform and work over [materials], we are engaged in factura.
Proceeding from this, the second discipline one can formulate thus: Factura is
to consciously select material and use it expediently without halting the move-
ment of the construction or limiting its tectonic.

Construction. Construction must be understood as the co-ordinating function
of Constructivism.

If the tectonic unites the ideological and formal, and as a result gives a unity
of conception, and the factura is the condition of the material, then the
construction discovers the actual process of putting together.

Thus we have the third discipline, the discipline of the formation of concep-
tion through the use of worked material.

All hail to the Communist expression of material building! [. . .]

The end has come to pure and applied [art]. A time of social expediency has
begun. An object of only utilitarian significance will be introduced in a form
acceptable to all.

Nothing by chance, uncalculated, nothing from blind taste and aesthetic
arbitrariness. Everything must be technically and functionally directed.

Once and for all the idea of a final solution and eternal truths must be
invalidated.

The roots of art were always in material-formal substances, in production . . .

From the speculative activity of art to socially directed artistic work . . .

The technical system of society, the ordering of its wealth, creates the ordering
of human relationships. . . .

In the field of cultural organization, the only valid criterion is that which is
*ndissolubly connected with the general tasks of the revolution . . . Art is dead!
There is no room for it in the human work apparatus. Work, technique and
organization!

Let us tear ourselves away from our speculative activity [art] and find the
w ay to real work, applying our knowledge and skills to real, live and expedient



320 Rationalization and Transformation

work. Intellectual-material production sets up working mutual relations and a
production basis with science and technique, replacing art which by its very
nature cannot be disentangled from religion and philosophy and is not capable
of pulling itself out of the closed circle of abstract, speculative activity

Tectonic, factum, construction. Retaining the lasting material and formal basis
of art such as colour, line, surface, volume and movement, artistic work
materialistically directed will become, in conditions of expedient activity and
intellectual-material production, capable of opening new means of artistic ex-
pression.

Not to reflect, not to represent and not to interpret reality, but to really build
and express the systematic tasks of the new class, the proletariat. The master
of colour and line, the builder of space-volume forms and the organizer of mass
productions must all become constructors in the general work of the arming
and moving of the many-millioned human masses. . . .

Our Constructivism has declared unconditional war on art, for the means and
qualities of art are not able to systematize the feelings of a revolutionary
environment. [ . . . ]



8



El Lissitsky (1890-1947) and Ilya Ehrenberg
(1891-1967) Statement by the Editors of Veshch



Lissitsky and the writer Ehrenburg collaborated in 1922 to produce a short-lived triling-
ual journal under the name Veshch/Gegenstand/Objet, intended to relate developments
in post-revolutionary Soviet art and design to similar movements in the West. Typically
the cover of the third issue drew together Malevich's Black Square and a locomotive in
a dramatic montage. The journal occupied a mid-point between Suprematism and utilita-
rian Constructivism. The statement reproduced here was delivered by Lissitsky to a con-
gress of 'progressive artists' in Dusseldorf in 1992 and was instrumental in the organisa-
tion of an International Fraction of Constructivists' at that Congress. The Veshch state-
ment was published in De Stijl, V, no. 4, Amsterdam, 1992. The present translation, by
Nicholas Bullock, is taken from Bann, op. cit.

1 I come here as representative of the magazine Veshch/Gegenstand/Objet,
which stands for a new way of thinking and unites the leaders of the new
art in nearly all countries.

2 Our thinking is characterized by the attempt to turn away from the old
subjective, mystical conception of the world and to create an attitude of
universality - clarity - reality.

3 That this way of thinking is truly international may be seen from the fact
that during a seven-year-period of complete isolation from the outside world,
we were attacking the same problems in Russia as our friends here in the
West, but without any knowledge of the others. In Russia we have fought
a hard but fruitful struggle to realize the new art on a broad social and
political front.

4 In doing so we have learned that progress in art is possible only in a society
that has already completely changed its social structure.



hid Utility and Construction 321

By progress we mean here the freeing of art from its role as ornament and
decoration, from the need to satisfy the emotions of the few. Progress means
proving and explaining that everybody has the right to create. We have

| nothing to do with those who minister to art like priests in a cloister.

I 6 The new art is founded not on a subjective, but on an objective basis. This,
like science, can be described with precision and is by nature constructive.
It unites not only pure art, but all those who stand at the frontier of the
new culture. The artist is companion to the scholar, the engineer, and the
worker.

7 As yet the new art is not always understood; it is not only society that
misunderstands it, but more dangerously, it is misunderstood by those who
call themselves progressive artists.

8 To combat this situation we must join ranks so that we really can fight back.
'i It is essentially this fight that unites us. If our aim were only to defend the

material interests of a group of people called artists, we would not need
j; another union, because there are already international unions for painters,

decorators, and varnishers, and professionally we belong to these.

9 We regard the founding of an International of Progressive
Artists as the banding together of fighters for the new culture.
Once again art will return to its former role. Once again we shall find a
collective way of relating the work of the artist to the universal.



9 LEF: 'Whom is LEF Alerting?'

Vladimir Mayakovsky, the leading revolutionary poet, organized the group 'Left Front of
the Arts' around the journal LEF in 1923. During the years of the civil war, 'leftist' art
had been hegemonic. In the changed conditions of the New Economic Policy more
technically conservative trends in art and literature re-emerged, claiming to serve the
Revolution under the banners of 'realism' and 'popularity'. Mayakovsky's aim was to
regroup the Left and re-establish its claims to be the true art of the Revolution. This
manifesto-editorial appeared in the first issue of LEF, pp. 10-11, Moscow, 1923. The
present translation, by Richard Sherwood, is taken from Form, no. 10, Brighton,
October 1969 (reprinted in Screen, vol. 12, no. 4, London, Winter 1971-2).

This is addressed to us. Comrades in Lef!

We know that we, the 'left' master-craftsmen, are the best workers in today's
art. Up to the Revolution we piled up highly correct draft-plans, clever theorems
and cunning formulae, for the forms of the new art.

One thing is clear: the slippery, globular belly of the bourgeoisie was a bad
site for building.

During the Revolution we amassed a great many truths, we studied life, we
received the task of building a very real structure for the centuries ahead.

A world shaken by the booming of war and revolution is difficult soil for
grandiose constructions.

We temporarily filed away our formulae, while helping to consolidate the days
of revolution.



322 Rationalization and Transformation

Now the globe of the bourgeois paunch exists no longer. Sweeping away the
old with the revolution we cleared the field for the new structures of art at the
same time. The earthquake is over. Cemented by spilt blood the USSR stands
firmly.

It is time to start big things. The seriousness of our attitude to ourselves is the
one solid foundation for our work.

Futurists!

Your services to art are great; but don't dream of living on the dividend of
yesterday's revolutionary spirit. Show by your work today that your outburst is
not the desperate wailing of the wounded intelligentsia, but a struggle, labouring
shoulder to shoulder with all those who are straining towards the victory of the
commune.

Construe tivists !

Be on your guard against becoming just another aesthetic school. Construc-
tivism in art alson is nothing. It is a question of the very existence of art.
Constructivism must become the supreme formal engineering of the whole of
life. Constructivism in a performance of shepherd pastorals is nonsense. Our
ideas must be developed on the basis of present-day things.

Production artists!

Be on your guard against becoming applied-artist handicraftsmen.

In teaching the workers learn from the worker. In dictating aesthetic orders
to the factory from your studios you become simply customers.

Your school is the factory floor.

Formalists!

The formal method is the key to the study of art. Every flea of a rhyme must
be accounted for. But avoid catching fleas in a vacuum. Only together with the
sociological study of art will your work become not only interesting, but
necessary.

Students!

Avoid giving out the chance distortions of the dilettante striving for innova-
tion, for the 'dernier cri' of art. The innovation of the dilettante is a steamship
on the legs of a chicken.

Only in craftsmanship have you the right to throw out the old.

Everyone together!

As you go from theory to practice remember your craftsmanship, your
technical skill.

Hackwork on the part of the young who have the strength for collossal things,
is even more repulsive than the hackwork of the flabby little academics.

Master and students of 'Lef 7

The question of our very existence is being decided. The very greatest idea
will perish if we do not mould it skilfully.

The most skilful forms will remain black threads in blackest night, will evoke
merely the annoyance and irritation of those who stumble over them if we do
not apply them to the shaping of the present day, the day of revolution.

Lef is on guard.

Lef is the defender for all inventors.



IIId Utility and Construction 323

| , Lef is on guard.

Lef will throw off all the old fuddy-duddies, all the ultra-aesthetes, all the copiers.

10 Osip Brik (1888-1945) 'The So-called 'Formal
Method'

I;

I The author was a critic and theorist, closely associated with Rodchenko and Mayakov-
% sky, and hence with Constructivism and the Left Front of the Arts. He had also been
I involved with the 'Opoyaz' group of formalist linguists. Linguistic Formalism had come
I under attack from more orthodox Marxists, as indeed had the Constructivism which
:! emerged from the preceding, essentially formalist, avant-garde art. Here Brik seeks to
% establish the revolutionary credentials of such practices, turning the tables on his
;1 opponents by claiming that it is these which are truly Materialist and the more orthodox
't forms which are reliant upon Idealism. Originally published in LEF, vol. 1, Moscow 1923,
% pp. 213-25. The present translation is by R. Sherwood (loc. cit.).

k *Dpoyaz' and its so-called 'formal method' has become a bugbear to the literary
l pontiffs and priestling dabblers in literature. This impudent attempt to approach
1; the poetic icons from a scientific point of view evoked a storm of indignation.
J A 'league of resistance to the formal method 1 was formed, or, to be more exact,
: a 'league of resistance to the removal of poetic values'.

This would not be worth mentioning, were there not several Marxists, albeit
motheaten ones, among the 'resisters'. This calls for an explanation.
r 'Opoyaz' maintains that there are no poets and writers - there are just poetry
 nd writing. Everything that a poet writes is meaningful as a part of his general
work, and is totally worthless as an expression of his T. If a poetic work can
fee comprehended as a 'human document', like an entry in a diary, it is
interesting to the author, to his wife, relatives, friends and maniacs of the type
who passionately seek the answer to the riddle 'was Pushkin a smoker?' - and
to no one else.

1 The poet is an expert in his own business. And that is all. But to be a good
expert you must know the needs of those for whom you are working, you must
live one life with them. Otherwise your work won't come off and will be useless.
The social role of the poet cannot be understood from an analysis of his
individual qualities and habits. A mass study of the devices of the poetic craft ts
necessary, these devices to be distinguished from the estimative areas of human
labour; also the laws of their historical development. Pushkin was not the
founder of a school, but simply its leader. If Pushkin had never existed 'Eugene
Onegin' would still have been written. And America would have been discovered
without Columbus. We have no history of literature yet. There is just a history
of the 'generals' of literature; 'Opoyaz' will make possible the writing of this
Wstory. The poet is an expert of the word, a word-creator, serving his own
c kss, his own social group. What to write about is intimated to him by the
f--[ Consumer. Poets do not invent themes, they take them from their surrounding mih eu -
She work of the poet starts with the processing of the theme, with finding a
Corresponding linguistic form for it.




324 Rationalization and Transformation

Studying poetry means studying the laws of this linguistic processing. The
history of poetry is the history of the development of the devices of linguistic
fashioning. Why poets have taken this or that actual theme, and not others, i s
explained by their belonging to this or that social group, and has no connection
with their poetic work. This is important for the poet's biography, but the history
of poetry is not a book of 'Lives of the Saints', and must not be like one.

Why poets used certain devices, and not others, in the processing of themes,
what causes the appearance of a new device, how an old one dies off - this is
the subject for the most thorough research of scientific poetics. 'Opoyaz' marks
off its work from the work of adjacent scientific disciplines not in order to go
'out of this world' but in order to establish and expand a series of the most
vital problems of man's literary activity in the neatest way possible.

'Opoyaz' studies the laws of poetic production. Who will dare prevent it doing
so?

What does 'Opoyaz' contribute to the proletarian construction of culture?

1 A scientific system instead of a chaotic accumulation of facts and personal
opinions.

2 A social evaluation of creative people instead of an idolatrous interpretation
of the 'language of the gods'.

3 A knowledge of the laws of production instead of a 'mystical' penetration
into the 'secrets' of creation.

'Opoyaz' is the best educator for the young proletarian writers.

The 'prolet-poets' are still afflicted with the thirst for 'self-revelation'. They
constantly tear themselves away from their class. They do not want to be simply
'prolet-poets'. They look for 'cosmic', 'planetary' or 'deep' themes. They think
that in his theme the poet must leap out of his milieu, that only then will he
reveal himself and create - the 'eternal'.

'Opoyaz' will show them that everything great has been created in answer to
questions of the day, that the 'eternal' today was then a topic of the time, and
that the great poet does not reveal himself, but simply carries out the social
command.

'Opoyaz' will help its comrade prolet-poets to overcome the traditions of bourgeois
literature, by scientifically proving its moribundity and counter-revolutionism.

'Opoyaz' will come to the aid of proletarian creation not with hazy little chats
about the 'proletarian spirit' and 'communist consciousness', but with the exact
technical meanings of the devices of contemporary poetic creation. "Opoyaz" is
the grave-digger of poetic idealistics. It is useless to fight it. And all the more so
for Marxists.



11 Osip Brik (1888-1945) 'From Picture to
Calico-Print*

Brik embraced the ethos of 'art into production'. He accordingly condemned easel-art
as archaic and moreover irrevocably marked by bourgeois individualism. In its place he




IIId Utility and Construction 325

advocated photography, photomontage, and the use of reproducible screen (i.e. 'calico')
printing. To this extent Brik's essay in particular, and indeed the Constructivist-
Productivist avant-garde in general, stand as precursors for the later preconceptions
of Walter Benjamin in his seminal essay The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical
Reproduction' (1936) (see IVd6). Originally published in LEF, no. 6, Moscow, 1924, pp.
30-1, 34. The present translation is by R. Sherwood (loc. cit.).



The propaganda of production art is now crowned with success.

It is becoming obvious that art culture is not totally covered by objects for
exhibitions and museums, that, in particular, painting is not 'pictures', but the
entire aggregate of the pictorial designing of life.

The calico-print is just the same sort of product of art culture as the picture,
and there is no foundation for drawing any sort of dividing line between the two.

Moreover, the belief is growing that the picture is dying, that it is inextricably
bound to the forms of the capitalist system, to its cultural ideology, and that
the calico-print is now moving into the centre of creative attention, - that calico,
and work on it, are now the peaks of art work.

This is a fact. Our cultural creative work is now entirely purpose-orientated.
We do not think up for ourselves any cultural work that does not pursue some
definite practical aim. The concepts of 'pure science', 'pure art', and 'self-
valuable truths and beauties' are foreign to us. We are practicians, - and in this
lies the distinguishing feature of our cultural consciousness.

The easel-art picture can find no place in such a consciousness. For its
strength and significance lie in its non-utilitarianism, in the fact that it serves
no other purpose than that of pleasing, of 'delighting the eye'.

All attempts to turn an easel-painting into an agit-picture are fruitless. Not
.because no talented artist could be found to do it, but because it is unthinkable
in its very essence.

The easel painting is intended for a prolonged existence, to last for years and
even centuries. But what agit-theme could last for such a time? What agit-picture
-Would not be obsolete within a month? And if the theme of the agit-picture
were obsolete, what would there be left in it?

A theme of short-lived effect must not be dealt with by devices intended for
* lengthy existence. A one-day object must not be built to last centuries.

This is why the agit-picture cannot bear comparison with the agit-poster, this
is why there are no good agit-pictures.

 The 'pure' easel-artists have exercised good judgement in refusing to work
n agit-themes. They realize that this way the easel-painting will perish, that
tt loses its basic values - its 'timeless', 'non-utilitarian' significance, and that
*he poster will outdo it. They are therefore making desperate attacks to save it
yy another method: - to impress on one and all that the easel-painting is, in
*& purely formal sense, a huge cultural fact, that without it any art culture is
unthinkable.

They maintain that if no easel-paintings are made, then art culture will perish,
*hat the creative 'freedom' which is apparent in the making of these easel-
Paintings must not be extinguished for a single second otherwise art will end.



326 Rationalization and Transformation

Let the theme of the picture be trivial, let there be an abstract 'free' play of
the pictorial forms, - this is unimportant; what is important is that this
non-temporal, non-utilitarian, 'purely aesthetic' value will continue to exist, that
one will be able to glance at it, be imbued with it - and art culture will be saved.

This is how monks reason. Their righteous life outside the world saves the
world.

And yet the easel-artists are right. If the painting can be saved it is only in
this way.

If it is true that the easel-painting is necessary for the existence of art culture,
that without it art culture will perish, then, of course, we must take every step
to encourage its development and well-being.

But it is not true. The easel-painting is not only unnecessary to our present
day art culture, but is one of the most powerful brakes to its development. And
this is why.

Of course, the chief evil is not in the monkish reasonings of the 'pure'
easel-artists. These can easily be dispelled by the light of anti-religious, anti-
aesthetic propaganda. What is bad is that these monkish dogmas are turned into
productional and pedagogical principles.

The nub of the matter is that the easel-artists do not deny the importance
and necessity of other forms of art culture. They fully allow the existence of
agit-posters, sketches for calico-printing, and book covers; they simply maintain
that without easel-painting all these 'secondary' aspects are unthinkable, that
easel-painting is the creative base on which all the culture of painting is
constructed.

Hence the conclusion that if you want to make good calico-prints, learn how
to paint landscapes.

The easel-artists argue thus: the artist, wherever he works, whatever he does,
must be master of an art culture, must be artistically educated. This art culture,
this art education, is given to him by easel-painting.

Having mastered the 'secrets' of easel-painting, he thereby masters the
'secrets' of every sort of painting work, be it calico, the book-cover, the poster,
or theatre decoration.

And this is where the easel-artists are cruelly wrong.

The painting is the product of a certain aspect of artistic work. To make a
painting one must expend a certain quantity of technical devices and skills,
namely those devices and skills with which a picture can be made. Why does
it follow that these devices and skills are universal? Why does it suddenly turn
out that the devices and skills suitable for one craft are right for any other?

Let us admit that partial coincidences are also possible, that part of the devices
may be universally used; but why should one craft be basic in relation to
another? Why should the making of a still-life be more basic than the making
of a calico-print? Why should one first learn to make still-life pictures, and then
proceed to calico-prints, and not the other way round?

The easel-artists like to compare pure easel-painting with pure mathematics.
They say that both of them give general principles, general propositions, which
can then be applied in practice.



IIId Utility and Construction 327

But the easel-artists forget that a picture is not science, but practical work,
and cannot establish any 'general' propositions. The experience of the easel-
painter is not the experience of the artist in general, but merely the experience
of one particular case of pictorial work.

The easel-artists want to vindicate their right of existence.

If easel-art died, as a socially necessary aspect of artistic craft, then, they say,
let it come back to life as a universal artistic method, as the highest school of
all artistic practical work.

This is how the zealots of classical antiquity tried to vindicate the need for
Greek and Latin in secondary schools.

But the pedagogic universality of easel-art can be disproved not only by
theoretical arguments, but also by everyday practical experience.

The sad fate of artists who have passed through the easel-art school, and then
try to apply their knowledge and skills in production, is well known. Nothing
comes of it.

However, the easel-artist, by and large, doesn't care a thing about production.
The acknowledgment of production art is an empty phrase in his mouth.

If work in production were always to remain art of the lowest sort it would
be all the same to him. This is why it is not the easel-artists who will find
methods for this type of work, and it will not be from easel-art that the solution
of the problems of production art will come.

Only those artists who have broken once and for all with easel-artistry, who
have in fact recognised production work as not only an equally legitimate aspect
of art work, but as the only one possible, - only these artists can undertake the
solving of the problems of present-day art culture productively and successfully.

Among these artists, as yet still few in number, are the members of INKHUK:
- Rodchenko, Lavinsky, Vesnin, Stepanova, Johanson, Senkin, Klutsis and the
late Lyubov Popova.

There is one very serious objection that the easel-artists make against the
production artists. They say: Your works are no different from the most primitive
sort of applied art; you are doing just what applied artists have always done,
'applying' easel drawings to factory-produced objects. But what will you do if there
are to be no easel-works? What will you 'apply * ?

It is true that art work, and factory or workshop work, are still separate. The
artist is still an alien in the factory. People react suspiciously to him, they do
not let him get close. They do not trust him. They cannot understand why he
taust know the technical processes, why he should have information of a purely
industrial nature. His business is to draw, to make drawings - and it is the
business of the factory to choose suitable ones from among them and stick them
on ready-made manufactures.

The basic idea of production art, that the external appearance of a thing is
determined by its economic purpose and not by abstract, aesthetic consider-
ations, is still insufficiently apprehended by our industrialists, and it seems to
them that the artist, in seeking to delve into the 'economic secret' of the object,
*s poking his nose into other people's business.

Hence the inevitable applied art, - a result of the alienation of the artist from



328 Rationalization and Transformation

production. As he does not receive the necessary economic directives he
involuntarily falls back on aesthetic stereotypes.

What conclusion can be drawn from this?

Forward! - to the overcoming of this alienation.

Forward! - to the union of artist and factory.

And never: backwards - to pure easel work, or backwards - to little pictures.

Leading artists have already set out on the road from picture to calico-print,
and of course they will not turn back. But this is only the beginning. The entire
mass of young artists must understand that this road is the only true one, that
it is along this road that the development of art culture will proceed.

It is necessary for our industrialists to understand their role in this matter,
since on this depends the acceleration of this historical process.

The initiative of the director of the first cotton-printing factory in Moscow
(formerly the Tsindel), comrade Arkhangelsky, and of Professor Viktorov, who
invited the artists Stepanova and Popova to work there, is worthy of great
attention and praise.

And if it is still too early to speak about the results of this first experiment,
then it is essential to mention its huge cultural value.

The art culture of the future is being made in the factories and workshops,
and not in attic studios.

Let young artists remember this, if they want to avoid falling prematurely
into the archives, together with the haughty easel-artists.



12 Vladimir Tatlin (1885-1953) 'Report of the Section
for Material Culture's Research Work for 1924'

Tatlin had been involved in an organizational capacity within the Petrograd Museum of
Artistic Culture (Ginkhuk) since 1921. From November 1923, though in practice earlier,
he was head of the Section for Material Culture. He resigned in 1925, after a conflict
with his old adversary Malevich, though this was perhaps symptomatic of wider press-
ures being exerted on Constructivists by the mid-1920s. The Section's original title
referred to 'Research on the Construction of the Object'. It investigated the processing
of materials, such as paint surfaces, and colours, and initiated projects in practical
design work, the best-known of which were for a suit of clothes, an overcoat and a
stove. The basic principle was the creating of new forms for the new 'everyday life'.
Originally submitted internally within Ginkhuk in 1924. The present translation is taken
from Zhadova, Tatlin (op. cit.).

Taking into account that the industrial and domestic production inherited from
the old world, including painting, as well as our experience in both town and
country in all its manifestations, is in a state of anarchy: production is splintered
into chance productive units, experience is abnormally individualized and with-
out unity of form. Recognizing also that the shaping principle of culture,
production and experience is material, the Section for Material Culture sets
itself the task of:




IIId Utility and Construction 329

1 Research into material as the shaping principle of culture.

2 Research into everyday life as a certain form of material culture.

3 The synthetic forming of material and, as a result of such formation, the
construction of standards for new experience.

To realize these tasks the Section carried out the following work:

I Experimental research into coating materials. The work was carried out in
the direction of broadening the use of coating materials, determining new means
of preparing surfaces. The Section showed a number of colour selections which,
thanks to their particular colour qualities, could find an application in produc-
tion; moreover, the Section found for certain coating materials normal methods
of preparation (colour-norms), thanks to which materials of this kind can be
widely used in our everyday life. In connection with the demonstration of new
standards two lectures were given by the director of this work:

1 Colour as coating material (against Impressionism and other 'isms'.)

2 Specific colour fields in various cultural epochs.

II Experimental research into the properties of material. Work was done and
developed on the shaping of material in space; to this purpose research was
undertaken into the construction of reliefs and counter-reliefs, our experience
in analysing a fully material volume was broadened, and finally the significance
of material as an unlimited element which uniquely shapes culture was con-
firmed. At the synoptic exhibition patterns of reliefs and counter-reliefs of
classical construction were shown, in connection with which two lectures were
given:

a form as a result of material volume;

b the development of spatial perceptions from recent tendencies in art to the
counter-relief

The shaping of materials in the conditions of contemporary everyday life. In
this division the Section worked out two patterns in several variants of cloth-
ing-norms and a fireplace-norm. Patterns of clothing-norms were designed in a
number of sketches and drawings, of which 1) A man's overcoat; 2) A jacket;
3) A smock; 4) Trousers, one set for workers and citizens of the USSR
(townspeople), were realized by the Department of Material Culture jointly with
the factories of Leningrad Clothing Manufacturers' Trust.

The design of a fireplace-norm for workers' apartments was developed in
three variants: model of a complex stove-range with all the means for preparing
and preserving food, the model of a simplified stove, and the model of an
economical stove. The demonstration of new^ models was accompanied by
lectures.
Material culture, contemporary everyday life and production.

Besides this, a number of conversations were held with specialist workers,
Workers who were students of institutes of higher education; evaluation forms
were collected.



330 Rationalization and Transformation

At the synoptic yearly exhibition all the designs were shown and accompanied
by necessary explanations.
The Section's staff:

The scientific staff: Khapaev, Kobelev, Kholodov, Nekrasov, Geintse.
Specialist workers: Nikolaev, Sokovich.

The Section has an accessory and assembly shop, in which work was carried
out on the assembly and preparing of necessary parts for developing demon-
stration patterns.

Director of the Section for Material Culture, V. Tatlin
Leningrad, 10 November 1924




Part IV

Freedom,
Responsibility and
Power



m



IV

Introduction



During the period between the wars, contributors to the theoretical discourses
of modern art tended to orient themselves by reference to three dominant and
problematic concepts: abstraction, Realism and, after the mid-1920s, Surrealism,
the adopted name of the principal avant-garde movement of the period (see
IVc2). There was no serious debate about art which did not implicate at least
one of these, and little that did not explicitly or implicitly propose some ordering
of the relations between them. (The apparent exceptions help prove the rule.
The work of Henri Matisse and Pierre Bonnard evades incorporation under any
of our three headings. But for all the considerable merit of their work, there
Was no substantial criticism or theory for which that work served as focus during
the period in question.)

just how any one of these terms was understood depended both upon the
range of examples in view and upon the commitments and investments in respect
of the other two which were at issue in any given context. To those for whom
Piet Mondrian was the type of the abstract artist, for example, abstraction and
Surrealism appeared irreconcilable. But the abstractions of Paul Klee and Joan
Miro were among the forms of painting claimed on behalf of the Surrealist
movement by that movement's principal theorist, Andre Breton. The form of
Realism proposed by George Grosz and Wieland Herzfelde in 1925 was openly
hostile to an abstract art they perceived as idealistic (IVc6). Yet ten years later
Herbert Read could claim that it was the abstract artists who were the true
revolutionaries, at the same time deprecating the Surrealists for their 'negativity'
(IVD3).

These were not simply squabbles over the demarcation of stylistic territories.
As Read's text makes clear, arguments about the meaning and value of artistic
commitments were effected, often unwittingly, by the gravitational force exer-
cised by larger allegiances, which were political in character. The principal forms
of these were Communism, Fascism and a third which consisted of that familiar
" not uncomplicated blend of liberal principles with capitalist economics which
^mains the dominant form of life in the industrialized nations of the West. If
this third allegiance lacked a clear and named identity in artistic debate, that
w *s because it tended to coincide with the position from which such debate was
generally conducted in the West, even by those attracted to Communism or to



334 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

Fascism. It was, as it were, the widely assumed state of human nature from
which the other allegiances were perceived as attractive or invidious forms of
political culture.

In sketching these two triads - abstraction, Realism and Surrealism on the
one hand, and Communism, Fascism and liberal-capitalism on the other - we
do not mean to suggest that systematic and exclusive forms of connection can
be drawn from the one set to the other. On the contrary. For example, while
there were certainly many Communists who were committed to forms of Realism
in the 1920s, and while the identification of Realism with Communism became
a cliche of art-critical discourse on both the Left and the Right during the
1930s, the same period furnishes evidence of the dedication of abstract art to
the task of building socialism (both in Russia and, as a less plausible enterprise,
in the abortive Weimar Republic), while the fact that it has been possible for
art historians to speak of 'Nazi Realism' indicates a persistent difficulty in
analysis of Realism as a practical concept. In turn, the association of Modernism
with an ideal and autonomous form of abstract art might seem to connect to
that tendency to 'spiritualize' social and economic values which Marx noted in
capitalism. But to insist on this connection would be both to minimize the
significance of Utopian socialism in the thinking of the artists concerned, and
to ignore their concerted opposition to capitalism in its Fascist form (see IVa6).
The evidence may show how important it was believed to be by many artists,
critics and ideologues that connections should be made between artistic forms
and political allegiances. But it also shows that attempts to make such connec-
tions systematic were doomed to failure then as now.

There can be no adequate understanding of the issues at stake in the artistic
theory of the 1920s and 1930s without allowing for the effects of the Russian
Revolution, both as its aftermath was experienced in subsequent Russian history,
and as its implications were perceived in the imagination of Western artists and
writers. Following the death of Lenin in 1924, Stalin's promulgation of the
doctrine of 'Socialism in one country' signalled the rejection of the internation-
alism of the revolution. With the benefit of hindsight it can be said that it also
signified the bureaucratic establishment of an iron pragmatism, to be im-
plemented in the later 1920s through the adoption of the Five Year Plan and
the collectivization of agriculture. The exiling of Trotsky at the end of the
decade marked not just the ending of a revolutionary phase, but the entrench-
ment of a counter-revolutionary regime.

But the mechanisms of repression are not easily distinguished from the hard
necessities which might be encountered in the building of a new socialist society.
Even for those directly touched by the events and processes in question there
can have been no clear point at which unjustifiable disloyalty to the revolution
was transformed into justified dissent at its betrayal. Georg Lukacs's ' "Tend-
ency" or Partisanship?' is revealing of the complex problems and perceptions
of its moment (IVbIO). Written in 1932, the year in which Russian literary
and artistic organizations came under central control (IVbII), it opposes the
ultra-Left tendentiousness of the Proletcult and argues for the identification of
partisanship with humanism; in the process it prepares some positive theoretical



IV Introduction 335

ground for the doctrine of Socialist Realism, which was to be given the stamp
of official policy by Stalin's son-in-law two years later (see IVB15). The idea
of a specifically Socialist Realism had been waiting in the wings for some time,
both as a form of affirmation of new social orders in Russia (IVB2-3) and Mexico
(IVB4), and as a voice of Left opposition to forms of abstract art (IVc6). But
even in Stalinist Russia, the practical and conceptual relations between Realism
and abstraction could be highly complex. In the same year that Lukacs's text
was written we find Kasimir Malevich, the consistent proponent of an extreme
abstraction and the butt of official criticism in the late 1920s, arguing the need
to establish pictorial identities for new social types (IVdI). During the 1930s,
the question of the relations between an intentionally popular Realism and an
avant-garde abstraction or 'Expressionism' was one which came to preoccupy
artists and intellectuals on the Left, not simply in Russia but throughout the
industrialized world (see, for example, IVB12-13 and 16-19, IVC17-18, IVD4,
8, 10).

Informed contributors to this debate were in a small minority, however. If
the true historical conditions of criticism and theory were hard to diagnose in
Russia itself, spectators in the West generally understood the effects of revol-
ution either in terms of echoes and whispers, or by listening to propaganda.
The majority of those drawn to the Communist Parties of the West tended to
believe Stalinist propaganda, supporting this where appropriate by extrapolations
from Marxist theory, in order to support a roseate view of Russian social and
cultural achievements. For the majority of this group abstract art and Surrealism
alike were suspect by virtue of their unpopularity - their implication with what
was seen as an elite social order. The conservatives, on the other hand, tended
to believe the propaganda of their own governments, threatened in imagination
if not in fact, according to which Bolshevik demons were engaged in the levelling
of all culture down to the lowest common denominator. For the majority of
this second group modern art was also unspeakable, so that it came easily to
them to identify modern art with revolutionary politics in general and with
bolshevism in particular.

Kulturbolschewismus - cultural bolshevism - was a blanket term of condem-
nation used by the Nazis to refer to forms of Expressionist and abstract art. By
the early 1930s the practice of modern art, like the pursuit of left-wing politics,
had become dangerous in Germany. By the mid-1 930s the Parisian art world
was substantially populated with exiles and emigrants from both Russia and
Germany, many of them Jews. Joining those already attracted to Paris as the
supposed metropolitan centre of artistic Modernism, they helped to form a
varied, homeless and cosmopolitan avant-garde. The publication of Circle in
London in 1937 both marked the establishment of close English contacts with
this community, and advertised London as a possible point of further migration
(see IVaIO-12).

If the effects of the Russian Revolution were determining directly or indirectly
u pon the cultural policies and theories of the West, the rise of Fascism was
clearly as pressing a consideration in the minds of those who perceived its
significance and its dangers. 1935 marked a point of convergence of these two



336 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

historical vectors. Following the Seventh World Congress of the Comintern in
July of that year Moscow issued a directive to the cohorts in the West both to
redirect their energies and to extend the political base of their organizations.
These were to form Popular Fronts against Fascism, thus broadening their
platform and their appeal in such a way as to conscript liberal opinion and to
establish common cause with other anti-Fascist organizations. It was to one of
many such bodies that the German Jewish intellectual Walter Benjamin had
delivered his paper 'The Author as Producer' (IVcl6). Benjamin's complex
argument takes account of the mixed complexion of the typical audience for
critical debate on the Left - part Stalinists committed to a form of Social
Realism, part liberal intellectuals persuaded of the autonomy of aesthetic value
- though his conclusion conformed to the expectations of neither. In 1936 the
apparent case for a Popular Front was strengthened by the overthrow of a
legitimate republican government by Fascist forces in Spain. The ensuing civil
war effected further polarization of Left and Right allegiances in the rest of
Europe. An event from this war, the bombing of Guernica by the German
Luftwaffe acting in alliance with the Spanish Fascists, was the subject of a
commemorative mural by Picasso. Widely exhibited between 1937 and 1939,
this monumental work provided a specific and dramatic focus for the conjunction
of artistic with political considerations.

It should be said that, if the policy of the Popular Front provided platforms
for anti-Fascist sentiment among artists and their supporters, this was not
because many of them were practical revolutionaries. On the contrary, it was
because that policy happened to coincide with a wider tendency within the
Modern Movement to transfer the concept of revolution from the sphere of
practical politics to the sphere of art, and to associate both with an absolute
freedom of thought and imagination. Conjoining the ideas of Marx with those
of Freud, the Surrealists saw themselves as working for what Salvador Dali
called 'a revolution in consciousness' (IVC14). In their turn the abstract artists
proposed a 'universal freedom' predicated on 'freedom of ideas' (IVA12).
Although the technical strategies were very different, both assumed a possible
'imaginative freedom' which their works were intended to exemplify or to
encourage. Pursuit of freedom in these terms became the common ethical
platform of modern artists in face of the political conditions of the time. By
the mid- 1930s the valuation of art as 'revolutionary' had come to fulfil much
the same function in the discourses of modern art as the discovery of formal
significance by the criticism of the previous two decades: it was the principal
seal of approval for which the respective advocates and supporters of abstract
art, of Realism and of Surrealism competed on behalf of one tendency or the
other.

We have noted the importance of Communism and Fascism as conditions
upon the artistic theory of the period between the wars, even where they are
unacknowledged as such. We also suggested earlier that a third form of allegiance
coincided with the ground from which the majority of this theory issued. In
conclusion we would propose that the most significant critical debate of the
later 1920s and 1930s was one which had as its central preoccupation the need



IV Introduction 337

to survey the ground of the third form of allegiance: the assumed natural order.
What was required was a self-conscious and sceptical representation of modern
Western culture itself and of its constitutive values; an analysis made as it were
from within, but by reference to concepts drawn from outside - the 'outside'
being that imagined world of modern political alternatives for which Commun-
ism and Fascism defined opposing poles, the one possibly positive, the other
decidely negative. The methodological instruments for this analysis were largely
found within the Marxist intellectual tradition. This was the task variously
addressed, at one time or another, by Andre Breton in France (IVc4-5), by
Siegfried Kracauer, Walter Benjamin, Theodor Adorno and Ernst Bloch in exile from
Germany (IVC9, 16, IVD6-8), and by Meyer Schapiro, Clement Greenberg and
Harold Rosenberg in America (IVd4, 10-11). (It is a measure of Britain's relative
disengagement from this debate, and of the price that was paid for this
disengagement, that Herbert Read's was the strongest native contribution.) What
distinguished these various writers was their common engagement with a
pressing and difficult question: what was to be revealed about the political and
ethical character of modern culture through the diagnosis of its artistic forms?
The question was both urgent and complex. Its urgency was revealed by the
prevalence of 'revolutionary' as a valuation for art, and by a sense of the
imminence and unpredictability of change; its complexity in the lack of syste-
matic connection between the two triads mentioned earlier. The critics who
addressed these conditions to best effect were those equipped to see through a
Realism which was generally not realistic to a Communism which was generally
not communistic. Prompted on occasion by the voice of the exiled Trotsky
(IVD9), they deduced the common totalitarian character of Stalinism and
Fascism from the stylistic and ethical character of the sponsored art. They
diagnosed a failure of modernity, and they drew the surprising conclusion: that
Modernism and Realism were not each other's stylistic opposites but rather each
other's necessary cultural and ethical conditions: that, whatever their respective
stylistic forms might be, Modernism, in effect, was Realism, and vice versa.



IVa The Modern as Ideal 339



IVa

The Modern as Ideal



1 Walter Gropius (1883-1969) 'The Theory and
Organization of the Bauhaus'

The author was the founder and first Director of the Bauhaus, established in Weimar in
1919. The reputation of the Bauhaus rests largely on its early promulgation of integrated
modern design principles with a view to their industrial implementation. The institution's
origins, however, were in the confused conditions of the end of a world war, the eruption
and failure of a revolution, and the establishment of bourgeois democracy in the Weimar
Republic. Accordingly a utopianism inseparable from this moment coexists in tension
with a more orthodox technological and rationalistic element, particularly in early
Bauhaus pronouncements. Originally published as Wee und Aufbau des Staatlichen
Bauhaus Weimar by the Bauhaus Press (Bauhausverlag), Munich, 1923. The present
extracts are taken from the translation in Herbert Bayer, Walter Gropius and Ise Gropius
(eds.J, Bauhaus 1919-1928, New York (Museum of Modern Art), 1938.

The dominant spirit of our epoch is already recognizable although its form is
not yet clearly defined. The old dualistic world-concept which envisaged the
ego in opposition to the universe is rapidly losing ground. In its place is rising
the idea of a universal unity in which all opposing forces exist in a state of
absolute balance. This dawning recognition of the essential oneness of all things
and their appearances endows creative effort with a fundamental inner meaning.
No longer can anything exist in isolation. We perceive every form as the
embodiment of an idea, every piece of work as a manifestation of our innermost
selves. Only work which is the product of inner compulsion can have spiritual
meaning. Mechanized work is lifeless, proper only to the lifeless machine. So
long, however, as machine-economy remains an end in itself rather than a means
of freeing the intellect from the burden of mechanical labor, the individual will
remain enslaved and society will remain disordered. The solution depends on a
change in the individual's attitude toward his work, not on the betterment of
his outward circumstances, and the acceptance of this new principle is of decisive
importance for new creative work.



The 'academy'

The tool of the spirit of yesterday was the 'academy.' It shut off the artist from
the world of industry and handicraft, and thus brought about his complete
isolation from the community. In vital epochs, on the other hand, the artist
enriched all the arts and crafts of a community because he had a part in its
vocational life, and because he acquired through actual practice as much
adeptness and understanding as any other worker who began at the bottom and
worked his way up. But lately the artist has been misled by the fatal and arrogant
fallacy, fostered by the state, that art is a profession which can be mastered by
study. Schooling alone can never produce art! Whether the finished product is
an exercise in ingenuity or a work of art depends on the talent of the individual
who creates it. This quality cannot be taught and cannot be learned. On the
other hand, manual dexterity and the thorough knowledge which is a necessary
foundation for all creative effort, whether the workman's or the artist's, can be
taught and learned.

Isolation of the artist

Academic training, however, brought about the development of a great art-prole-
tariat destined to social misery. For this art-proletariat, lulled into a dream of
genius and enmeshed in artistic conceit, was being prepared for the 'profession'
of architecture, painting, sculpture or graphic art, without being given the
equipment of a real education - which alone could have assured it of economic
and esthetic independence. Its abilities, in the final analysis, were confined to
a sort of drawing-painting that had no relation to the realities of materials,
techniques or economics. Lack of all vital connection with the life of the
community led inevitably to barren esthetic speculation. The fundamental
pedagogic mistake of the academy arose from its preoccupation with the idea
of the individual genius and its discounting the value of commendable achieve-
ment on a less exalted level. Since the academy trained a myriad of minor talents
in drawing and painting, of whom scarcely one in a thousand became a genuine
architect or painter, the great mass of these individuals, fed upon false hopes
and trained as one-sided academicians, was condemned to a life of fruitless
artistic activity. Unequipped to function successfully in the struggle for exist-
ence, they found themselves numbered among the social drones, useless, by
Virtue of their schooling, in the productive life of the nation.
* With the development of the academies genuine folk art died away. What
remained was a drawing-room art detached from life. In the 19th century this
dwindled to the production of individual paintings totally divorced from any
relation to an architectural entity. The second half of the 19th century saw the
beginning of a protest against the devitalizing influence of the academies. Ruskin
and Morris in England, van de Velde in Belgium, Olbrich, Behrens and others
in Germany, and, finally, the Deutsche Werkbund, all sought, and in the end
discovered, the basis of a reunion between creative artists and the industrial
world. In Germany, arts and crafts (Kunstgewerbe) schools were founded for



340 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

the purpose of developing, in a new generation, talented individuals trained in
industry and handicraft. But the academy was too firmly established: practical
training never advanced beyond dilettantism, and draughted and rendered
'design' remained in the foreground. The foundations of this attempt were laid
neither wide enough nor deep enough to avail much against the old Van pour
Vart attitude, so alien to, and so far removed from life. [. . .]

Analysis of the designing process

The objective of all creative effort in the visual arts is to give form to space.
. . . But what is space, how can it be understood and given a form?

. . . Although we may achieve an awareness of the infinite we can give form
to space only with finite means. We become aware of space through our
undivided Ego, through the simultaneous activity of soul, mind and body. A
like concentration of all our forces is necessary to give it form. Through his
intuition, through his metaphysical powers, man discovers the immaterial space
of inward vision and inspiration. This conception of space demands realization
in the material world, a realization which is accomplished by the brain and the
hands.

The brain conceives of mathematical space in terms of numbers and dimensions.
. . . The hand masters matter through the crafts, and with the help of tools and
machinery.

Conception and visualization are always simultaneous. Only the individual's
capacity to feel, to know and to execute varies in degree and in speed. True
creative work can be done only by the man whose knowledge and mastery of
the physical laws of statics, dynamics, optics, acoustics equip him to give life
and shape to his inner vision. In a work of art the laws of the physical world,
the intellectual world and the world of the spirit function and are expressed
simultaneously.

The Bauhaus at Weimar

Every factor that must be considered in an educational system which is to
produce actively creative human beings is implicit in such an analysis of the
creative process. At the 'State Bauhaus at Weimar' the attempt was made for
the first time to incorporate all these factors in a consistent program.

[ . . . ] The theoretical curriculum of an art academy combined with the
practical curriculum of an arts and crafts school was to constitute the basis of
a comprehensive system for gifted students. Its credo was: 'The Bauhaus strives
to coordinate all creative effort, to achieve, in a new architecture, the unification
of all training in art and design. The ultimate, if distant, goal of the Bauhaus is
the collective work of art - the Building - in which no barriers exist between
the structural and the decorative arts.

The guiding principle of the Bauhaus was therefore the idea of creating a
new unity through the welding together of many 'arts' and movements: a unity
having its basis in Man himself and significant only as a living organism.



IVa The Modern as Ideal 341

Human achievement depends on the proper coordination of all the creative
faculties. It is not enough to school one or another of them separately: they
must all be thoroughly trained at the same time. The character and scope of
the Bauhaus teachings derive from the realization of this.



The Curriculum

The course of instruction at the Bauhaus is divided into:

* * *

The Preliminary Course (Vorlehre)

Practical and theoretical studies are carried on simultaneously in order to release
the creative powers of the student, to help him grasp the physical nature of
materials and the basic laws of design. Concentration on any particular stylistic
movement is studiously avoided. Observation and representation - with the
intention of showing the desired identity of Form and Content - define the
limits of the preliminary course. Its chief function is to liberate the individual
by breaking down conventional patterns of thought in order to make way for
personal experiences and discoveries which will enable him to see his own
potentialities and limitations. For this reason collective work is not essential in
the preliminary course. Both subjective and objective observation will be culti-
vated: both the system of abstract laws and the interpretation of objective matter.

Above all else, the discovery and proper valuation of the individual's means
of expression shall be sought out. The creative possibilities of individuals vary.
One finds his elementary expressions in rhythm, another in light and shade, a
third in color, a fourth in materials, a fifth in sound, a sixth in proportion, a
seventh in volumes or abstract space, an eighth in the relations between one
and another, or between the two to a third or fourth.

All the work produced in the preliminary course is done under the influence
of instructors. It possesses artistic quality only in so far as any direct and
logically developed expression of an individual which serves to lay the founda-
tions of creative discipline can be called art.

 * *

Instruction in form problems

Intellectual education runs parallel to manual training. The apprentice is ac-
quainted with his future stock-in-trade - the elements of form and color and
the laws to which they are subject. Instead of studying the arbitrary individ-
ualistic and stylized formulae current at the academies, he is given the mental
equipment with which to shape his own ideas of form. This training opens the
w ay for the creative powers of the individual, establishing a basis on which
different individuals can cooperate without losing their artistic independence.
Collective architectural work becomes possible only when every individual,



342 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

prepared by proper schooling, is capable of understanding the idea of the whole,
and thus has the means harmoniously to coordinate his independent, even if
limited, activity with the collective work. Instruction in the theory of form is
carried on in close contact with manual training. Drawing and planning, thus
losing their purely academic character, gain new significance as auxiliary means
of expression. We must know both vocabulary and grammar in order to speak
a language; only then can we communicate our thoughts. Man, who creates and
constructs, must learn the specific language of construction in order to make
others understand his idea. Its vocabulary consists of the elements of form and
color and their structural laws. The mind must know them and control the hand
if a creative idea is to be made visible. The musician who wants to make audible
a musical idea needs for its rendering not only a musical instrument but also a
knowledge of theory. Without this knowledge, his idea will never emerge from
chaos.

A corresponding knowledge of theory - which existed in a more vigorous era
- must again be established as a basis for practice in the visual arts. The
academies, whose task it might have been to cultivate and develop such a theory,
completely failed to do so, having lost contact with reality. Theory is not a
recipe for the manufacturing of works of art, but the most essential element of
collective construction; it provides the common basis on which many individuals
are able to create together a superior unit of work; theory is not the achievement
of individuals but of generations.

The Bauhaus is consciously formulating a new coordination of the means of
construction and expression. Without this, its ultimate aim would be impossible.
For collaboration in a group is not to be obtained solely by correlating the
abilities and talents of various individuals. Only an apparent unity can be
achieved if many helpers carry out the designs of a single person. In fact, the
individual's labor within the group should exist as his own independent accom-
plishment. Real unity can be achieved only by coherent restatement of the formal
theme, by repetition of its integral proportions in all parts of the work. Thus
everyone engaged in the work must understand the meaning and origin of the
principal theme.

Forms and colors gain meaning only as they are related to our inner selves.
Used separately or in relation to one another they are the means of expressing
different emotions and movements: they have no importance of their own. Red,
for instance, evokes in us other emotions than does blue or yellow; round forms
speak differently to us than do pointed or jagged forms. The elements which
constitute the 'grammar' of creation are its rules of rhythm, of proportion, of
light values and full or empty space. Vocabulary and grammar can be learned,
but the most important factor of all, the organic life of the created work,
originates in the creative powers of the individual.

The practical training which accompanies the studies in form is founded as
much on observation, on the exact representation or reproduction of nature, as
it is on the creation of individual compositions. These two activities are
profoundly different. The academies ceased to discriminate between them,
confusing nature and art - though by their very origin they are antithetical. Art





iva The Modern as Ideal 343

wants to triumph over Nature and to resolve the opposition in a new unity,
and this process is consummated in the fight of the spirit against the material
world. The spirit creates for itself a new life other than the life of nature.

Each of these departments in the course on the theory of form functions in
close association with the workshops, an association which prevents their
wandering off into academicism.
* * *

The goal of the Bauhaus curriculum

... the culminating point of the Bauhaus teaching is a demand for a new and
powerful working correlation of ail the processes of creation. The gifted student
must regain a feeling for the interwoven strands of practical and formal work.
The joy of building, in the broadest meaning of that word, must replace the
paper work of design. Architecture unites in a collective task all creative workers,
from the simple artisan to the supreme artist.

For this reason, the basis of collective education must be sufficiently broad
to permit the development of every kind of talent. Since a universally applicable
method for the discovery of talent does not exist, the individual in the course
of his development must find for himself the field of activity best suited to him
within the circle of the community. The majority become interested in produc-
tion; the few extraordinarily gifted ones will suffer no limits to their activity.
After they have completed the course of practical and formal instruction, they
undertake independent research and experiment.

Modern painting, breaking through old conventions, has released countless
suggestions which are still waiting to be used by the practical world. But when,
in the future, artists who sense new creative values have had practical training
in the industrial world, they will themselves possess the means for realizing
those values immediately. They will compel industry to serve their idea and
industry will seek out and utilize their comprehensive training.



2 Paul Klee (1879-1940) from On Modern Art

Swiss by birth, Klee spent most of his working life in Germany, latterly at the Bauhaus,
until forced into exile by the victory of the Nazis in 1933. For much of this time he was
involved in a creative dialogue with Kandinsky. 'On Modern Art' was first delivered as a
lecture to the Jena Kunstverein in 1924. It was first published, as Paul Klee: Ober die
m oderne Kunst, by the Verlag Benteli, Bern-Bumpliz, in 1945. The present extracts are
taken from the translation by Paul Findlay in Herbert Read (intro.), Paul Klee: On Modern
At, London, 1948.

May I use a simile, the simile of the tree? The artist has studied this world of
variety and has, we may suppose, unobtrusively found his way in it. His sense
f direction has brought order into the passing stream of image and experience.



344 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

This sense of direction in nature and life, this branching and spreading array,
I shall compare with the root of the tree.

From the root the sap flows to the artist, flows through him, flows to his eye.

Thus he stands as the trunk of the tree.

Battered and stirred by the strength of the flow, he molds his vision into his
work.

As, in full view of the world, the crown of the tree unfolds and spreads in time
and in space, so with his work.

Nobody would affirm that the tree grows its crown in the image of its root.
Between above and below can be no mirrored reflection. It is obvious that
different functions expanding in different elements must produce vital diver-
gences.

But it is just the artist who at times is denied those departures from nature
which his art demands. He has even been charged with incompetence and
deliberate distortion.

And yet, standing at his appointed place, the trunk of the tree, he does nothing
other than gather and pass on what comes to him from the depths. He neither
serves nor rules - he transmits.

His position is humble. And the beauty at the crown is not his own. He is
merely a channel.

* * *

The creation of a work of art - the growth of the crown of the tree - must of
necessity, as a result of entering into the specific dimensions of pictorial art,
be accompanied by distortion of the natural form. For, therein is nature reborn.

What, then, are these specific dimensions?

First, there are the more or less limited, formal factors, such as line, tone value,
and color.

Of these, line is the most limited, being solely a matter of simple Measure. Its
properties are length (long or short), angles (obtuse or acute), length of radius
and focal distance. All are quantities subject to measurement.

Measure is the characteristic of this element. Where the possibility of measure-
ment is in doubt, line cannot have been handled with absolute purity.

Of a quite different nature is tone value, or, as it is also called, chiaroscuro -
the many degrees of shading between black and white. This second element can
be characterized by Weight. One stage may be more or less rich in white energy,
another more or less weighted toward the black. The various stages can be
weighed against one another. Further, the blacks can be related to a white norm
(on a white background) and the whites to a black norm (on a blackboard). Or
both together can be referred to a medium grey norm.



iva The Modern as Ideal 345

Thirdly, color, which clearly has quite different characteristics. For it can be
neither weighed nor measured. Neither with scales nor with ruler can any
difference be detected between two surfaces, one a pure yellow and the other
a pure red, of similar area and similar brilliance. And yet, an essential difference
remains, which we, in words, label yellow and red.

In the same way, salt and sugar can be compared, in their saltiness and
sweetness.

Hence, color may be defined as Quality.

We now have three formal means at our disposal - Measure, Weight, and Quality,
which in spite of fundamental differences, have a definite interrelationship.

The form of this relationship will be shown by the following short analysis.

Color is primarily Quality. Secondly, it is also Weight, for it has not only color
value but also brilliance. Thirdly, it is Measure, for besides Quality and Weight,
it has its limits, its area, and its extent, all of which may be measured.

Tone value is primarily Weight, but in its extent and its boundaries, it is also
Measure.

Line, however, is solely Measure.

Thus, we have found three quantities which all intersect in the region of pure
color, two only in the region of pure contrast, and only one extends to the
region of pure line.

These three quantities impart character, each according to its individual con-
tribution - three interlocked compartments. The largest compartment contains
three quantities, the medium two, and the smallest only one. [. . .]

This shows a remarkable intermixture of our quantities and it is only logical
that the same high order should be shown in the clarity with which they are
used. It is possible to produce quite enough combinations as it is.

Vagueness in one's work is therefore only permissible when there is a real inner
need. A need which could explain the use of colored or very pale lines, or the
application of further vagueness such as the shades of grey ranging from yellow
to blue.

*. * *

Leaving this subject of formal elements I now come to the first construction
using the three categories of elements which have just been enumerated.

This is the climax of our conscious creative effort.
This is the essence of our craft.
This is critical.

From this point, given mastery of the medium, the structure can be assured
foundations of such strength that it is able to reach out into dimensions far
removed from conscious endeavor.



346 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

This phase of formation has the same critical importance in the negative sense.
It is the point where one can miss the greatest and most important aspects of
content and thus fail, although possibly possessing the most exquisite talent.
For one may simply lose one's bearings on the formal plane. Speaking from my
own experience, it depends on the mood of the artist at the time which of the
many elements are brought out of their general order, out of their appointed
array, to be raised together to a new order and form an image which is normally
called the subject.

This choice of formal elements and the form of their mutual relationship is,
within narrow limits, analogous to the idea of motif and theme in musical
thought.

With the gradual growth of such an image before the eyes an association of
ideas gradually insinuates itself which may tempt one to a material interpreta-
tion. For any image of complex structure can, with some effort of imagination,
be compared with familiar pictures from nature.

These associative properties of the structure, once exposed and labelled, no
longer correspond wholly to the direct will of the artist (at least not to his most
intensive will) and just these associative properties have been the source of
passionate misunderstandings between artist and layman.

While the artist is still exerting all his efforts to group the formal elements
purely and logically so that each in its place is right and none clashes with the
other, a layman, watching from behind, pronounces the devastating words 'But
that isn't a bit like uncle. 1

The artist, if his nerve is disciplined, thinks to himself, 'To hell with uncle! I
must get on with my building. . . . This new brick is a little too heavy and to
my mind puts too much weight on the left; I must add a good-sized counter-
weight on the right to restore the equilibrium.'

And he adds this side and that until finally the scales show a balance.

And he is relieved if, in the end, the shaking which he has perforce had to give
his original pure structure of good elements, has only gone so far as to provide
that opposition which exists as contrast in a living picture.

But sooner or later, the association of ideas may of itself occur to him, without
the intervention of a layman. Nothing need then prevent him from accepting
it, provided that it introduces itself under its proper title.

Acceptance of this material association may suggest additions which, once the
subject is formulated, clearly stand in essential relationship to it. If the artist
is fortunate, these natural forms may fit into a slight gap in the formal
composition, as though they had always belonged there.

The argument is therefore concerned less with the question of the existence of
an object, than with its appearance at any given moment - with its nature.



IVa The Modern as Ideal 347

I only hope that the layman who, in a picture, always looks for his favorite
subject, will, as far as I am concerned, gradually die out and remain to me
nothing but a ghost which cannot help its failings. [. . .]

* * *

Certain proportions of line, the combination of certain tones from the scale of
tone values, certain harmonies of color, carry with them at the time quite
distinctive and outstanding modes of expression.

The linear proportions can, for example, refer to angles: movements which are
angular and zigzag - as opposed to smooth and horizontal - strike resonances
of expression which are similarly contrasting.

In the same way a conception of contrast can be given by two forms of linear
construction, the one consisting of a firmly jointed structure and the other of
lines loosely scattered.

Contrasting modes of expression in the region of tone value are given by:

The wide use of all tones from black to white, implying full-bodied strength.

Or the limited use of the upper light half or the lower dark half of the scale.

Or medium shades around the grey which imply weakness through too much
or too little light.

Or timid shadows from the middle. These, again, show great contrasts in
meaning.

And what tremendous possibilities for the variation of meaning are offered by
the combination of colors.

Color as tone value: e.g. red in red, i.e. the entire range from a deficiency to
an excess of red, either widely extended, or limited in range. Then the same
in yellow (something quite different). The same in blue - what contrasts!

Or colors diametrically opposed - i.e. changes from red to green, from yellow
to purple, from blue to orange.

Tremendous fragments of meaning.

Or changes of color in the direction of chords, not touching the grey center,
but meeting in a region of warmer or cooler grey.

What subtleties of shading compared with the former contrasts.

Or: color changes in the direction of arcs of the circle, from yellow through orange
to red or from red through violet to blue, or far flung over the whole circumference.

What tremendous variations from the smallest shading to the glowing symphony
of color. What perspectives in the dimension of meaning!

Or finally, journeys through the whole field of color, including the grey center,
and even touching the scale from black to white.



348 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

Only on a new dimension can one go beyond these last possibilities. We could
now consider what is the proper place for the assorted colors, for each assortment
clearly possesses its possibilities of combination.

And each formation, each combination will have its own particular constructive
expression, each figure its face - its features.

* * *

I would like now to examine the dimensions of the object in a new light and
so try to show how it is that the artist frequently arrives at what appears to be
such an arbitrary 'deformation' of natural forms.

First, he does not attach such intense importance to natural form as do so many
realist critics, because, for him, these final forms are not the real stuff of the
process of natural creation. For he places more value on the powers which do
the forming than on the final forms themselves.

He is, perhaps unintentionally, a philosopher, and if he does not, with the
optimists, hold this world to be the best of all possible worlds, nor to be so
bad that it is unfit to serve as a model, yet he says:

'In its present shape it is not the only possible world.'

Thus he surveys with penetrating eye the finished forms which nature places
before him.

The deeper he looks, the more readily he can extend his view from the present
to the past, the more deeply he is impressed by the one essential image of creation
itself, as Genesis, rather than by the image of nature, the finished product.

Then he permits himself the thought that the process of creation can today
hardly be complete and he sees the act of world creation stretching from the
past to the future. Genesis eternal!

He goes still further!

He says to himself, thinking of life around him: this world at one time looked
different and, in the future, will look different again.

Then, flying off to the infinite, he thinks: it is very probable that, on other
stars, creation has produced a completely different result.

Such mobility of thought on the process of natural creation is good training for
creative work.

It has the power to move the artist fundamentally, and since he is himself
mobile, he may be relied upon to maintain freedom of development of his own
creative methods.

This being so, the artist must be forgiven if he regards the present state of
outward appearances in his own particular world as accidentally fixed in time
and space. And as altogether inadequate compared with his penetrating vision
and intense depth of feeling.




IVa The Modem as Ideal 349



* * *



These unsettled times have brought chaos and confusion (or so it seems, if we
are not too near to judge).

gut among artists, even among the youngest of them, one urge seems to be
gradually gaining ground:

The urge to the culture of these creative means, to their pure cultivation, to
their pure use.

The legend of the childishness of my drawing must have originated from those
linear compositions of mine in which I tried to combine a concrete image, say
that of a man, with the pure representation of the linear element.

Had I wished to present the man 'as he is,' then I should have had to use such
a bewildering confusion of line that pure elementary representation would have
been out of the question. The result would have been vagueness beyond
recognition.

And anyway, I do not wish to represent the man as he is, but only as he might
be.

And thus I could arrive at a happy association between my vision of life
[Weltanschauung] and pure artistic craftsmanship.

And so it is over the whole field of use of the formal means: in all things, even
in colors, must all trace of vagueness be avoided.

This then is what is called the untrue coloring in modern art.

As you can see from this example of 'childishness' I concern myself with work
on the partial processes of art. I am also a draughtsman.

I have tried pure drawing, I have tried painting in pure tone values. In color,
I have tried all partial methods to which I have been led by my sense of direction
in the color circle. As a result, I have worked out methods of painting in colored
tone values, in complementary colors, in multicolors and methods of total color
painting.

Always combined with the more subconscious dimensions of the picture.

Then I tried all possible syntheses of two methods. Combining and again
combining, but, of course, always preserving the culture of the pure element.

Sometimes I dream of a work of really great breadth, ranging through the whole
region of element, object, meaning, and style.

^his, I fear, will remain a dream, but it is a good thing even now to bear the
possibility occasionally in mind.

Nothing can be rushed. It must grow, it should grow of itself, and if the time
e ver comes for that work - then so much the better!



350 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

We must go on seeking it!
We have found parts, but not the whole!
We still lack the ultimate power, for:
the people are not with us.

But we seek a people. We began over there in the Bauhaus. We began there
with a community to which each one of us gave what he had.
More we cannot do.



3 Hart Crane (1899-1932) 'General Aims and
Theories'

The author was an American poet. This theoretical essay outlines a characteristically
Modernist view on the relation between the contingencies of history and the apparently
timeless demands of aesthetics. It was written in 1925. This version taken from Philip
Horton, Hart Crane: The Life of an American Poet, New York, 1976.

It is a terrific problem that faces the poet today - a world that is so in transition
from a decayed culture toward a reorganization of human evaluations that there
are few common terms, general denominators of speech that are solid enough
or that ring with any vibration or spiritual conviction. The great mythologies
of the past (including the Church) are deprived of enough facade to even launch
good raillery against. Yet much of their traditions are operative still - in millions
of chance combinations of related and unrelated detail, psychological reference,
figures of speech, precepts, etc. These are all a part of our common experience
and the terms, at least partially, of that very experience when it defines or
extends itself.

The deliberate program, then, of a 'break' with the past or tradition seems
to me to be a sentimental fallacy [ . . . ]

I put no particular value on the simple objective of 'modernity.' The element
of the temporal location of an artist's creation is of very secondary importance;
it can be left to the impressionist or historian just as well. It seems to me that
a poet will accidentally define his time well enough simply by reacting honestly
and to the full extent of his sensibilities to the states of passion, experience and
rumination that fate forces on him, first hand. He must, of course, have a
sufficiently universal basis of experience to make his imagination selective and
valuable. His picture of the 'period,' then, will simply be a by-product of his
curiosity and the relation of his experience to a postulated 'eternity.'

I am concerned with the future of America, but not because I think that
America has any so-called par value as a state or as a group of people ... It is
only because I feel persuaded that here are destined to be discovered certain as
yet undefined spiritual quantities, perhaps a new hierarchy of faith not to be
developed so completely elsewhere. And in this process I like to feel myself as
a potential factor; certainly I must speak in its terms and what discoveries I
may make are situated in its experience.





IVa The Modern as Ideal 351

But to fool one's self that definitions are being reached by merely referring
frequently to skyscrapers, radio antennae, steam whistles, or other surface
phenomena of our time is merely to paint a photograph. I think that what is
interesting and significant will emerge only under the conditions of our sub-
mission to, and examination and assimilation of the organic effects on us of
these and other fundamental factors of our experience. It can certainly not be
an organic expression otherwise. [. . .]

It may not be possible to say that there is, strictly speaking, any 'absolute'
experience. But it seems evident that certain aesthetic experience (and this may
for a time engross the total faculties of the spectator) can be called absolute,
inasmuch as it approximates a formally convincing statement of a conception or
apprehension of life that gains our unquestioning assent, and under the condi-
tions of which our imagination is unable to suggest a further detail consistent
with the design of the aesthetic whole.

* * *

It is my hope to go through the combined materials of the poem, using our
'real' world somewhat as a spring-board, and to give the poem as a whole an
orbit or predetermined direction of its own. I would like to establish it as free
from my own personality as from any chance evaluation on the reader's part.
(This is, of course, an impossibility, but it is a characteristic worth mentioning.)
Such a poem is at least a stab at a truth, and to such an extent may be
differentiated from other kinds of poetry and called 'absolute.' Its evocation will
not be toward decoration or amusement, but rather toward a state of conscious-
ness, an 'innocence' (Blake) or absolute beauty. In this condition there may be
discoverable under new forms certain spiritual illuminations, shining with a
morality essentialized from experience directly, and not from previous precepts
or preconceptions. It is as though a poem gave the reader as he left it a single,
new word, never before spoken and impossible to actually enunciate, but
self-evident as an active principle in the reader's consciousness henceforward.

* * *

I know that I run the risk of much criticism by defending such theories as
I have, but as it is part of a poet's business to risk not only criticism - but
folly - in the conquest of consciousness I can only say that I attach no intrinsic
value to what means I use beyond their practical service in giving form to the
living stuff of the imagination.

New conditions of life germinate new forms of spiritual articulation. [. . .]



4 Amedee Ozenfant (1886-1966) from Foundations of
Modern Art

Ozenfanfs close collaboration with Jeanneret/Le Corbusier had ended in 1925 with the
final issue of L'Esprit Nouveau. Thereafter he took a less exclusive position, worked
with Leger, visited the Bauhaus, and opened his own academy in Paris. His Foundations
f Modern Art is a characteristic statement of European Modernism: focusing on
the autonomy of art and the innateness of our feelings for it, yet universalizing its



352 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

supposedly underlying principles to the point of claiming their identity with the principles
of nature itself. Originally published in Paris, 1928, and widely translated and reprinted.
First English translation, New York, 1931, from which this extract is taken.

To succeed in assuaging reality a work of art should:

1 Respect the profound and innate sense in us of nature's fundamental
reactions, and not too much outrage them: for then we are led to compare
the work with its subject, which brings us back to the literal reality (as a
monster reminds us of the normal creature).

2 Yet remain, nevertheless, at such a distance from nature's aspects that the
disturbance introduced into habitual aspects may deprive us momentarily of
our rationalizing facilities. Thus some illogical woman's argument, falling
suddenly into a closely reasoned discussion, unhorses the arguers and makes
us ponder.

Being no longer controlled by the powerful impulses of 'common sense,' and
the 'normal,' the valves of our unconscious open, and permit the fusion of our
slumbering, suppressed, or unwitted potentialities. Thus a world of new sensa-
tions and awareness comes into being. Faustian joys!

The problem is how to create a form of hallucination that will be a substitute
for the simple perception of the work of art as an object (poem, music, painting,
or architecture). [. . .]

The work should convey a feeling that it conforms profoundly to the dictates
of nature (which does not mean to say that it must keep to habitual aspects of
it). In order to make this rather vague formula clearer, an example will suffice:
paint the statue of some Pharaoh violet or green, and the effect will be
ridiculous, a fine organic thing ruined; yet every day we see these same faults,
which add a certain piquancy to certain kinds of painting, but not for long.

So when we admire some natural object, it is merely because the harmony of
form and colour affects us? No, it is because, above all, we have an instinct in
us, and at times an awareness, more or less conscious, of the ordering of the
universe: and the object we admire answers to that order, and reveals to us the
measure of its adaptation. [. . .]

The sea moves. In that infinite monotony nothing catches the eye. Suddenly
a wave unfurls its perfect spirals. The sea is performing a precise act. It is as
though the whole ocean were compact in that perfect wave. Sometimes nature
seems to have attained the creation of a perfect type: that is, has objectified a
conception clearly formulated. A law has been adhered to closely. Thus we are
enabled to read one of nature's metrical verses. It fits in well with our geometry.

Bees construct their cells to an obvious geometry: solutions crystallize out in
constant forms: waves are propagated according to curves that can be formulated
and reduced to equations: capitals curl on themselves like Ionic shells. Joy for
the senses and the mind. The geometer, the analyst, at the same moment light
on concordances that seem miraculous to us. Is the world geometric? Is geometry
the thread that man has seized which links all things? Or is it that the laws
which guide the brain are geometric, and so it is able to perceive only what fits




IVa The Modern as Ideal 353

into its warp and woof? The fact remains that seekers discover either algebraic
or geometric relations. The abundance of concordances has caused the wisest
critics to affirm, that if a particular hypothesis be justifiable, the others certainly
are not. I believe, rather, that in such multiple concordances the proof should
be seen that everything depends on the laws of our intelligences, and that the
diverse modalities of geometric or algebraic analysis, since they are but diverse
forms of our thinking, must inevitably harmonize with each-other. They but
render, in various languages, the same phenomena.

Everything appears to develop according to mathematical 'forms,' which
happen in fact to be elementary forms of the language of art: of all the arts. It
is inspiring, but the contrary would be incomprehensible to us: yet what is most
astonishing is that we are astonished by it. How could geometry and algebra,
abstract transfers of the concrete universe, not reveal systematic concordances
between us and the universe?

Mathematical constants adapt themselves equally well to Egyptian or Greek
art. They apply also to those natural objects we call beautiful. Does that mean
that artists were conscious of nature's norms, and used them in their art? Or
does it mean only that every effort of creation, to be truly great, must submit
to certain constant laws? We cannot say. Yet it is true that the Egyptians, Arabs,
Persians, and certain men of the Renaissance like Piero della Francesca and
Leonardo, were mad on mathematics, and applied certain arithmetical or geo-
metrical principles to their art. On the other hand, we can assert, that although
certain moderns ignore such principles, there are many who pay great attention
to them. What is important is to be able, even remotely, to intuit or feel certain
constants. It matters little whether they be arithmetical, geometrical, logarith-
mical, or appertain to some other system: the important thing is that they should
be present. If they are, even though too uncertain to constitute a precise technic,
yet they will be certain enough to fecundate a trend, a spirit, an ethic, an
aesthetic.

That is why art, in the highest sense, cannot be free. For a work to be great
a certain harmony between man and nature must come into being. Fine naturally
beautiful things are the product of instinctive art. Nature, instinct, intellect,
sometimes converge, blending into forms that inspire us. When the artist
succeeds in creating some such miracle, it may be he is unveiling the abscissa
and coordinates of the perceptible universe: or alternatively, those of our deepest
depths: which comes to the same thing.

I suggest that it is possible that forms are the consequence of a sort of call
from space! Matter, by which I mean the densest waves, would appear to
infiltrate itself, as into a mould, into such space as offers least resistance to it:
it then becomes perceptible to us.

How much more beautiful and moving is the universe when conceived as
ethereal palpitation of those waves which make up all things, and yet are nothing
rf universal laws have not moulded them into structures perceptible to our senses
and intellect, which themselves are adapted to the universal structure, and to
u s. Out of chaos we make a world, a consequence of art, which in return reveals
ur proper structure to us.



354 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

Structures are all we can perceive. Thus it is that the universe is only
'structure,' and that the Artist is the God of man. [. . .]



5 Hans Hofmann (1880-1966) 'On The Aims of Art'

The author, German by birth, was active in the early twentieth-century European avant-
garde before emigrating to America. In New York in the 1930s he ran a school of
painting which was influential on those who were to constitute the post-war American
avant-garde, particularly the critic Clement Greenberg. The present essay anticipates
many of the emphases of Greenberg's writings, particularly in its stress on the medium,
the picture plane, and the unity of the work. Written in Bad Toelz, Germany, in late
1931, the essay was translated into English at a time when Hofmann was teaching
occasional courses in California. It was originally published in The Fortnightly, vol. 1,
no. 13, Campbell, California, 26 February 1932, pp. 7-11, from which the present
extracts are taken.

[. . .] The medium which is used in creating becomes the work of art if the
principles and meaning, the essential nature of the medium are mastered and
if the artist is intuitive in spirit. For artistic intuition emanates from the cosmos
and embraces the whole world. The vaulting, creative mind recognizes no
boundaries to its realm, the mind has ever brought new spheres under control.
Artistic intuition is the basis for confidence of the spirit. Art is always spiritual,
a result of introspection, finding expression through the natural entity of the
medium. Every medium of expression has its own laws; founded on these laws
it can be made to resonate and vibrate when stimulated by the impulses coming
directly from the natural world, when the artist is equipped with finely balanced
sense and mentality, conscious feeling and memory. The artist intensifies his
concepts, condenses his experience into a spiritual reality complete in itself and
thus creates a new reality in terms of the medium. Thus is the work of art a world
in itself but reflecting the sensorial and emotional world for the artist. [. . .]
* * #

The artist must follow his inner leading independent of fads and fashions,
therefore art education should take this individual inner direction more seriously
than is done at present. Art teaching is not soap manufacture. The value in the
artist is apt to be that of differences rather than that of likeness.

It would be nonsense to graft an education foreign to this inner direction
onto an introspective personality - a character able to pursue deep study. Should
the lark sing like the nightingale? There are inward looking personalities,
introverts, and outward looking, extroverts. The character seeking purely the
external values never possesses the true inner greatness unless the external
expression is but a final stage of deep inner development, of introspection. Just
so, the purely external estimates of a work of art for instance the measures of
the format - the size of the painting - are of no importance whatsoever in
judging its real value. An etching may be greater than acres of murals. A violin
solo may be greater than a symphony, when judged as pure art. Scope of




IVa The Modern as Ideal 355

influence is not a measure of artistic quality. The only values which make a
work of art great are emotional and sensory. Life-content. Expressed experience.
Sensory raw material blended to a spiritual unity through legitimate use of the
medium is art. In this sense the small picture format might be much more
living, much more leavening, stirring, awakening than square yards of wall space.
This 'inner greatness' pictorially, is determined and limited by the degree to
which depth in effect and illusion serve the artistic purpose. The width of a
line may present the idea of infinity. The sensitive artist may develop the spacial
meaning of any sized format indefinitely. An epigram may contain the world
and the universe of life. And from the depth-sensation, movement develops.
There are movements into space and movements forward, out of space, both in
form and in color. The product of movement and counter-movement is tension.
When tension - working strength - is expressed it endows the work of art with
the living effect of co-ordinated, though opposing forces. Tension and move-
ment, or movement and counter-movement, lawfully ordered within unity,
paralleling the artist's life-experience and his artistic and human discipline,
endow the work with the power to stir the observer rythmically to a response
to living, spiritual totality. The picture swings, oscillates, vibrates with form-
rhythms integrated to the purpose of spacial (and volumnar) unity and it
resonates with color rhythms balanced, focussed and so ordered as to produce
the richest intensity of light contrast. It is not the contrast of two or three, but
the contrasted balance of many contributing factors, which produces the paradox
of life within unity. Largeness of format in accepted absolute measures has little
if any relation to the power of the greatest possible variety within the most
perfect, unified balance. [. . .]

In painting we distinguish two kinds of creations; (1) the symphonic animation
of the picture plane, as in the so-called art of easel painting (or print making,
etching, engraving, and other forms of drawing which may connote color) and
(2) the decorative animation of the picture plane, as in so-called mural painting.
The purposes here are alike in one respect and different in another. Truly
considered, however, the names 'easel picture' and 'mural picture' express purely
external differences. In philosophic reality every work which posseses intrinsic
greatness is at once decorative and symphonically focussed and integrated. The
symphonic creation intends the highest enrichment of the given format through
sensory and emotional differentiation on an enormous scale (yet indifferent to
Actual size measurement) and therefore monumental. (But again monumental
qualities are not to be confused with mere standard, partial size measurements.
They are an affair of relativity.) The truly monumental can only come about
by means of the most exact and refined relation between parts. The truly
Monumental is tuned to the finest degree, and so becomes great - monumental.
The picture swings and resounds to the rhythm of color, increased through
integration to the highest light-intensity and richness. By, with and from color,
form is intensified in subordination to spacial and spiritual unity, in large
Presentation-areas of light and form (form complexes and light complexes - the
plasticity as known through the hands, and the pattern as known through the
*yes), by means of rhythmic animation.



356 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

In symphonic painting color is the real building medium. 'When the color
has the greatest fullness, the form contains the greatest richness.' This declara-
tion of Cezanne's is the guide for this branch of art. (Symphonic painting).

Swinging and pulsating form and its answer resonating space, originates in
color intervals differentiated, (each color-plane standing in the greatest contrast
possible to its neighbor within the balance of the whole) but this differentiation
is dominated by that simplification coming only through great order. (Great
design is produced by the ability to simplify essentials and the organization, in
a simple order, of ever-present life essentials.) Here one finds the reason that
the art of painting is so overwhelming for despite the highest condensation, it
is always decorative in the highest degree. [...] In decorative painting the
emotional and intellectually considered effort focusses on the greatest simplifica-
tion, which in the case of mural painting, must be in conformation with the
architectural surroundings, and so becomes a harmonious part of the environment.

Painting as a whole, however, possesses fundamental laws. The highest law
of painting is: The entity of the picture plane must be preserved. This entity
is its essential two dimensionality. This high principle of painting is: The picture
plane must be preserved. Then comes the second principle: The essence of the
picture is its two dimensionality. This law connotes at once: the picture plane
must achieve a three dimensional effect (as distinguished from illusion) by means
of the creative process. These two lawful principles apply both to color and to
form.

A third principle must be recognized regarding symphonic painting. In the
process of coloring (painting) the surface of the canvas (the picture plane) should
receive the greatest possible richness in light-emanation-effect, and at the same
time, it should retain the transparency of the jewel. (Which stands as the
prototype of exactly ordered form.) The light and form should control illusory
oscillation into space and out of space. (Renoir, Rembrandt) A painting not
subscribing to this principle, no matter what its kind, has only uncertain relation
- perhaps none at all - to art in its highest sense. Such a painting must, in the
main be only a collection of fragments and details without relation and under-
lying unity. Even the completest mastery of representing objective forms does
not change the matter. Form must be balanced by means of space. We
differentiate the animated form and the space pervaded by energy. Form exists
because of space and space exists because of form. [ . . . ]

We must discriminate between the word decorative in a pictorial sense and
decorative in a naturalistic sense. The pictorially decorative effect is achieved
through musical contrasts and rhythmic relations conditioned by space. This
leads to abstraction, through which objective values are by no means necessarily
eliminated, but on the contrary are made more effective by rhythmic relation.
Color and form then function symbolically.

The word 'decorative' used in a naturalistic sense implies only the repre-
sentation of objects in a further developed objective arrangement directed by
fanciful and arbitrary taste and subordinated to some literary meaning foreign
to the art of painting for itself. For the valuation of a painting however, all
literary or journalistic considerations should be abandoned entirely. Burdening



IVa The Modern as Ideal 357

the canvas with propaganda or history does not make the painting a better work
f art. Such burdening, in the majority of cases, decreases the quality of the
w ork and with it the living, vivid relations and swinging, vibrating space proper
to a work of visual art. [. . .] The spiritual and mental content of the work of
art is again, only found in the quality of the painting and not in the allegory
r in the symbolic meaning presented through the objects in the painting. The
aim of art, so far as one can speak in art of an aim at all, has always been
the same; the melting together of material gained in experience in life with the
natural qualities of the medium. The medium swings and resonates as one strikes
its strings and as one masters its registers and stops. For every medium possesses
its own rhythmic laws and thus its strict limitations through which it is
distinguished as the specific way of expression that it is. The limitation of the
medium is an essential condition for the quality in a work of art, for the
boundlessness of the spirit can only find material expression within the lawful
limits of a medium. [. . .]



6 Abstraction-Creation: Editorial Statements to
Cahiers nos. 1, 1932 and 2, 1933

The Association Abstraction-Creation was founded in Paris in February 1931 to organize
'manifestations' of non-figurative art. The organizing committee included Hans Arp,
Albert Gleizes, Jean Helion, Auguste Herbin, Frantisek Kupka and Georges Vantongerloo.
ft had an international membership, not least amongst the community of exiles who
were beginning to congregate in Paris as the totalitarian regimes in Stalinist Russia and
Nazi Germany increasingly proscribed abstract work. One of the Association's hallmarks
was the equation of 'abstraction' with 'freedom'. Five Cahiers or yearbooks were
published between 1932 and 1936. The present editorial statements are translated
from the first and second. For a response to the questionnaire printed in No. 2, see
IVa7.



1

abstraction
creation
non-figurative art

we have chosen these words as names for our group and for our activities,
because we have not found any others which are less obscure or less controver-
sial, the collection of reproductions in this book can serve as a definition of
these terms, we are not particularly committed to them in other respects.

non-figuration, that's to say a purely plastic culture which excludes every
dement of explication, anecdote, literature, naturalism, etc. . . .

abstraction, because certain artists have come to the concept of non-figuration
ny the progressive abstraction of forms from nature.



358 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

creation, because other artists have attained non-figuration direct, purely via
geometry, or by the exclusive use of elements commonly called abstract such
as circles, planes, bars, lines, etc. . . .

we do not judge, we do not compare, we do not distinguish works constructed
by progressive abstraction or by direct creation, we are trying to compose a
document of non-figurative art.

selection, the responsibility of the committee of the association of abstraction-
creation, is based on the criterion of non-figuration: however, only those artists
are invited to participate in the group who definitively consider themselves to
be non-figurative artists, artists who at the same time produce works containing
more or less obvious forms of living things or objects are not invited, nor are
those who produce works without commitments of this kind, no matter what
the value of the latter.

we think that the assembly in this book of very different works, which are none
the less harmonized by the common idea of non-figuration, will enable the public
to grasp the possibilities and the scope of purely plastic art.

each artist has been invited to express in an article the reasons which he feels
essentially motivate his point of view, these articles, whether written by himself
or by a specially chosen writer, are the responsibility of the artist concerned:
they involve him alone.

the committee has asked different writers and different personalities interested
in non-figurative art to reply to some questions concerning the place of this art
in contemporary society and culture, the following artists are considered quali-
fied according to the criteria stated to participate in the association, and have
also been invited: kandinski, neugeboren, fernandez, carlsund.

considered unable to join: lissitski, mallevich, tatline.

some declined the invitation; the reproductions of the works of others were not
available for inclusion at the time of publication.

the association abstraction-creation is totally independent of all other groups,
commercial firms, and publicity interests.



The journal Abstraction-Creation no. 2 appears at a moment when free thought
is being fiercely contested, in many ways, on all levels, in some countries more
successfully than in others, but everywhere.

Like the previous issue, this journal presents works and declarations of
independent artists, who endeavour, each in their own way, to respond to the
cultural demands of the era. They have come together around the general idea
of Non-Figuration. They do not agree on all points, but think that all tendencies
should be followed through in the direction in which they point.




IVa The Modern as Ideal 359

No one can determine in advance the course of subsequent art. Any attempt
to limit artistic efforts according to considerations of race, ideology or nationality
is intolerable.

We commit this second journal to total opposition to all oppression, of
whatever kind.

The Committee

The Committee of the Association 'Abstraction-Creation' asked its adherents
the following questions:

1 Why do you not paint nudes?

2 What do you think of the influence of trees on your works?

3 Is a locomotive a work of art? Why? Why not?

4 Does the fact that a work has the appearance of a machine or of a technical
creation, detract or add to its artistic effectiveness?

5 Does the fact that a work has an animal appearance detract or add to its
artistic effectiveness?

The replies, like the other articles contained in the journal, following the
pattern adopted in the first journal, are the sole responsibility of the signatory
and involve him alone.

The Association 'Abstraction-Creation' is totally independent of all groups,
of commercial firms, and publicity interests.



7 Wladyslaw Strzeminski (1893-1952) Statements

Strzeminski was a participant in the Polish Constructivist avant-garde of the 1920s. He
had previously been in Russia, returning to Poland in 1922. Here, in consort with the
sculptor Kobro, he developed the concept of 'Unism', implementing it in his abstract
^rt between 1922 and c.1936. The outcome was an art of rigorous medium-specificity,
Which, in common with other abstract work of the period, was envisaged both as strictly
autonomous and as possessed of a Utopian social dimension. It was assumed, that is,
that art could stand as a model. These two statements were published in the yearbooks
'Abstraction-Creation', nos. 1 and 2, Paris, 1932 and 1933, from which the present
translations are made. (The second takes the form of a reply to a questionnaire
circulated by the editors of Abstraction-Creation, reproduced in IVa6.)

1

there, where there is a division, the painting is cut into parts, what should their
relation be?

|*ne. if there is only one, we then see its relation to the border of the painting,
" there are many, we see the relations between the lines and between each line
*nd the border of the painting.



360 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

line has always created divisions of the painting, where we have divisions, what
should their reciprocal relation be? we link the divided parts in a rhythm of
mutual connections, one dimension with another, there exists then a rhythm
like the essential aesthetic emotions of the painting, this rhythm is formed from
the opposition of directions and dimensions.

what is the law of unity of rhythm? the unity of rhythm is achieved by
subordinating the dimensional relations to the same mathematical formula, this
mathematical formula determines the relation between the height and breadth
of the painting, all the fractions and forms are maintained in this mathematical
relationship, in this way we achieve an absolute rhythmic unity of all the forms,
the largest of which is the painting itself.

however, where we have a line, we will have a division and instead of a single
painting, we will have separated parts, line divides - the aim must not be the
division of the painting, but its unity, presented in a direct way: optically.

in consequence it is necessary to renounce line, it is necessary to renounce
rhythm, because it only exists in the relations between independent parts, it is
necessary to renounce opposites and contrasts, because only separated forms can
create oppositions and contrasts, it is necessary to renounce division, because it
gives concentration and the greatest intensity to forms in proximity to outline
- and cuts the painting into sections, containing concentrated forms and weak
forms.

after having studied in my paintings the problem of structural rhythm, i am
now considering the idea of the unity of a painting - these paintings being
photographically unreproducible, i am presenting reproductions of older paint-
ings.



1 When painting the nude one is also obliged to paint the background. In
any case, when we paint an object, we find in the painting the object and the
background, therefore two things in the one painting. Sometimes even several
objects and the background, therefore several visual experiences in the one
painting.

2 Trees have demonstrated to me what a work of art is not. The form of a
tree results from: a) the symmetry (in the form and distribution of leaves). This
symmetry is the result of the division of the cells of a plant. The painting does
not grow, its cells are not subject to division and that is why symmetry has no
place there, b) a fluid curve of the branches and trunk, resulting from the
pressure of the wind, from the direction of the sun (of light), from the
vaporization of sap in a plant. We do not find these forces in a painting,
therefore its form is different.

3 The aim of a locomotive is to produce energy, which is necessary to start
the train moving. When we project its form, we take into consideration this



IVa The Modern as Ideal 361

aim, that is to say the best means of producing energy. Independently of this,
it may be that the locomotive, in its entirety, or in part (by chance), are

beautiful.

The aim of a work of art is unity of composition. The greater this unity, the
m ore we approach the aim. Independently of this, a work of art and its fragments
can be beautiful. But this is only a question of chance, this is not the aim of

art.

The accidental beauty of a locomotive, of an animal, or of a painting, do not

determine the realisation of artistic aims, since the only admissible criterion is
the extent to which the aim of making something has been attained.

A machine only exists to produce certain objects or the energy necessary for
their construction.

The animal world only exists to eat, to live in a world of sensations and to
he eaten by man.

A work of art aims at a higher degree of unity of composition. The more
focused its homogeneity, the closer we draw to the aim.



8 Alfred H. Barr Jr (1902-1981) from Cubism and
Abstract Art

The author was the first Director of the Museum of Modern Art in New York. Barr's
innovations in many ways set the terms in which modern art has continued to be viewed,
both as regards the physical display of works of art and the scholarly apparatus -
frbtably the exhibition catalogue - which surrounds them. To accompany the exhibition
*Cubism and Abstract Art' of 1936 Barr produced for the catalogue a complex diagram
to illustrate the dominance of two trends in modern art: one 'fantastic' in purport and
largely curvilinear or biomorphic in execution; the other rationalist and principally
rectilinear. Though Barr's perspective was thus fundamentally formalist, he was not
altogether heedless of social and political circumstances. For Barr, abstract and
near-abstract avant-garde art expressed a freedom denied to art, and a fortiori to
society, by regimes which enforced particular artistic forms (regimes which he had
experienced at first hand on visits to Stalinist Russia and Nazi Germany). Originally
published by the Museum of Modern Art, New York, 1936.

The early twentieth century

Sometimes in the history of art it is possible to describe a period or a generation
tf artists as having been obsessed by a particular problem. The artists of the
cariy fifteenth century for instance were moved by a passion for imitating nature.
In the North the Flemings mastered appearances by the meticulous observation
f external detail. In Italy the Florentines employed a profounder science to
discover the laws of perspective, of foreshortening, anatomy, movement and
felief.

In the early twentieth century the dominant interest was almost exactly
opposite. The pictorial conquest of the external visual world had been completed




362 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

and refined many times and in different ways during the previous half millen-
nium. The more adventurous and original artists had grown bored with painting
facts. By a common and powerful impulse they were driven to abandon the
imitation of natural appearance.



'Abstract'

'Abstract' is the term most frequently used to describe the more extreme effects
of this impulse away from 'nature.' It is customary to apologize for the word
'abstract,' but words to describe art movements or works of art are often inexact:
we no longer apologize for applying the ethnological word 'Gothic' to French
thirteenth century art and the Portuguese word for an irregular pearl, 'Baroque,'
to European art of the seventeenth century. Substitutes for 'abstract' such as
'non-objective' and 'non-figurative' have been advocated as superior. But the
image of a square is as much an 'object' or a 'figure' as the image of a face or
a landscape; in fact 'figure' is the very prefix used by geometers in naming A
or B the abstractions with which they deal.

This is not to deny that the adjective 'abstract' is confusing and even
paradoxical. For an 'abstract' painting is really a most positively concrete
painting since it confines the attention to its immediate, sensuous, physical
surface far more than does the canvas of a sunset or a portrait. The adjective
is confusing, too, because it has the implications of both a verb and a noun.
The verb to abstract means to draw out of or away from. But the noun abstraction
is something already drawn out of or away from - so much so that like a
geometrical figure or an amorphous silhouette it may have no apparent relation
to concrete reality. 'Abstract' is therefore an adjective which may be applied to
works of art with a certain latitude. [ . . . ]

The ambiguity of the word abstract as applied to works of art is really useful
for it reveals the ambiguity and confusion which is inseparable from the subject.



Dialectic of abstract art

Abstract art today needs no defense. It has become one of the many ways to
paint or carve or model. But it is not yet a kind of art which people like without
some study and some sacrifice of prejudice. Prejudice can sometimes be met
with argument, and for this purpose the dialectic of abstract painting and
sculpture is superficially simple enough. It is based upon the assumption that
a work of art, a painting for example, is worth looking at primarily because it
presents a composition or organization of color, line, light and shade. Resem-
blance to natural objects, while it does not necessarily destroy these esthetic
values, may easily adulterate their purity. Therefore, since resemblance to nature
is at best superfluous and at worst distracting, it might as well be eliminated.
[]





iva The Modern as Ideal 363

Such an attitude of course involves a great impoverishment of painting, an
elimination of a wide range of values, such as the connotations of subject matter,
sentimental, documentary, political, sexual, religious; the pleasures of easy
recognition; and the enjoyment of technical dexterity in the imitation of material
forms and surfaces. But in his art the abstract artist prefers impoverishment to
adulteration. [. . .]
* * *

Two main traditions of Abstract Art

At the risk of grave oversimplification the impulse towards abstract art during
the past fifty years may be divided historically into two main currents, both of
which emerged from Impressionism. The first and more important current finds
its sources in the art and theories of Cezanne and Seurat, passes through the
widening stream of Cubism and finds its delta in the various geometrical and
Constructivist movements which developed in Russia and Holland during the
War and have since spread throughout the World. This current may be described
as intellectual, structural, architectonic, geometrical, rectilinear and classical in
its austerity and dependence upon logic and calculation. The second - and, until
recently, secondary - current has its principal source in the art and theories of
Gauguin and his circle, flows through the Fauvisme of Matisse to the Abstract
Expressionism of the pre-War paintings of Kandinsky. After running under
ground for a few years it reappears vigorously among the masters of abstract
art associated with Surrealism. This tradition, by contrast with the first, is
intuitional and emotional rather than intellectual; organic or biomorphic rather
than geometrical in its forms; curvilinear rather than rectilinear, decorative
rather than structural, and romantic rather than classical in its exaltation of the
mystical, the spontaneous and the irrational. Apollo, Pythagoras and Descartes
Watch over the Cezanne-Cubist-geometrical tradition; Dionysus (an Asiatic god),
Plotinus and Rousseau over the Gauguin-Expressionist-non-geometrical line.

Often, of course, these two currents intermingle and they may both appear
in one man. At their purest the two tendencies may be illustrated by paintings
of twenty years ago: a Suprematist composition by Malevich and an Improvisation
oy Kandinsky. The geometrical strain is represented today by the painter
Mondrian and the Constructivists Pevsner and Gabo; the non-geometrical by
the painter Miro and the sculptor Arp. The shape of the square confronts the
silhouette of the amoeba.



9 Henri Matisse (1869-1954) Statements to Teriade

for most of the 1920s and 1930s Matisse had worked in the south of France. His
works of this period have a relationship to hedonism and luxury which has often
Ptovoked concern even among supporters such as Clement Greenberg; though it should
 e said that these doubts have tended to resolve in Matisse's favour. In the mid-1 930s
Matisse seems to have experienced similar doubts and to have conceived the need to
return to the basic principles of his art, to reinforce his 'purity of means'. E. Teriade



364 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

was a critic and friend who had published previous statements by Matisse in 1929-30
and 1933. Entitled 'Constance de Fauvisme', the present statements were published,
somewhat paradoxically, in the Surrealist journal Minotaure, II, no. 9, 15 October 1936|
p. 3, under Teriade's editorship. (The parenthetical passages are from an alternative
version of the statements published by Raymond Escholier in 1937.) The present
translation is taken from J. D. Flam, Matisse on Art, London and New York, 1973.

When the means of expression have become so refined, so attenuated that their
power of expression wears thin, it is necessary to return to the essential
principles which made human language. They are, after all, the principles which
'go back to the source', which relive, which give us life. Pictures which have
become refinements, subtle gradations, dissolutions without energy, call for
beautiful blues, reds, yellows - matter to stir the sensual depths in men. This
is the starting point of Fauvism: the courage to return to the purity of the
means.

Our senses have an age of development which does not come from the
immediate surroundings, but from a moment in civilization. We are born with
the sensibility of a given period of civilization. And that counts far more than
all we can learn about a period. The arts have a development which comes not
only from the individual, but also from an accumulated strength, the civilization
which precedes us. One can't do just anything. A talented artist cannot do just
as he likes. If he used only his talents, he would not exist. We are not the
masters of what we produce. It is imposed on us.

In my latest paintings, I have united the acquisitions of the last twenty years
to my essential core, to my very essence.

The reaction of each stage is as important as the subject. For this reaction
comes from me and not from the subject. It is from the basis of my interpret-
ation that I continually react until my work comes into harmony with me. Like
someone writing a sentence, rewrites it, makes new discoveries ... At each stage,
I reach a balance, a conclusion. At the next sitting, if I find a weakness in the
whole, I find my way back into the picture by means of the weakness - I
re-enter through the breach - and reconceive the whole. Thus everything
becomes fluid again and as each element is only one of the component forces
(as in an orchestration), the whole can be changed in appearance but the feeling
still remains the same. A black could very well replace a blue, since basically
the expression derives from the relationships. [A kilogramme of green is greener
than half a kilo. Gauguin attributes this saying to Cezanne in a visitor's book
at the house of Marie Gloanec at Pont-Aven.] One is not bound to a blue, to
a green or to a red. You can change the relationships by modifying the quantity
of the components without changing their nature. That is, the painting will still
be composed of blue, yellow and green, in altered quantities. Or you can retain
the relationships which form the expression of a picture, replacing a blue with
a black, as in an orchestra a trumpet may be replaced by an oboe. [It all depends
on the feeling you're after.]

... At the final stage the painter finds himself freed and his emotion exists
complete in his work. He himself, in any case, is relieved of it.



IVa The Modern as Ideal 365

10 Naum Gabo (1890-1977) 'The Constructive Idea
in Art'

Gabo had emigrated to Western Europe after the end of the civil war in the Soviet Union
in 1921. One result of the successful career he then pursued was that the term
'Constructivism' lost the specific connotations it had had among artists in the early
Soviet Union. There it had been identified with a move out of art, into production. In
the West the term became identified with a school of abstract sculpture and, to a lesser
extent, painting. By the 1930s it could be claimed with some justification that there
existed an 'international constructive tendency' with its own principles, catalogue of
works, and relevant publications. Gabo's essay was originally published as the lead
article in the major survey of this tendency which he helped edit in 1937: L. Martin,
B. Nicholson and N. Gabo (eds.), Circle - International Survey of Constructive Art,
London, 1937, pp. 1-10.

Our century appears in history under the sign of revolutions and disintegration.
The revolutions have spared nothing in the edifice of culture which had been
built up by the past ages. They had already begun at the end of the last century
and proceeded in ours with unusual speed until there was no stable point left
in either the material or the ideal structure of our life. The war was only a
natural consequence of a disintegration which started long ago in the depths of
the previous civilization. It is innocent to hope that this process of disintegration
will stop at the time and in the place where we want it to. Historical processes
of this kind generally go their own way. They are more like floods, which do
not depend on the strokes of the oarsmen floating on the waters. But, however
long and however deep this process may go in its material destruction, it cannot
deprive us any more of our optimism about the final outcome, since we see that
in the realm of ideas we are now entering on the period of reconstruction.
* * *

The immediate source from which the Constructive idea derives is Cubism,
although it had almost the character of a repulsion rather than an attraction.
The Cubistic school was the summit of a revolutionary process in Art which
was already started by the Impressionists at the end of the last century. One
may estimate the value of particular Cubistic works as one likes, but it is
incontestable that the influence of the Cubistic ideology on the spirits of the
artists at the beginning of this century has no parallel in the history of Art for
violence and intrepidity. The revolution which this school produced in the minds
of artists is only comparable to that which happened at approximately the same
time in the world of physics. [. . .]

[ . . . ] The basis of the Constructive idea in Art lies in an entirely new
approach to the nature of Art and its functions in life. In it lies a complete
reconstruction of the means in the different domains of Art, in the relations
between them, in their methods and in their aims. It embraces those two
fundamental elements on which Art is built up, namely, the Content and the
Form. These two elements are from the Constructive point of view one and
the same thing. It does not separate Content from Form - on the contrary, it



366 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

does not see as possible their separated and independent existence. The thought
that Form could have one designation and Content another cannot be incorpor-
ated in the concept of the Constructive idea. In a work of art they have to live
and act as a unit, proceed in the same direction and produce the same effect.
I say 'have to' because never before in Art have they acted in such a way in spite
of the obvious necessity of this condition. It has always been so in Art that
either one or the other predominated, conditioning and predetermining the other.

This was because in all our previous Art concepts of the world a work of art
could not have been conceived without the representation of the external aspect
of the world, f . . .]

[. . .] This was the main obstacle to the rejuvenation of Art, and it was at
this point that the Constructive idea laid the cornerstone of its foundation. It
has revealed a universal law that the elements of a visual art such as lines,
colours, shapes, possess their own forces of expression independent of any
association with the external aspects of the world; that their life and their action
are self-conditioned psychological phenomena rooted in human nature; that those
elements are not chosen by convention for any utilitarian or other reason as
words and figures are, they are not merely abstract signs, but they are imme-
diately and organically bound up with human emotions. The revelation of this
fundamental law has opened up a vast new field in art giving the possibility of
expression to those human impulses and emotions which have been neglected.
Heretofore these elements have been abused by being used to express all sorts
of associative images which might have been expressed otherwise, for instance,
in literature and poetry.

But this point was only one link in the ideological chain of the constructive
concept, being bound up with the new conception of Art as a whole and of its
functions in life. The Constructive idea sees and values Art only as a creative
act. By a creative act it means every material or spiritual work which is destined
to stimulate or perfect the substance of material or spiritual life. Thus the
creative genius of Mankind obtains the most important and singular place. In
the light of the Constructive idea the creative mind of Man has the last and
decisive word in the definite construction of the whole of our culture. To be
sure, the creative genius of Man is only a part of Nature, but from this part
alone derives all the energy necessary to construct his spiritual and material
edifice. Being a result of Nature it has every right to be considered as a further
cause of its growth. Obedient to Nature, it intends to become its master;
attentive to the laws of Nature it intends to make its own laws, following the
forms of Nature it re-forms them. We do not need to look for the origin of
this activity, it is enough for us to state it and to feel its reality continually
acting on us. Life without creative effort is unthinkable, and the whole course
of human culture is one continuous effort of the creative will of Man. Without
the presence and the control of the creative genius, Science by itself would
never emerge from the state of wonder and contemplation from which it is
derived and would never have achieved substantial results. Without the creative
desire Science would go astray in its own schemes, losing its aim in its reasoning.




IVa The Modern as ideal 367

r . .] The Constructive idea does not see that the function of Art is to
represent the world. It does not impose on Art the function of Science. Art
and Science are two different streams which rise from the same creative source
and flow into the same ocean of the common culture, but the currents of these
two streams flow in different beds. Science teaches, Art asserts; Science
persuades, Art acts; Science explores and apprehends, informs and proves. It
does not undertake anything without first being in accord with the laws of
Nature. Science cannot deal otherwise because its task is knowledge. Knowledge
is bound up with things which are and things which are, are heterogeneous,
changeable and contradictory. Therefore the way to the ultimate truth is so long
and difficult for Science.

The force of Science lies in its authoritative reason. The force of Art lies in
its immediate influence on human psychology and in its active contagiousness.
Being a creation of Man it re-creates Man. Art has no need of philosophical
arguments, it does not follow the signposts of philosophical systems; Art, like
life, dictates systems to philosophy. It is not concerned with the meditation
about what is and how it came to be. That is a task for Knowledge. Knowledge
is born of the desire to know, Art derives from the necessity to communicate
and to announce. The stimulus of Science is the deficiency of our knowledge.
The stimulus of Art is the abundance of our emotions and our latent desires.
Science is the vehicle of facts - it is indifferent, or at best tolerant, to the ideas
which lie behind facts. Art is the vehicle of ideas and its attitude to facts is
strictly partial. Science looks and observes, Art sees and foresees. Every great
scientist has experienced a moment when the artist in him saved the scientist.
'We are poets', said Pythagoras, and in the sense that a mathematician is a
creator he was right.

In the light of the Constructive idea the purely philosophical wondering about
real and unreal is idle. Even more idle is the intention to divide the real into
super-real and sub-real, into conscious reality and sub-conscious reality. The
Constructive idea knows only one reality. Nothing is unreal in Art. Whatever
is touched by Art becomes reality, and we do not need to undertake remote
and distant navigations in the sub-conscious in order to reveal a world which
toes in our immediate vicinity. [. . .]

There is and there can be only one reality - existence. For the Constructive
idea it is more important to know and to use the main fact that Art possesses
in its own domain the means to influence the course of this existence enriching
its content and stimulating its energy.

This does not mean that this idea consequently compels Art to an immediate
construction of material values in life; it is sufficient when Art prepares a state
f mind which will be able only to construct, co-ordinate and perfect instead
f to destroy, disintegrate and deteriorate. Material values will be the inevitable
result of such a state. For the same reason the Constructive idea does not expect
worn Art the performance of critical functions even when they are directed
gainst the negative sides of life. What is the use of showing us what is bad
Without revealing what is good? The Constructive idea prefers that Art perform
Positive works which lead us towards the best. The measure of this perfection



368 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

will not be so difficult to define when we realize that it does not lie outside us
but is bound up in our desire and in our will to it. The creative human genius,
which never errs and never mistakes, defines this measure. Since the beginning
of Time man has been occupied with nothing else but the perfecting of his
world.

To find the means for the accomplishment of this task the artist need not
search in the external world of Nature; he is able to express his impulses in
the language of those absolute forms which are in the substantial possession
of his Art. This is the task which we constructive artists have set ourselves,
which we are doing and which we hope will be continued by the future
generation.



11 Piet Mondrian (1872-1944) 'Plastic Art and Pure
Plastic Art'

Mondrian published this restatement of his theoretical principles at a moment when
there appeared the prospect of an international movement grounded in similar precepts.
He again distinguishes 'universal' from 'individual', 'subjective' from 'objective', but
points out that the balance between them must be sought in practice, not merely in
theory. He is also more concerned than hitherto to relate these fundamental principles
of 'dynamic equilibrium' to the world at large, to what he calls 'world disorder'. The text
thus furnishes another assertion from within the European avant-garde of the paradox-
ical 'utility of pure abstract art'. Originally published in Martin, Nicholson and Gabo, op.
cit., 1937, pp. 41-56.



Part I

Although art is fundamentally everywhere and always the same, nevertheless
two main human inclinations, diametrically opposed to each other, appear in its
many and varied expressions. One aims at the direct creation of universal beauty,
the other at the aesthetic expression of oneself in other words, of that which one
thinks and experiences. The first aims at representing reality objectively, the
second subjectively. Thus we see in every work of figurative art the desire,
objectively to represent beauty, solely through form and colour, in mutually
balanced relations, and, at the same time, an attempt to express that which these
forms, colours and relations arouse in us. This latter attempt must of necessity
result in an individual expression which veils the pure representation of beauty.
Nevertheless, both the two opposing elements (universal - individual) are
indispensable if the work is to arouse emotion. Art had to find the right solution.
In spite of the dual nature of the creative inclinations, figurative art has
produced a harmony through a certain co-ordination between objective and
subjective expression. For the spectator, however, who demands a pure repre-
sentation of beauty, the individual expression is too predominant. For the artist
the search for a unified expression through the balance of two opposites has
been, and always will be, a continual struggle.




iva The Modern as Ideal 369

Throughout the history of culture, art has demonstrated that universal beauty
does not arise from the particular character of the form, but from the dynamic
rhythm of its inherent relationships, or - in a composition - from the mutual
relations of forms. Art has shown that it is a question of determining the rel-
ations. It has revealed that the forms exist only for the creation of new
relationships: that forms create relations and that relations create forms. In this
duality of forms and their relations neither takes precedence.

The only problem in art is to achieve a balance between the subjective and
the objective. But it is of the utmost importance that this problem should be
solved, in the realm of plastic art - technically, as it were - and not in the
realm of thought. The work of art must be 'produced', 'constructed'. One must
create as objective as possible a representation of forms and relations. Such work
can never be empty because the opposition of its constructive elements and its
execution arouse emotion.

If some have failed to take into account the inherent character of the form
and have forgotten that this - untransformed - predominates, others have
overlooked the fact that an individual expression does not become a universal
expression through figurative representation, which is based on our conception
of feeling, be it classical, romantic, religious, surrealist. Art has shown that
universal expression can only be created by a real equation of the universal and
the individual.

Gradually art is purifying its plastic means and thus bringing out the
relationships between them. Thus, in our day two main tendencies appear: the
one maintains the figuration, the other eliminates it. While the former employs
more or less complicated and particular forms, the latter uses simple and neutral
forms, or, ultimately, the free line and the pure colour. It is evident that the
latter (non-figurative art) can more easily and thoroughly free itself from the
domination of the subjective than can the figurative tendency; particular forms
and colours (figurative art) are more easily exploited than neutral forms. It is,
however, necessary to point out, that the definitions 'figurative' and 'non-
figurative' are only approximate and relative. For every form, even every line,
represents a figure, no form is absolutely neutral. Clearly, everything must be
relative, but, since we need words to make our concepts understandable, we
must keep to these terms.

Among the different forms we may consider those as being neutral which
have neither the complexity nor the particularities possessed by the natural
forms or abstract forms in general. We may call those neutral which do not
evoke individual feelings or ideas. Geometrical forms being so profound an
abstraction of form may be regarded as neutral; and on account of their tension
and the purity of their outlines they may even be preferred to other neutral
forms.

If, as a conception, non-figurative art has been created by the mutual interaction
f the human duality, this art has been realized by the mutual interaction of
constructive elements and their inherent relations. This process consists in mutual
Purification; purified constructive elements set up pure relationships, and these
lr * their turn demand pure constructive elements. Figurative art of today is the



370 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

outcome of figurative art of the past, and non-figurative art is the outcome of
the figurative art of today. Thus the unity of art is maintained.

If non-figurative art is born of figurative art, it is obvious that the two factors
of human duality have not only changed, but have also approached one another
towards a mutual balance; towards unity. One can rightly speak of an evolution
in plastic art. It is of the greatest importance to note this fact, for it reveals the
true way of art; the only path along which we can advance. Moreover, the
evolution of the plastic arts shows that the dualism which has manifested itself
in art is only relative and temporal. Both science and art are discovering and
making us aware of the fact that time is a process of intensification, an evolution
from the individual towards the universal, of the subjective towards the object-
ive; towards the essence of things and of ourselves.

A careful observation of art since its origin shows that artistic expression seen
from the outside is not a process of extending but of intensifying one and the same
thing, universal beauty; and that seen from the inside it is a growth. Extension
results in a continual repetition of nature; it is not human and art cannot follow
it. So many of these repetitions which parade as 'art' clearly cannot arouse emotions.

Through intensification one creates successively on more profound planes;
extension remains always on the same plane. Intensification, be it noted, is
diametrically opposed to extension; they are at right angles to each other as are
length and depth. This fact shows clearly the temporal opposition of non-
figurative and figurative art.

But if throughout its history art has meant a continuous and gradual change in
the expression of one and the same thing, the opposition of the two trends - in
our time so clear-cut - is actually an unreal one. It is illogical that the two
principal tendencies in art, figurative and non-figurative (objective and subject-
ive) should be so hostile. Since art is in essence universal, its expression cannot
rest on a subjective view. Our human capacities do not allow of a perfectly
objective view, but that does not imply that the plastic expression of art is based
on subjective conception. Our subjectivity realizes but does not create the work.

[...]

Art is not made for anybody and is, at the same time, for everybody. It is a
mistake to try to go too fast. The complexity of art is due to the fact that
different degrees of its evolution are present at one and the same time. The
present carries with it the past and the future. But we need not try to foresee
the future; we need only take our place in the development of human culture,
a development which has made non-figurative art supreme. It has always been
only one struggle, of only one real art; to create universal beauty. This points
the way for both present and future. We need only continue and develop what
already exists. [. . .]
* * *

Art makes us realize that there are fixed laws which govern and point to the
use of the constructive elements of the composition and of the inherent inter-relation-
ships between them. These laws may be regarded as subsidiary laws to the
fundamental law of equivalence which creates dynamic equilibrium and reveals the
true content of reality.




!Va The Modern as Ideal 371



Part II



* * *



In spite of world disorder, instinct and intuition are carrying humanity to a
real equilibrium, but how much misery has been and is still being caused by
primitive animal instinct. How many errors have been and are being committed
through vague and confused intuition? Art certainly shows this clearly. But art
shows also that in the course of progress, intuition becomes more and more
conscious and instinct more and more purified. Art and life illuminate each
other more and more; they reveal more and more their laws according to which
a real and living balance is created.

Intuition enlightens and so links up with pure thought. They together become
an intelligence which is not simply of the brain, which does not calculate, but
which feels and thinks. Which is creative both in art and in life. From this
intelligence there must arise non-figurative art in which instinct no longer plays
a dominating part. Those who do not understand this intelligence regard
non-figurative art as a purely intellectual product.

Although all dogma, all preconceived ideas, must be harmful to art, the artist
can nevertheless be guided and helped in his intuitive researches by reasoning
apart from his work. If such reasoning can be useful to the artist and can
accelerate his progress, it is indispensable that such reasoning should accompany
the observations of the critics who talk about art and who wish to guide mankind.
Such reasoning, however, cannot be individual, which it usually is; it cannot
arise out of a body of knowledge outside plastic art. If one is not an artist
oneself one must at least know the laws and culture of plastic art. If the public
is to be well informed and if mankind is to progress it is essential that the
confusion which is everywhere present should be removed. For enlightenment,
a clear demonstration of the succession of artistic tendencies is necessary. Hitherto,
a study of the different styles of plastic art in their progressive succession has
been difficult since the expression of the essence of art has been veiled. In our
time, which is reproached for not having a style of its own, the content of art
has become clear and the different tendencies reveal more clearly the progressive
succession of artistic expression. Non-figurative art brings to an end the ancient
culture of art; at present therefore, one can review and judge more surely the
whole culture of art. We are not at the turning-point of this culture; the culture
of particular form is approaching its end. The culture of determined relations has
begun.

It is not enough to explain the value of a work of art in itself; it is above all
necessary to show the place which a work occupies on the scale of the evolution of
plastic art. Thus in speaking of art, it is not permissible to say 'this is how I
see it' or 'this is my idea 1 . True art like true life takes a single road.

The laws which in the culture of art have become more and more determinate
are the great hidden laws of nature which art establishes in its own fashion. It is
necessary to stress the fact that these laws are more or less hidden behind the
superficial aspect of nature. Abstract art is therefore opposed to a natural
representation of things. But it is not opposed to nature as is generally thought.



372 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

It is opposed to the raw primitive animal nature of man, but it is one with true
human nature. It is opposed to the conventional laws created during the culture of
the particular form but it is one with the laws of the culture of pure relationships.

* * *

In pure plastic art the significance of different forms and lines is very
important; it is precisely this fact which makes it pure.

In order that art may be really abstract, in other words, that it should not
represent relations with the natural aspect of things, the law of the denatural-
ization of matter is of fundamental importance. In painting, the primary colour
that is as pure as possible realizes this abstraction of natural colour. But colour
is, in the present state of technique, also the best means for denaturalizing
matter in the realm of abstract constructions in three dimensions; technical
means are as a rule insufficient.

All art has achieved a certain measure of abstraction. This abstraction has
become more and more accentuated until in pure plastic art not only a
transformation of form but also of matter - be it through technical means or
through colour - a more or less neutral expression is attained. [ . . . ]

Non-figurative art is created by establishing a dynamic rhythm of determinate
mutual relations which excludes the formation of any particular form. We note
thus, that to destroy particular form is only to do more consistently what all
art has done.

The dynamic rhythm which is essential in all art is also the essential element
of a non-figurative work. In figurative art this rhythm is veiled.

Yet we all pay homage to clarity.

The fact that people generally prefer figurative art (which creates and finds
its continuation in abstract art) can be explained by the dominating force of the
individual inclination in human nature. From this inclination arises all the
opposition to art which is purely abstract.

* * *

In removing completely from the work all objects, 'the world is not separated
from the spirit', but is on the contrary, put into a balanced opposition with the
spirit, since the one and the other are purified. This creates a perfect unity
between the two opposites. There are, however, many who imagine that they
are too fond of life, particular reality, to be able to suppress figuration, and for
that reason they still use in their work the object or figurative fragments which
indicate its character. Nevertheless, one is well aware of the fact that in art one
cannot hope to represent in the image things as they are, nor even as they
manifest themselves in all their living brilliance. The impressionists, divisionists,
and pointillistes have already recognized that. There are some today who,
recognizing the weakness and limitation of the image, attempt to create a work
of art through the objects themselves, often by composing them in a more or
less transformed manner. This clearly can not lead to an expression of their
content nor of their true character. One can more or less remove the conven-
tional appearance of things (surrealism), but they continue nevertheless to show
their particular character and to arouse in us individual emotions. To love things
in reality is to love them profoundly; it is to see them as a microcosmos in the




IVa The Modern as Ideal 373

jnacrocosmos. Only in this way can one achieve a universal expression of reality.
precisely on account of its profound love for things, non-figurative art does not
aim at rendering them in their particular appearance.

Precisely by its existence non-figurative art shows that 'art' continues always
on its true road. It shows that 'art' is not the expression of the appearance of reality
such as we see it, nor of the life which we live, but that it is the expression of true
reality and true life . , . indefinable but realizable in plastics.
* * *

[. . .] Execution and technique play an important part in the aim of estab-
lishing a more or less objective vision which the essence of the non-figurative
work demands. The less obvious the artist's hand is the more objective will the
work be. This fact leads to a preference for a more or less mechanical execution
or to the employment of materials produced by industry. Hitherto, of course,
these materials have been imperfect from the point of view of art. If these
materials and their colours were more perfect and if a technique existed by
which the artist could easily cut them up in order to compose his work as he
conceives it, an art more real and more objective in relation to life than painting
would arise. All these reflections evoke questions which have already been asked
many years ago, mainly: is art still necessary and useful for humanity? Is it not
even harmful to progress? Certainly the art of the past is superfluous to the
new spirit and harmful to its progress: just because of its beauty it holds many
people back from the new conception. The new art is, however, still very
necessary to life. In a clear manner it establishes the laws according to which
a real balance is reached. Moreover, it must create among us a profoundly
human and rich beauty realized not only by the best qualities of the new
architecture, but also by all that the constructive art in painting and sculpture
makes possible.

But although the new art is necessary, the mass is conservative. Hence these
cinemas, these radios, these bad pictures which overwhelm the few works which
are really of our era.

It is a great pity that those who are concerned with the social life in general
do not realize the utility of pure abstract art. Wrongly influenced by the art of
the past, the true essence of which escapes them, and of which they only see
that which is superfluous, they make no effort to know pure abstract art.
Through another conception of the word 'abstract', they have a certain horror
of it. They are vehemently opposed to abstract art because they regard it as
something ideal and unreal. In general they use art as propaganda for collective
or personal ideas, thus as literature. They are both in favour of the progress of
the mass and against the progress of the elite, thus against the logical march of
human evolution. Is it really to be believed that the evolution of the mass and
that of the elite are incompatible? The elite rises from the mass; is it not
therefore its highest expression?
* * *

It would be illogical to suppose that non-figurative art will remain stationary,
for this art contains a culture of the use of new plastic means and their
determinate relations. Because the field is new there is all the more to be done.



374 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

What is certain is that no escape is possible for the non-figurative artist; he
must stay within his field and march towards the consequence of his art.

This consequence brings us, in a future perhaps remote, towards the end of
art as a thing separated from our surrounding environment, which is the actual plastic
reality. But this end is at the same time a new beginning. Art will not only
continue but will realize itself more and more. By the unification of architecture
sculpture and painting, a new plastic reality will be created. Painting and
sculpture will not manifest themselves as separate objects, nor as 'mural art'
which destroys architecture itself, nor as 'applied' art, but being purely construc-
tive will aid the creation of an atmosphere not merely utilitarian or rational but
also pure and complete in its beauty.



12 Barbara Hepworth (1903-1975) 'Sculpture'

Hepworth had been invited to join the Association Abstraction-Creation together with
Ben Nicholson in 1932. She developed an individual form of 'pure' carved sculpture in
the mid-1930s. Examples were included in the international exhibition 'Abstract and
Concrete' shown in London and elsewhere in 1936. Her concern in this statement is
with the 'universality' of the experience of art, and hence with a relationship between
the art's abstraction - or 'purity' - and its socially progressive potential. Originally
published in Martin, Nicholson and Gabo, op. cit., 1937, pp. 113-16.



I

Full sculptural expression is spatial - it is the three-dimensional realization of
an idea, either by mass or by space construction. The materials for sculpture
are unlimited in their variety of quality, tenseness and aliveness. But for the
imaginative idea to be fully and freely projected into stone, wood or any plastic
substance, a complete sensibility to material - an understanding of its inherent
quality and character - is required. There must be a perfect unity between the
idea, the substance and the dimension: this unity gives scale. The idea - the
imaginative concept - actually is the giving of life and vitality to material; but
when we come to define these qualities we find that they have very little to do
with the physical aspect of the sculpture. When we say that a great sculpture
has vision, power, vitality, scale, poise, form or beauty, we are not speaking of
physical attributes. Vitality is not a physical, organic attribute of sculpture - it
is a spiritual inner life. Power is not man power or physical capacity - it is an
inner force and energy. Form realization is not just any three-dimensional mass
- it is the chosen perfected form, of perfect size and shape, for the sculptural
embodiment of the idea. Vision is not sight - it is the perception of the mind.
It is the discernment of the reality of life, a piercing of the superficial surfaces
of material existence, that gives a work of art its own life and purpose and
significant power.

One of the most profound qualities of sculpture is scale - it can only be
perceived intuitively because it is entirely a quality of thought and vision.



IVa The Modern as ideal 375

Sculpture does not gain or lose spiritual significance by having more or less of
physical attributes. A vital work has perfect co-ordination between conception
and realization; but actual physical contours do not limit a perfected idea.

It does not matter whether a sculpture is asymmetrical or symmetrical - it
does not lose or gain by being either: for instance, it can be said that an
asymmetrical sculpture has more points of view. But this is only one aspect of
the sculptural entity - asymmetry can be found in the tension, balance, inner
vital impact with space and in the scale.

The fact that a plastic projection of thought can only live by its inner power
and not by physical content, means that the range for its choice of form is free
and unlimited - the range of many forms to one form, surprising depths and
juxtapositions to the most subtle, very small to very large. All are equal, and
capable of the maximum of life according to the intensity of the Vision.

Scale is not physical size, because a very small thing can have good scale or
a very large thing poor scale - though often large sculptures achieve good scale
because the artist approaches their conception with a greater seriousness and
thought. Size can be emphasized by the juxtaposition of the very large to the
very small; but this is only one side of sculptural relationships. There is the
sculpture which has magnificent scale because of its precise and exact relation-
ship between dimension and idea - it creates space for itself by its own vitality.
There are two main sculptural identities - one which comes within the embrace
6f our hands and arms, and the other which stands free and unrelated to our
sense of touch. Both have their distinct and individual quality of scale which
makes an expansion and spaciousness in everything surrounding them. Scale is
connected with our whole life - perhaps it is even our whole intuitive capacity
to feel life.



n

The most difficult and complicated form relationships do not necessarily give
a sculpture the fullest spiritual content. Very often, as the thought becomes
more free the line is purified, and as principles - the laws which contain lesser
laws - are comprehended, the forms become simplified and strengthened. In
the physical world we can discover in the endless variations of the same form,
the one particular form which demonstrates the power and robustness of the
simplified structure - the form is clear and every part of it in precise unity
With the whole. It is not the accidental or casual, but the regular irregularity,
the perfect sequence which gives the maximum expression of individual life. In
the three-dimensional realization there is always this exact form, or sequence of
form - which can most fully and freely convey the idea. But there is no formula
that can reveal the sequence; the premise is individual and the logical sequence
Purely intuitive - the result of equilibrium between thought and medium.

The perception of these differences, imperfections and perfections helps us
to understand the language the sculptor uses to convey the whole feeling and
thought of his experience. It is the sculptor's work fully to comprehend the
World of space and form, to project his individual understanding of his own life




376 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

and time as it is related universally in this particular plastic extension of thought
and to keep alive this special side of existence. A clear social solution can only
be achieved when there is a full consciousness in the realm of thought and when
every section constitutes an inherent part of the whole.

The sculptural elements have long been neglected and unconsidered, the form
consciousness of people has become atrophied; but now much is being done by
a more balanced and free education - a greater co-ordination between hand and
head - that will keep alive the intuitive form perceptions of the child. A world
without form consciousness would scarcely be alive at all. The consciousness
and understanding of volume and mass, laws of gravity, contour of the earth
under our feet, thrusts and stresses of internal structure, space displacement
and space volume, the relation of man to a mountain and man's eye to the
horizon, and all laws of movement and equilibrium - these are surely the very
essence of life, the principles and laws which are the vitalization of our
experience, and sculpture a vehicle for projecting our sensibility to the whole
of existence.



Ill

The whole life force is in the vision which includes all phantasy, all intuitive
imagination, and all conscious selection from experience. Ideas are born through
a perfect balance of our conscious and unconscious life and they are realized
through this same fusion and equilibrium. The choice of one idea from several,
and the capacity to relate the whole of our past experience to the present idea
is our conscious mind: our sensitivity to the unfolding of the idea in substance,
in relation to the very act of breathing, is our unconscious intuition.

'Abstract' is a word which is now most frequently used to express only the
type of the outer form of a work of art; this makes it difficult to use it in
relation to the spiritual vitality or inner life which is the real sculpture. Abstract
sculptural qualities are found in good sculpture of all time, but it is significant
that contemporary sculpture and painting have become abstract in thought and
concept. As the sculptural idea is in itself unfettered and unlimited and can
choose its own forms, the vital concept selects the form and substance of its
expression quite unconsciously.

Contemporary constructive work does not lose by not having particular human
interest, drama, fear or religious emotion. It moves us profoundly because it
represents the whole of the artist's experience and vision, his whole sensibility
to enduring ideas, his whole desire for a realization of these ideas in life and a
complete rejection of the transitory and local forces of destruction. It is an
absolute belief in man, in landscape and in the universal relationship of
constructive ideas. The abstract forms of his work are now unconscious and
intuitive - his individual manner of expression. His conscious life is bent on
discovering a solution to human difficulties by solving his own thought perma-
nently, and in relation to his medium. If we had lived at a time when animals,
fire worship, myth or religion were the deepest emotional aspects of life,
sculpture would have taken the form, unconsciously, of a recognizable god; and



iva The Modern as Ideal 377

the formal abstract relationships in the representation would have been the
conscious way of vitalizing these ideas; but now, these formal relationships have
become our thought, our faith, waking or sleeping - they can be the solution
to life and to living. This is no escapism, no ivory tower, no isolated pleasure
in proportion and space - it is an unconscious manner of expressing our belief
in a possible life. The language of colour and form is universal and not one for
a special class (though this may have been in the past) - it is a thought which
gives the same life, the same expansion, the same universal freedom to everyone.

The artist rebels against the world as he finds it because his sensibility reveals
|o him the vision of a world that could be possible - a world idealistic, but
practical - idealistic, inclusive of all vitality and serenity, harmony and dynamic
movement - a concept of a freedom of ideas which is all-inclusive except to
that which causes death to ideas. In his rebellion he can take either of two
courses - he can give way to despair and wildly try to overthrow all those things
which seem to stand between the world as it appears to be and the world as it
could be - or he can passionately affirm and re-affirm and demonstrate in his
plastic medium his faith that this world of ideas does exist. He can demonstrate
constructively, believing that the plastic embodiment of a free idea - a universal
truth of spiritual power - can do more, say more and be more vividly potent,
because it puts no pressure on anything.

A constructive work is an embodiment of freedom itself and is unconsciously
perceived even by those who are consciously against it. The desire to live is
the strongest universal emotion, it springs from the depths of our unconscious
sensibility - and the desire to give life is our most potent, constructive, conscious
expression of this intuition.



13 American Abstract Artists: Editorial Statement 1938

The American Abstract Artists group was founded in 1936, and published Yearbooks
in 1938, 1939 and 1946. The group's principal indebtedness was to European abstract
art, as it was then being buttressed by the formation of Paris-based organizations such
as Abstraction-Creation and Cercle et Carre (founded in 1930). It was strongly opposed
to the various schools of realistic art then claiming attention in America, arguing instead
for arf s essential distinction from life and for its universality. The AAA Yearbooks were
Published in facsimile in the Arno Series of Contemporary Art, no. 23, Arno Press,
1969.

% the fact of their active existence and production, the American Abstract
Artists express the authenticity and autonomy of the modern movement in the
United States. The word abstract is incorporated in our title as a provisional
gesture, so that we can be identified as a particular group in our effort to clarify
Rowing and actively significant concepts of art.

Abstract, like so many other words, is too often used as an idiosyncratic
Suggestion, rather than as a concept which defines particular values. To under-
stand abstract art is, in reality, no more a problem than understanding any and



378 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

all art. And this depends upon the ability of the individual to perceive essentials,
to perceive that which is called universally significant, and to evaluate the unity
and relationship that is contained in any work.

As the first and only comprehensive organization of its type in the United
States, we are faced with the familiar problem of a largely unsympathetic and
biased criticism, a criticism which merely negates, condemns, or ridicules. There
is, however, a more encouraging response to our exhibitions and lectures, a
response that could be especially experienced only by the form and action of a
representative and authentic organization. Individuals working and studying
against the odds of isolation can now be articulate and related to others working
in similar directions.

The membership of this group is homogeneous to the extent of its recognition
of mutual problems and limitations, and in its willingness to cooperate in the
presentation and solution of these problems. We are, as in any group, hetero-
geneous and diverse in our concepts.

To place artistic, or any cultural effort on the level of a competition is to
negate the method and meaning of knowledge. American Abstract Artists
dedicates itself to the problems of the artist and the student, presented in the
terms of method and activity that define the artist; and limits itself accordingly
for the purpose of clarification. As to the question of which aspects of life affect
the artist in his effort, this is demonstrated by the character and efficacy of his
activity and production; for this we present the individual artist.

No educated intelligence can draw the so-called iine of national culture' as
an ambition and objective, without discerning its ambiguity. Beside being
impossible, such a misconception is a negation of the very essence of cultural
effort; the general heightening and application of knowledge. To make this
negation may be politically expedient but it serves only to preserve and sway
ignorance. While knowledge belongs to no nationality, particular nations do
exist, and each nation has, and is, a peculiar and limited cultural development.

Considering the tempo of present political history and the importance of the
various fields of knowledge in relationship to it, we can do nothing better than
emphasize that the contemporary must respect the interpenetration and con-
catenation of all culture. True culture is recognizable when established from the
standpoint of scientific thought and effort. For us it is established through the
freedom to develop facilities and to maintain their proportional distribution, as
civilized achievements, toward the enlivenment of existence - an unequivocal
application toward the physical and psychic benefit of all humanity.

For these reasons, American Abstract Artists was formed in November of
1936. It has now attained a national scope and is more active in 1938.

- The Editors



14 Ibram Lassaw (b. 1913) 'On Inventing Our Own Art'

The author was a member of the American Abstract Artists group. In this short
statement he reproduces in highly condensed form the central credos of inter-war



IVa The Modern as Ideal 379

abstract art: its status as its own reality rather than the secondary depiction of an
external reality, its power to express emotion directly, and the need to behave as though
re-inventing art from first principles. Originally published in the American Abstract
Artists' Yearbook, 1938, reprinted by Arno Press (op. cit.).

The contemporary artist who works in the various plastic media is becoming
aware of the unlimited and hitherto undreamed of possibilities in art. In order
to penetrate this vast new world we must abandon most of the traditional
experiences. The significant art expression of the various cultures in the history
of man is greatly appreciated by the artist and interested layman; nevertheless
the present day artist must, in a sense, work as though the art of the past has
never existed; as though we invented art.

The crystallized concepts of the terms 'sculpture' and 'painting' are dissolving.
It has always been considered a function of these plastic arts to describe
appearances of people, houses, historical and religious events and subjects, and
almost all scenes occurring in the life of man. Up till now narration has also
been considered a necessary and integral part of art expression.

Until the invention of printing on a mass scale, and the development of
photography, painting and sculpture were the only means of conveying ideas
(outside of speech) to the millions of people who were completely illiterate.
Now photography and the cinema have been brought to such a high state of
perfection that painting cannot hope to compete with them in either description
or story telling. Stripped of these superimposed tasks, the underlying structure
of art becomes clear. Colors and forms alone have a greater power to move man
emotionally and psychologically. It becomes more and more apparent that art
has something more and something much greater to offer.

In view of these developments, artists are beginning to realize the limitations
of time-honored laws of art, so-called, and even the various media. It seems
that each of the many cultures of the past had grown and developed an art
expression peculiar to itself. Our own age, in some ways so completely different
from all past times and at the same time so eclectic of our heritage, is now
forming a new viewpoint of art.

Many people are now learning that we cannot produce an art of our own by
continuing to borrow styles and ways of working that came from such different
physical, philosophical and psychological world environments as the past shows.
It is like trying to transplant a tree after tearing it out of the soil without its
roots.

Certain artists have abandoned traditional pigment painting and solid, static
sculpture. They feel that the important thing for art is to be alive, to be full
of suggestion and possibilities, to enlarge our sensibility and to intensify
experience. They are experimenting in the great fields opened up by the growth
of modern physics, electricity and machinery and are influenced by the recent
discoveries in psychology and psychoanalysis. In these searches our baggage of
traditional values is a hindrance. Tacts long amassed, patiently juxtaposed,
avariciously preserved, are suspect. They bear the stigma of prudence, of
conformism, of constancy, of slowness,' writes Gaston Bachelard.



380 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

The new attitude that is being formed as a result of these searches is concerned
with the invention of objects affecting man psychologically by means of physical
phenomena. It is a new form of magic. The artist no longer feels that he is
'representing reality', he is actually making reality. Direct sensual experience is
more real than living in the midst of symbols, slogans, worn-out plots, cliches
- more real than political-oratorical art. Reality is something stranger and greater
than merely photographic rendering can show. Jean Cocteau has very aptly said
in his film Le Sang dun Poke: 'A plaster cast is exactly like the original except
in everything.' We must make originals. All aesthetic phenomena produced by
artists belong to the field of art, whether they fit into the former concepts and
definitions or not. A work of art must work.



15 Ben Nicholson (1894-1982) 'Notes on Abstract Art'

Nicholson was the foremost English abstract painter of the inter-war years and a leading
figure in attempts to establish the English Modern Movement on an international footing.
He showed abstract all-white reliefs in an exhibition at the Lefevre Gallery, London, in
1935. The following year he was represented in the exhibition 'Abstract and Concrete',
and in 1937 acted as co-editor of Circle with Gabo and the architect Leslie Martin. His
'Notes on Abstract Art' were originally published in Horizon, London, October 1941,
and in slightly revised form in Herbert Read (intra.), Ben Nicholson, paintings, reliefs,
drawings, London, 1948, from which the present text is taken.

About 'abstract' art: I have not yet seen it pointed out that this liberation of
form and colour is closely linked with all the other liberations one hears about.
I think it ought, perhaps, to come into one of our lists of war-aims. After all,
every movement of human life is affected by form and colour, everything we
see, touch, think and feel is linked up with it, so that when an artist can use
these elements freely and creatively it can be a tremendously potent influence
in our lives. The power, for instance, to create space (not 'literary' space but
actual space) is surely invaluable. I think, too, that so far from 'abstract' art
being the withdrawal of the artist from reality (into an 'ivory tower') it has
brought art once again into common every-day life - there is evidence of this
in its common spirit with and influence on many things like contemporary
architecture, aeroplanes, cars, refrigerators, typography, publicity, electric tor-
ches, lipstick holders, etc. But like all the more profound religious, poetic,
scientific, musical or artistic ideas its deepest meaning is only understood by a
few and the process seems to be that these interpret it to a few more who pass
it on to the rest of the world who unconsciously incorporate it in their lives.
A Raphael is not a painting in the National Gallery - it is an active force in
our lives.

It was interesting that during an exhibition of abstract work which I held in
London several people in different professions wrote saying that they felt a
common bond between their job and mine: a yacht designer, for instance, wrote
that it was a hair's breadth in design which decided the pace or lack of pace




IVa The Modern as Ideal 381

in a yacht and that it seemed to be this same hair's breadth in design which
decided the power or lack of power in a relief. These people were getting at
the roots of the matter far more than those critics who were concerned as to
whether they were works of art and if so why (at first sight) they were so unlike
the work of Tintoretto. One can say that the problems dealt with in 'abstract'
art are related to the interplay of forces and, therefore, that any solution reached
has a bearing on all interplay between forces: it is related to Arsenal v.
Tottenham Hotspur quite as much as to the stars in their courses. I think the
recent liberation of the powerful forces of form and colour is an important
event, and when critics announce or foretell the death of abstract art they show
the same misunderstanding of the freedom of form and colour as the dictators
do of the freedom of the individual: putting an end to the liberty of either is,
however, a hopeless job, right from the start, as there is only one way of doing
so - by putting an end not only to the human race but to every other form of
life.

Many people expect one kind of art to exclude all others, but I don't see why
all the different forms can't proceed at the same time: there is a place for
abstract art, for surrealist art or indeed for an art based more directly on
representation, though since abstract art is painting and sculptural expression
free and undiluted it must have a special potency of its own.

A great deal of painting and sculpture to-day is concerned with the imitation
of life, with the imitation of a man, a tree or a flower instead of using colour
and form to create its equivalent; no one will ask what a tree is supposed to
represent and yet, with the most innocent expression in the world, they will
ask what a painting or a sculpture or a construction in space is supposed to
represent. This equivalent must be conceived within the terms of the medium,
it must be pure painting and sculptural expression, since the introduction of
anything extraneous means that the conception is adulterated and therefore that
it can no longer have a complete application to other forms of life. [. . .]

In painting a 'still-life' one takes the simple every-day forms of a bottle -
mug -jug - plate-on-table as the basis for the expression of an idea: the forms
are not entirely free though they are free to the extent that each object can be
seen from as many viewpoints as you wish at one and the same time but the
colours are free: bottle-colour for plate, plate-colour for table, or just as you
wish and working in this way you have in time not a still-life of objects but an
equivalent of something much more like deer passing through a winter forest,
over foothills and mountains, through sunlight and shadows in Arizona, Cornwall
or Provence and so, inevitably, you eventually at some point discard altogether
the forms of even the simplest objects as a basis and work out your idea, not
only in free colour but also in free form. To most people this- development may
sound easy but, for example, although I made my first 'abstract' painting in
1923 it wasn't till 1933 that I was able to establish this development. At first
the circles were freely drawn and the structure loose with accidental textures,
later I valued more the direct contact that could be obtained by flat planes of
colour made and controlled to an exact pitch and the greater tension obtainable
by the use of true circles and rectangles - the superficial appeal became less,



382 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

but the impact of the idea more direct and therefore more powerful. The
geometrical forms often used by abstract artists do not indicate, as has been
thought, a conscious and intellectual mathematical approach - a square or a
circle in art are nothing in themselves and are alive only in the instinctive and
inspirational use an artist can make of them in expressing a poetic idea. If you
take a large ultramarine blue and a small cadmium red square and place them
on a cool white surface along with a pencilled circle, you can create a most
exciting tension between these forces, and if at any time this tension becomes
too exciting you can easily, by the smallest mark made by a compass in its
centre, transfix the circle like any butterfly! [. . .]

About space-construction: I can explain one aspect of this by an early painting
I made of a shop-window in Dieppe though, at the time, this was not made
with any conscious idea of space but merely using the shop-window as a theme
on which to base an imaginative idea. The name of the shop was 'Au Chat
Botte\ and this set going a train of thought connected with the fairy tales of
my childhood and, being in French, and my French being a little mysterious,
the words themselves had also an abstract quality - but what was important
was that this name was printed in very lovely red lettering on the glass window
- giving one plane - and in this window were reflections of what was behind
me as I looked in - giving a second plane - while through the window objects
on a table were performing a kind of ballet and forming the 'eye' or life-point
of the painting - giving a third plane. These three planes and all their subsidiary
planes were interchangeable so that you could not tell which was real and which
unreal, what was reflected and what unreflected, and this created, as I see now,
some kind of space or an imaginative world in which one could live.

The same process takes place in making an abstract painting or relief, where,
for instance, as the simplest example - you can take a rectangular surface and
cut a section of it one plane lower and then in the higher plane cut a circle
deeper than, but without touching, the lower plane. One is immediately conscious
that this circle has pierced the lower plane without having touched it - even a dog
or a cat will realize this instantly - and this creates space. The awareness of
this is felt subconsciously and it is useless to approach it intellectually as this,
so far from helping, only acts as a barrier. This language is comprehensible to
anyone who doesn't set up barriers - the dog and cat set up no barriers and
their eyes, whiskers and tails are alive, without restriction, but the whiskers of
an intellectual do not give off the necessary spark and contact cannot be made.

I think that so far from being a limited expression, understood by a few,
abstract art is a powerful, unlimited and universal language.



ivb

Realism as Figuration



1 Vladimir Ilyich Lenin (1870-1924) 'On Proletarian
Culture'

Shortly after the Revolution Lenin became involved in a dispute over the issue of
'proletarian culture'. To the supporters of this idea, just as the Revolution had resulted
in the overthrow of the old political and economic forms of society, so the existing
bourgeois culture should now be replaced by a culture of the working class. It was
Lenin's view, on the other hand, that the Revolution had to proceed on the basis of
existing bourgeois standards. Moreover the idea of 'proletarian culture' was advanced
by an organization, Proletcult, which Lenin perceived as a threat to the authority of the
Party itself. The hostile resolution was submitted to the Proletcult conference on 8
October 1920. It was originally published after Lenin's death in Krasnaya Nov, no. 3,
1926. The present translation is taken from Lenin on Literature and Art, Moscow, 1967.

DRAFT RESOLUTION

1 All educational work in the Soviet Republic of workers and peasants, in
the field of political education in general and in the field of art in particular,
should be imbued with the spirit of the class struggle being waged by the
proletariat for the successful achievement of the aims of its dictatorship, i.e.,
the overthrow of the bourgeoisie, the abolition of classes, and the elimination
of all forms of exploitation of man by man.

2 Hence, the proletariat, both through its vanguard - the Communist Party
- and through the many types of proletarian organizations in general, should
display the utmost activity and play the leading part in all the work of public
education.

3 All the experience of modern history and, particularly, the more than
half-century-old revolutionary struggle of the proletariat of all countries since
the appearance of the Communist Manifesto has unquestionably demonstrated
that the Marxist world outlook is the only true expression of the interests, the
viewpoint, and the culture of the revolutionary proletariat.

4 Marxism has won its historic significance as the ideology of the revol-
utionary proletariat because, far from rejecting the most valuable achievements
of the bourgeois epoch, it has, on the contrary, assimilated and refashioned







384 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

everything of value in the more than two thousand years of the development
of human thought and culture. Only further work on this basis and in this
direction, inspired by the practical experience of the proletarian dictatorship as
the final stage in the struggle against every form of exploitation, can be
recognized as the development of a genuine proletarian culture.

5 Adhering unswervingly to this stand of principle, the All-Russia Proletcult
Congress rejects in the most resolute manner, as theoretically unsound and
practically harmful, all attempts to invent one's own particular brand of culture,
to remain isolated in self-contained organizations, to draw a line dividing the
field of work of the People's Commissariat for Education and the Proletcult, or
to set up a Proletcult 'autonomy' within establishments under the People's
Commissariat for Education and so forth. On the contrary, the Congress enjoins
all Proletcult organizations to fully consider themselves in duty bound to act as
auxiliary bodies of the network of establishments under the People's Commis-
sariat for Education, and to accomplish their tasks under the general guidance
of the Soviet authorities (specifically, of the People's Commissariat for Educa-
tion) and of the Russian Communist Party, as part of the tasks of the proletarian
dictatorship.



2 AKhRR: 'Declaration'

The Association of Artists of Revolutionary Russia was the main 'Realist' group which
arose after the end of the civil war under the New Economic Policy. It was violently
opposed to the avant-garde, representing it as a remnant of the bourgeois order, and
as such unfit to claim the mantle of 'revolutionary art'. AKhRR's approved method
involved a technique rooted in the mastery of traditional academic skills. The inaugural
Declaration was published in the catalogue to their 'Exhibition of Studies, Sketches,
Drawings and Graphics from the Life and Customs of the Workers' and Peasants' Red
Army', Moscow, June-July 1922. It was reprinted in Ivan Matsa et al. (eds.), Sovetskoie
Isskusstvo za 15 let, Moscow - Leningrad, 1933. The present translation is taken from
John Bowlt, Russian Art of the Avant Garde, London, 1976 and 1988.

The Great October Revolution, in liberating the creative forces of the people,
has aroused the consciousness of the masses and the artists - the spokesmen of
the people's spiritual life.

Our civic duty before mankind is to set down, artistically and documentarily,
the revolutionary impulse of this great moment of history.

We will depict the present day: the life of the Red Army, the workers, the
peasants, the revolutionaries, and the heroes of labor.

We will provide a true picture of events and not abstract concoctions
discrediting our Revolution in the face of the international proletariat.

The old art groups existing before the Revolution have lost their meaning,
the boundaries between them have been erased in regard to both ideology and
form - and they continue to exist merely as circles of people linked together
by personal connections but devoid of any ideological basis or content.



IVb Realism as Figuration 385

It is this content in art that we consider a sign of truth in a work of art, and
the desire to express this content induces us, the artists of Revolutionary Russia,
to join forces; the tasks before us are strictly defined.

The day of revolution, the moment of revolution, is the day of heroism, the
moment of heroism - and now we must reveal our artistic experiences in the
monumental forms of the style of heroic realism.

By acknowledging continuity in art and by basing ourselves on the contem-
porary world view, we create this style of heroic realism and lay the foundation
of the universal building of future art, the art of a classless society.



3 AKhRR: 'The Immediate Tasks of AKhRR'

This text took the form of a circular to all branches of AKhRR in May 1924. It followed
the exhibition 'Revolution, Life and Labour' of February 1924. The circular expands on
AKhRR's criticism of the Western avant-garde and of its assimilation by Russian 'leftist'
avant-garde groups. By contrast it situates itself in a 'Realist' tradition headed in French
art by Courbet and in Russia by the nineteenth-century Realist group The Wanderers.
The circular was reprinted in Matsa, op. cit. The present translation is taken from Bowlt,
op. cit.

The presidium of AKhRR and its Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) faction
consider it essential - on the second anniversary of the Association of Artists
of Revolutionary Russia (May 1, 1924) - to sum up its artistic and social
activities and to define its ideological policy in its subsequent practical work,
once the immediate tasks facing AKhRR have been solved.

From the very beginning of AKhRR's existence, when it proclaimed in its
declaration the need for a creative response to the October Revolution and for
a new reality in visual art, it has been quite clear that AKhRR should take the
organization of the new elements of social art organically linked to our revol-
utionary epoch as the basis of its artistic work, and that it should do this by
regenerating art on the foundation of a high and authentic level of painterly
skill.

The creation of the elements of a social art in the Russian school acted, by
the very fact of its existence, as a logical balance to the development of, and
enthusiasm for, the extreme, so-called leftist trends in art; it displayed their
petty-bourgeois, pre-Revolutionary, decadent substance, which was expressed in
their attempt to transfer the fractured forms of Western art - mainly French
(Cezanne, Derain, Picasso) - to a soil alien both economically and psychologi-
cally.

In no way does this signify that we should ignore all the formal achievements
of French art in the second half of the nineteenth century and to a certain
extent in the first quarter of the twentieth within the general treasury of world
art (the careful, serious study and assimilation of the painterly and formal
achievements of modern art is an essential obligation of every serious artist who
aspires to become a master). AKhRR objects only to the aspiration to reduce



386 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

the whole development of art to the imitation and repetition of models of the
French school, a school that is nurtured, in turn, on the sources of old traditions
in art.

After their two years of work in factories and plants, after the many exhibitions
they organized - which laid the foundation for the Museum of the Ail-Union
Central Council of Trade Unions and for the Red Army and Navy Museum -
the main group of AKhRR members felt convinced that subject matter, thematic
method in the study and conversion of reality, was the main element in
organizing form.

It became clear to the AKhRR artists that the factory, the plant, the
production worker, electrification, the heroes of labor, the leaders of the
Revolution, the new life of the peasants, the Red Army, the Komsomol and
Pioneers, the death and funeral of the Revolution's leader - all this contained
a new color of unprecedented power and severe fascination, a new interpretation
of synthetic form, a new compositional structure; in a word, contained the
aggregate of those conditions whose execution would regenerate easel and
monumental painting.

For the expression of these new forms created by the Revolution, the frayed,
lost forms and lacerated color hired from the masters of the French school are
absolutely useless.

For the expression of these new forms created by the Revolution a new style
is essential, a strong, precise, invigorating style that organizes thought and
feeling, the style that in our short declaration is called heroic realism.

The difficulty of solving and realizing the above tasks lies in the fact that,
while aspiring toward content in art, it is very easy to lapse into feeble, simple
imitation of a host of outdated art schools and trends.

Those artists, those young artists who wish first and foremost to be sincere,
who wish to shake off the yoke of vacuous philosophizing and inversion of the
bases of visual art decomposed through the process of analysis, fully realize the
necessity to regenerate the unity of form and content in art; and they direct all
their strength, all their creative potential, to the ceaseless scientific and com-
pletely professional study of the new model, giving it the acutely realistic
treatment that our epoch dictates.

The so-called indifference to politics of certain contemporary groups of artists
is a well or badly concealed aversion to the Revolution and a longing for a
political and moral restoration.

The harsh material conditions that surround the present-day artist on the one
hand deprive the artist of the protection of his professional interests and the
safeguarding of his work and on the other hand determine his view of art as a
weapon for the ideological struggle and clearly aggravate the difficulty of this
path; but if the Revolution has triumphed, in spite of the innumerable obstacles,
then the will to express the Revolution creatively will help the contemporary
realist artist to overcome all the difficulties he encounters on his path.

It is essential to remember that a creative artistic expression of the Revolution
is not a fruitless and driveling sentimentality toward it but a real service, because
the creation of a revolutionary art is first and foremost the creation of an art



IVb Realism as Figuration 387

- that will have the honor of shaping and organizing the psychology of the
generations to come.

Only now, after two years of AKhRR, after the already evident collapse of
the so-called leftist tendencies in art, is it becoming clear that the artist of
today must be both a master of the brush and a revolutionary fighting for the
better future of mankind. Let the tragic figure of Courbet serve as the best
prototype and reminder of the aims and tasks that contemporary art is called
on to resolve.

The reproaches of formal weakness and dilettantism that were cast at the
Wanderers by other art groups can by rights be repaid to those who made them,
for if we remember the formal achievements of the best Wanderers (Perov,
Surikov, Repin), we can see how much more profound, sincere, and serious
they were than their descendants poisoned by the vacuous decorativism, retro-
spectivism, and brittle decadence of the prerevolutionary era.

Kramskoi's prediction that the ideas of a social art would triumph under a
different political regime is beginning to be brilliantly justified; it is confirmed
by the mass withdrawal from all positions of the so-called leftist front observable
in contemporary art.

Give particular attention to the young artists, organize them, turn all your
efforts to giving polish to those natural artists from among the workers and
peasants who are beginning to prove their worth in wall newspapers; and the
hour is not far off when, perhaps, the Soviet art school will be destined to
become the most original and most important factor in the renaissance of world
art.

Ceaseless artistic self-discipline, ceaseless artistic self-perfection, unremitting
effort in the preparations for the next AKhRR exhibition - this is the only path
that will lead to the creation of a genuine, new art on whose heights form will
fuse with content. And the presidium of AKhRR and its Russian Communist
Party (Bolsheviks) faction appeal to all artists who hold near and dear the behests
and aims set before AKhRR to rally around the association in a powerful, united,
artistic, and revolutionary organization.



4 David A. Siqueiros (1896-1974), et al. <A

Declaration of Social, Political and Aesthetic
Principles'

Siqueiros was active in the Mexican mural art movement in the years following the
Mexican revolution. His commitment to Communism later led him into conflict with the
other leading muralist Diego Rivera when in the 1930s the latter became allied with
Trotsky. During Trotsky's exile in Mexico, Siqueiros was in fact implicated in an assass-
ination attempt against him. The Declaration denigrates the tradition of easel art for
its alleged privacy and elitism, and instead advocates a monumental public art. Drawn
up by Siqueiros in 1922, it was signed by all the members of the Syndicate of Technical
Workers, Painters and Sculptors. The present translation, by Sylvia Calles, is taken from
David A. Siqueiros, Art and Revolution, London, 1975.



388 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

The Syndicate of Technical Workers, Painters and Sculptors directs itself to
the native races humiliated for centuries; to the soldiers made into hangmen by
their officers; to the workers and peasants scourged by the rich; and to the
intellectuals who do not flatter the bourgeoisie.

We side with those who demand the disappearance of an ancient, cruel system
in which the farm worker produces food for the loud-mouthed politicians and
bosses, while he starves; in which the industrial workers in the factories weave
cloth and by the work of their hands make life comfortable for the pimps and
prostitutes, while they crawl and freeze; in which the Indian soldier heroically
leaves the land he has tilled and eternally sacrifices his life in a vain attempt
to destroy the misery which has lain on his face for centuries.

The noble work of our race, down to its most insignificant spiritual and
physical expressions, is native (and essentially Indian) in origin. With their
admirable and extraordinary talent to create beauty, peculiar to themselves, the art
of the Mexican people is the most wholesome spiritual expression in the world and
this tradition is our greatest treasure. Great because it belongs collectively to
the people and this is why our fundamental aesthetic goal must be to socialize
artistic expression and wipe out bourgeois individualism.

We repudiate so-called easel painting and every kind of art favoured by
ultra-intellectual circles, because it is aristocratic, and we praise monumental
art in all its forms, because it is public property.

We proclaim that at this time of social change from a decrepit order to a new
one, the creators of beauty must use their best efforts to produce ideological works
of art for the people; art must no longer be the expression of individual satisfaction
which it is today, but should aim to become a fighting, educative art for all.



5 Red Group: 'Manifesto'

The Red Group arose out of the old Novembergruppe Opposition, as an organization
of artists active in the Communist Party (KPD) in Weimar Germany. Most of its adherents
had previously been involved in Berlin Dada, and tended now to be involved in the Neue
Sachlichkeit movement, which basically entailed an 'objective' approach to painting and
photography. As they understood it, 'objectivity' involved no conflict with partisanship
in terms of the class struggle and its attendant political alignments. First published in
Die Rote Fahne (The Red Flag), 57, Berlin, 1924. The present translation is taken from
M. Kay Flavell, George Grosz: A Biography, New Haven, 1988.



Communist Artists' Group

Artists organized and active in the Communist Party have combined to form a
Communist Artists' Group. The members of this group, known as 'The Red
Group of the Union of Communist Artists', share the conviction that a good
Communist is first of all a Communist, and only secondarily a technician, artist,
and so on. They believe that all knowledge and skills are tools placed in the
service of the class struggle.




IVb Realism as Figuration 389

In close conjunction with the local central organs of the Communist Party
they have undertaken to realize the following programme, briefly outlined below,
in order to increase the effectiveness of communist propaganda in the fields of
literature, drama and the visual arts. The mode of production of communist
artists, hitherto much too anarchistic, must now be replaced by a planned form
of cooperation:

1 Organization of ideologically unified propaganda evenings.

2 Practical support in all revolutionary meetings.

3 Opposition to the Free German ideological survivals in proletarian meetings
(patriotic romanticism).

4 Artistic training organized within each district; sample copies of wall
newspapers; guidance in preparing posters and placards for demonstrations,
etc.; support of the efforts (far too dilettantish at present) of party members
to proclaim the revolution by word and image.

5 Organization of travelling exhibitions.

6 Ideological and practical education among the revolutionary artists them-
selves.

7 Public opposition to counter-revolutionary cultural manifestations.

8 Disruption and neutralization of work by bourgeois artists.

9 Exploitation of bourgeois art exhibitions for propaganda purposes.

10 Contact with pupils in art establishments and institutions, in order to
revolutionize them.

We regard the 'Red Group' as the core of an ever-expanding organization of
all proletarian revolutionary artists in Germany.

Already several writers, along with our drama comrade Erwin Piscator, have
joined the Communist Artists' Group. We now appeal to further artists and
writers to join our ranks and work in practical terms with us on the basis of
our working plan. All correspondence to be sent to Rudolf Schlichter, Neue
Winterfeldstr. 17, Berlin. 13 June 1924.

Union of Communist Artists. Chairman: George Grosz. Deputy Chairman:
Karl Witte, writer. Secretary: John Heartfield.



6 Otto Dix (1891-1969) 'The Object Is Primary'

During and immediately after the First World War Dix produced Expressionist-oriented
work on themes of war, corruption and social decay. As the 1920s progressed, his
technique became deliberately 'objective', based on research into the methods of the
Old Masters, while the range of his subjects remained basically the same. Dix was not
a member of the Communist Party, and tended to give his themes 'human', even
religious inflections in preference to militantly class-based viewpoints. This did not
protect him from being condemned as 'un-German' by the Nazis in the 1930s. The
present statement was written at a time when Dix was working on his City triptych, and
was originally published in Berliner Nachtausgabe, Berlin, 3 December 1927. It is
reprinted in U. M. Schneede (ed.), Die Zwanziger Jahre, Manifeste und Dokumente



390 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

deutscher Kunstier, Cologne, 1979, from which text the present translation is made.
The argument depends upon an identification of 'object' with 'subject' which is difficult
to render into English. Dix's point is that novelty of expression is not feasible as an aim
in itself, but follows from attention to that (object) which is the painting's subject.

In recent years, one catchphrase has motivated the present generation of creative
artists. It urges them to 'Find new forms of expression!' I very much doubt,
however, whether such a thing is possible. Anyone who looks at the paintings
of the Old Masters, or immerses himself in the study of their works, will surely
agree with me.

As I see it, at any rate, the new element in painting lies in the extension of
its subject area, an enhancement of those forms of expression already present
in essence in the Old Masters. For me, the object is primary and determines
the form. I have therefore always felt it vital to get as close as possible to the
thing I see. 'What' matters more to me than 'How'. Indeed, 'How' arises from
'What'.



7 ARBKD (Asso): 'Manifesto' and 'Statutes'

The German Association of Revolutionary Visual Artists (Association Revolutionarer
Bildender Kunstier Deutschlands), colloquially known as the 'Asso', was formed in Berlin
in 1928, following the example of AKhRR in Russia, and with a programme modelled
on that of the Red Group. Its formation cannot be disentangled from political events,
most notably the inception of the ultra-Left Third Period' in Russia. This invoked a
heightened phase of class struggle which, as far as culture was concerned, led to the
formation of new and militant Communist art organizations, and a reinvigoration of the
idea of a 'proletarian culture'. This in its turn resulted in demands for positive images
of working-class life and labour: a demand which the Asso set out to fulfil. Its member-
ship of several hundred included John Heartfield, Otto Nagel, Laszlo Peri and Arthur
Segal. The Manifesto and Statutes were issued in 1928. They are reprinted in Schneede,
op. cit., from which text the present translation is made.

Art is a weapon, the artist a warrior in the people's struggle for freedom from
a bankrupt system!

'Social being determines consciousness'

Karl Marx

In all cultural epochs of the past economic circumstances have determined the
development of art as a whole and left a distinct mark on it.

The rise of the money economy and trade in the fifteenth century created
the conditions for individual artistic activity.

The rising middle class needed art, as one of the most effective methods of
demonstrating its power and dominance to the rest of the world. Moreover, the
accumulation of money in individual hands offered an opportunity of investing
it in treasures of all kinds, and in works of art.

Only thus can the vast luxury and magnificence of the Renaissance be



IVb Realism as Figuration 391

explained, and only on these economic foundations was it possible for art to
rise in so spectacular a way.

In the epoch of fully established industrial capitalism, however, matters are
different. Even at the height of its development, industrial capitalism did not
require the aid of art to boost its power by glorifying it. It had very different
and much more efficacious methods at its disposal. The expansion of production,
investment of capital in stocks and shares, and ownership of all society's
consumer goods allowed the bourgeoisie to display their power and safeguard
their dominant position by creating a strong bourgeois state, with all its
attendant means of enforcing its power.

Profit is the first principle of the capitalist system! Only thus can the fact that
the same criterion was applied to art be explained. As a result, the art trade
came into being and works of art became market commodities, although only
those which fetched high prices from the point of view of profit.

What, in these circumstances, is the situation of the majority of artists? We
need only quote the proverb which says that 'Art goes a-begging' to indicate
the situation of artists in a capitalist society clearly enough. Unable to make a
bare living, lacking any kind of social protection, the artist is given no chance
to develop.

These are the real facts concerning the place of art and culture in the capitalist
society. Where expensive colleges and academies are still maintained today, it
is only to make the ruling classes appear to patronize art and culture. By
comparison with the many millions spent annually on armaments and the
apparatus of power (the police, the judiciary, etc.), the expenditure of the Lander
and local government authorities on the encouragement of freelance artists is
ridiculously low.

This system, which could not have succeeded without the cruel exploitation of
millions of working people, is now approaching its end. Shaken by economic crises,
threatened in its very existence by the struggle for liberty of the revolutionary
proletariat, the bourgeoisie sees only one means of delaying its fall: Fascism!
But Fascism means the ruthless dictatorship of capitalism to suppress any kind of
progress in cultural life. Fascism means a further drop in the standard of living
of all working people, and wholesale cuts to all funding for cultural purposes,
which is already low enough.

This fact, clearly recognized by Marxist-minded artists, must be brought home
to all destitute artists, dispelling the hopes and illusions still placed by some of
them on the 'strong man' [Hitler]. The devastating influence of the system will
not be countered by the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie in the form of Fascism.
Only the fall of the capitalist system and the establishment of a socialist order
of society can free mankind from the fetters of want and oppression.

Only in a socialist society, where the entire means of production are in the hands
of the working people, will all workers have equal rights and be able to enjoy the
benefits of all social and cultural achievements.

Only the revolutionary proletariat as the creator of all social assets (the fruits
of which it could not gather under the capitalist system) is competent, acting
with all the oppressed, to do away with the old system root and branch. When



392 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

the material situation of millions of working people in the socialist system has
been improved, there will be a great new hunger for knowledge and culture.
New forces are stirring and need room to develop.

Look at Soviet Russial

While the army of the unemployed is growing to vast proportions throughout
the capitalist world, while the material and cultural level of great strata of society
there has sunk to a minimum, and art and artists seem doomed to perish, the
USSR has not hands enough to satisfy all its new needs. The most distinguished
scientists, architects and city planners of today are already at work in the Soviet
Union, the first state of workers and peasants in the world, where they receive
an enthusiastic welcome and find an unparalleled field in which to operate.

'Revolutions are the locomotives of world history /'

It is an historical fact that revolutionary upheavals always bring a great
stimulus to all areas of life, but whereas the radical changes of the past and
their achievements benefited only a ruling minority, today's social revolution
serves the liberation and higher development of all mankind.

The 'Association of Revolutionary Visual Artists of Germany' (ARBKD) has
been formed because of the understanding of these facts by revolutionary artists,
as described above.

Visual artists! All of you suffer from the present terrible circumstances, when
you are forced to live and work amidst dreadful privations and humiliations!
Recognize the cause of your misery! Your wretchedness is rooted in the same
causes as that of the proletariat!

Your place, therefore, is at the side of the fighting proletariat. Like the
workers, the artists have 'nothing to lose but their chains, but a whole world
to gain!'

Join us\

Statutes of The ARBKD

1 The 'Association of Revolutionary Visual Artists of Germany' is a sister
organization of the Association of Artists of Revolutionary Russia, and is known
as the ARBKD.

2 The ARBKD aims to unite all revolutionary visual artists who support the
proletarian class struggle. Through this union, the ARBKD will bring together
the scattered forces supporting the class struggle into a centralized organization
with a single purpose,

3 Unlike those associations of artists that are based only on stylistic move-
ments and the principle of 'art for art's sake', the ARBKD aims to promote
the class struggle, in a manner suited in both style and content to the needs of
the working classes.

4 Besides a regular membership fee the ARBKD will receive from its
members a certain percentage of the fees for all work it has procured for them.

5 The ARBKD will be run not by an executive board but by a committee
of five, who will collectively make decisions about all the affairs of the ARBKD.
One member of this committee will be responsible for its business management.



iVb Realism as Figuration 393

The committee will be chosen by the full assembly. It may be removed at any
time by a majority decision of the assembly.

6 The members of the ARBKD will meet at least once a month.

7 The committee will decide on the admission of a member. Admissions
must be confirmed by the membership.



8 George Grosz (1893-1959) from 'My Life'

In the later 1920s Grosz produced more 'objective' work in accordance with the
tendency of Die Neue Sachlichkeit. At the same time, owing to the increasingly ultra-Left
turn by the Communist International, a demand was made on left-wing artists to produce
unmistakably optimistic, even propagandists, imagery. This Grosz baulked at, for all
his political commitment to the cause of the working class. His statement in response
to Communist criticism was first published in Prozektor, 14, Moscow, 1928. The
present translation, by Eileen Martin, is taken from the catalogue, Prints and Drawings
of the Weimar Republic, Stuttgart, 1985, p. 61.

[ . . . ] Often comrades who think they are particularly clever object to my
depictions of workers on the grounds that my proletarians are not, in their view,
real proletarians, they are artificial figures, the product of the petty bourgeois,
as the anarchistic artist Grosz sees them. What they mean is that since the
working class is growing one should show the growing proletariat as a 'positive
idea'. But I don't think it is necessary to meet the requirements of a 'Hurrah-
Bolshevism', that sees the proletariat as always neatly brushed and combed in
the old hero's dress. I at least cannot imagine the proletariat any other way than
the way I draw it. I still see them as oppressed, at the bottom of the social
scale, badly dressed, badly paid, in dark, stinking housing and very often
dominated by the bourgeois desire to 'get to the top'. Apart from that I very
definitely don't believe that one can only serve by following a one-sided and
false idealization of the propaganda, singing praises. There are other ways of
showing the worker than with his sleeves rolled up showing a strong biceps, in
the style of the agit posters. You can't proceed from so sentimental an idea and
say that my image is false from the standpoint of the propaganda . . . You have
to remember that the mass of the German proletariat has not yet become so
aware of his strength as the worker in the Soviet Union. To help the workers
to understand their oppression and suffering, force them to admit openly to
themselves that they are wretched and enslaved, awaken their self-confidence
and stir them to the class war, that is the task for art, and it is the task I serve.



9 Alfred Rosenberg (1893-1946) from 'The Myth of
the Twentieth Century'

The author was one of the Nazis' leading spokesmen on art and culture. In 1929 he
formed the Combat League for German Culture (Kampfbund fur Deutsche Kultur). He



394 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

extended the concept of 'cultural bolshevism' (Kulturbolschewismus), initially broached
by Hitler in Mein Kampf in 1924. According to this claim all modern art was the product
of a Communist-Jewish conspiracy to undermine the 'beauty-ideal' of the Aryan race.
In this belief Rosenberg came to be involved in a conflict with Goebbels who, in his
youth, had himself been the author of an Expressionist play, and who tended to favour
Expressionism as an appropriately 'German' art. The conflict was resolved in Rosen-
berg's favour on the intervention of Hitler. As a result, all manifestations of modern art
were deemed 'entartet (degenerate). This extract is from Rosenberg's Der Mythus
des 20. Jahrhunderts, 1930, translated in Robert Pois (ed.), Alfred Rosenberg, Selected
Writings, London, 1970.

[. . .] The metropolis began its race-annihilating work. The coffee-houses of
the asphalt men became studios; theoretical bastardized dialectics became laws
for ever-new 'directions'. A race-chaos of Germans, Jews and anti-natural street
races was abroad. The result was mongrel 'art'.

[. . .] Mongrelism claimed that its bastardized progeny, nurtured by spiritual
syphilis and artistic infantilism, was able to represent 'expressions of the soul'.
One should gaze long and hard upon something like Kokoschka's Self Portrait,
in order to gain a halfway understanding of the monstrous inner-nature of this
idiot-art. In a novel, Hanns Heinz Ewers tells of a child who was talented in
so unnatural a manner as to derive a special satisfaction from the illness of
elephantiasis. Our contemporary 'European intelligentsia' finds itself in a similar
position today; an intelligentsia which, through Jewish pens, worships the
Kokoschkas, Chagalls, Pechsteins and so on as the leaders of future art.
Wherever this form goes it bears the features of degeneration, as in the case of
Schwalback, who already has dared to represent Jesus as flat-footed and bow-
legged. Lovis Corinth displayed a certain robustness, yet even this butcher of
the brush pales in comparison with the clay-corpse-coloured bastardizations of
Syrian Berlin.

Impressionism, which originally was borne by strong, talented artists, became
a battle-cry of decomposing intellectualism. An atomistic world-view atomized
even the colours; the dull level of understanding of natural science achieved its
apogee in the practitioners and theoreticians of Impressionism. A mythless world
procreated a mythless sensuousness. Men who desired inwardly to break free
from this were broken. Van Gogh is a tragic example of one who longed and
went mad. Gauguin is another example of the attempt to break free from
intellectualism. Only the Paul Signacs painted on, uninhibited, unconcernedly,
gluing their bits of colour next to one another. [ . . . ]

The complete tragedy of a mythless age also revealed [...] itself in the
following decades. Men no longer wanted intellectualism; they began to hate
the endless dissection of colour and to despise the brown gallery-colours and
copies of Titian. With correct feeling, they began to search for redemption,
expression and strength. And the result of this powerful tension was - the
abortion of Expressionism. A whole race had cried for expression and now had
nothing that it could express. It called for beauty and no longer had an ideal
of beauty. It wanted to search for life in a revived spirit of creativity and it
had lost every true ability to create form. Thus, Expressionism became a style:



IVb Realism as Figuration 395

instead of nurturing a new style-constructing strength, it continued the process
of atomization. Internally unprincipled they [the Expressionists] devoured
'primitive art', over-reached themselves in praise of Japan and China, and began
in all seriousness to direct European-Nordic art back to Asia . . . Thus, a
bar-room mystique alternated with cerebralism and cubist linear chaos, until
men became completely satiated and are today again searching, and in vain, with
what they call 'New Realism' [i.e. Die Neue SachlichJ^eit].

The essence of this completely chaotic development lies, among other places,
in the loss of that beauty-ideal which, while in many forms and costumes, still
has remained the underlying support for all European creative art. Democratic,
race-corrupting precepts and the ^/^-annihilating metropolis combined with
the carefully planned decomposing activities of the Jews. The result was not
only the shattering of Weltanschauung and state thought, but also of the art of
the Nordic West.



10 Georg Lukacs (1885-1971)
Partisanship?'



'Tendency" or



One of the twentieth century's leading Marxist thinkers on art, Lukacs offered intellectual
support for Socialist Realism. Hungarian by birth, he was active in Germany around
1930 after a period in the Soviet Union, and prior to returning there after the Nazi
assumption of power in 1933. The present text was an intervention in the dispute
between a tendentious, self-professedly 'proletarian' art, often, if somewhat paradoxi-
cally, with roots in avant-garde experimentation, and a more sober art with its heritage
in bourgeois tradition. The claim made for the latter was that it was the medium of a
more generalized 'realism'. As such it could be linked to the policy of 'Socialist Realism',
though Lukacs's treatment is characteristically more nuanced than Socialist Realism as
an official doctrine ever was. Originally published in Die Linkskurve, vol. 4, no. 6, Berlin,
1932, pp. 13-21. The present extracts are taken from the translation by David
Fernbach in Rodney Livingstone (ed.), Georg Lukacs: Essays on Realism, London, 1980.

It is understandable, indeed obvious, that the first proletarian literature should
have linked up with the 'tendency' literature of what little was left of the
literature of the progressive bourgeoisie, and thus took over both the theory
and practice of 'tendency 1 . It did so all the more, in that right from the start
it was forced to adopt, in intensified form, the positions held by this progressive
bourgeois literature at the time. 'Tendency', in other words, is something very
relative. In bourgeois literary theory, as recognized today even officially, a text
is seen as displaying 'tendency' if its class basis and aim are hostile (in class
terms) to the prevailing orientation; one's own 'tendency', therefore, is not a
tendency at all, but only that of one's opponent. The positions of struggle that
the various literary factions of the bourgeoisie took up against one another, in
which connection, of course, it was generally the more politically and socially
progressive trend that was particularly reproached for its 'tendency', rather than
the reactionary trend, were assumed with doubled vigour against the first



396 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

beginnings of proletarian literature. Any depiction of society, whether the society
of the proletariat or that of the bourgeoisie, and no matter whether this was
presented from the class standpoint of the proletariat itself, or simply from one
close to it, was viewed as 'tendentious', and every possible argument as to its
'inartistic' and 'hostile-to-art' character was marshalled against it. At the same
time, bourgeois 'pure art' became ever poorer in content and further removed
from reality, while simultaneously growing ever more tendentious, so that the
prejudice about proletarian 'tendency' art became increasingly hypocritical.
Under such conditions, it is only too readily understandable that the young
proletarian literature should have taken up the term of abuse applied to it by
the class enemy and worn it as a badge of honour, just like the Dutch 'Geusen'
(beggars) in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, or the 'sans-culottes" of the
French revolution. For a long time, therefore, we referred to our literature with
pride as a 'tendency literature'.

Yet however understandable it was to take up this theoretical position, this
in no way means it is theoretically correct. On the contrary. It takes over unseen,
together with the bourgeois formulation of the problem and the bourgeois
terminology, the entire bourgeois eclecticism involved in the very terms of the
problem itself, its bourgeois-eclectic contradictions, which are not superseded,
but rather in part glossed over, and in part rigidly polarized. What we
particularly have in mind here is the antithesis between 'pure art' and 'tendency'.
On this basis, only two answers are possible. Either, on the one hand, we express
contempt for 'pure art' and its perfection of form; literature has a social function
in the class struggle, which determines its content; we fulfil this function
consciously, and do not worry about the decaying bourgeoisie's questions of
form. (This is to restrict literature to everyday agitation, the standpoint of
mechanical materialism in literary theory.) Or else, on the other hand, we
acknowledge an 'aesthetic' and attempt to reconcile with it a 'tendency' that is
taken from the realm of the 'social' or 'political', i.e. a realm that is 'foreign to
art'. In this way, the insoluble task of introducing into the work of art a
component that is 'foreign to art' is raised in a haphazard manner. On the one
hand, therefore, aesthetic immanence is (tacitly) recognized, i.e. the 'pure'
autonomy of the work of art, or the domination of form over content; while
on the other hand it is demanded that a content which in this view lies
outside the artistic ('tendency') should prevail. The result is an eclectic
idealism.

These untranscended (and on this basis untranscendable) contradictions are
what account for Franz Mehring's lack of sureness on this question. It is well
known that Mehring also viewed the Kantian aesthetic that was decisive for the
artistic theory of the declining bourgeoisie as a necessary theoretical foundation.
The basic conception expressed in this, of 'purposefulness without purpose',
and the exclusion of all 'interestedness' from the consideration of art, is evidently
a theory of 'pure art'. [. . .]

[. . .] The limitation of this conception is shown by the way that the question
of 'tendency' is made into a question of the relationship between art and
morality, so that the subjective idealist character of 'tendency' clearly emerges:



IVb Realism as Figuration 397

'tendency' is a demand, an 'ought', an ideal, which the writer counterposes to
reality; it is not a tendency of social development itself, which is simply made
conscious by the poet (in Marx's sense), but rather a (subjectively devised)
commandment, which reality is requested to fulfil. Behind this line of thought
lies first of all the rigid and formalized separation of the various spheres of
human activity from one another. That is to say, we are confronted by the
ideological reflection of the capitalist division of labour. However, instead of
thinking of this reflection as the consequence of the division of labour, and
subjecting it to Marxist analysis and criticism, it is conceived in purely ideo-
logical terms as an 'eternal' law that separates 'essences' and is then made into
the starting-point of all further analyses in a quite unhistorical manner. Second,
human activity, practice, is conceived not in its real, objective or material
production, and as applied to changing society, but rather in its distorted and
upside-down ideological reflection (as 'morality'), so that in a similarly ahistori-
cal way, the distorted ideological result has to be made the theoretical starting-
point. Third, this counterposing of art and morality contains an uncritical and
ideological illusion of the human individual as an 'atom' of society (cf. on this
illusion The Holy Family), as well as the fetishized conception of society as
something 'thing-like', surrounding human beings as an 'alien' reality (the
environment theory), rather than being simply the sum and the system, the
result of human activity (even if under capitalism this result is not conscious
or intended). Fourth, corresponding to this rigid and mechanical counterposing
of (individual) man and society, which underlies the entire bourgeois conception
of 'morality', we find that the work of art is isolated from social practice, from
material production and the class struggle, and the task of art is thought to be
that of realizing an 'aesthetic ideal'. And fifth, on this view art and morality
are not results of the same social practice, but rather realizations of different,
divergent and rigidly counterposed ideals (in Kant's case, 'interest' and 'disin-
terest'). We can therefore apply to their relationship, and to the solution of the
problem of literature and 'tendency' ('morality'), what Hegel wrote about the
undialectical conception of body and soul: 'If we take them to be absolutely
antithetical and absolutely independent, they are as impenetrable to each other
as one piece of matter to another.'
* * *

Here we already have in embryo the literary theory of Trotskyism. For it is
clear that when Trotsky writes that 'the dictatorship of the proletariat is not
the culturally productive organization of a new society, but rather a revolutionary
means of struggle to achieve this', later going on to counterpose rigidly to one
another socialism and class struggle, culture accordingly assumes for him,
corresponding to the intensification of class struggle and the concretization of
all problems in it, the same position that (Kantian) 'pure art' did for Mehring.
'Revolutionary literature must be permeated with the spirit of social hatred . . .
(thus it is simply a 'tendency art': G.L.). Under socialism the foundation of
society is solidarity (so that a 'pure art', a 'genuine culture' is possible: G.L.).'
It is no accident, then, that the uncritical acceptance of Mehring's writings in
our literary and cultural theory has given a boost to Trotskyism. In the same



398 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

way, any mechanistic reduction of our literary goals, whether conscious and
intentional or not, must necessarily end up taking a Trotskyist turn.

It cannot be our task here to analyse in detail all the errors of this conception;
this has already been done to a large extent, moreover, in the struggle against
Trotskyism. Here we need only indicate the mistake that is decisive for our
present question: the false and undialectical view of the subjective factor. Marx
and Engels repeatedly gave the dialectic of subjective and objective factors in
social development a correct dialectical formulation, in a quite unmistakable
fashion. [ . . . ]

... it is precisely a knowledge of social necessity that determines the correct
(and important) place of the subjective factor in the development, contrary to
both the mechanistic and the idealist conceptions. Yet it does so for the
proletariat in a different fashion than for other classes. The thesis that the
working class 'have no ideals to realize' applies only to the proletariat. For other
classes, including the revolutionary period of the bourgeoisie, what Engels wrote
still holds: 'Ideology is a process accomplished by the so-called thinker con-
sciously, it is true, but with a false consciousness' (letter to Mehring, 14 July
1893). This 'false consciousness' has the subsequent result that conscious human
activity in the historical process either has no active significance at all, or else
is allotted an inflated independence or leading role, as is also shown in the way
that the subjective factor appears in the form of 'morality', its goals taking the
form of the 'ideal'. Even those bourgeois writers and thinkers who have
penetrated relatively deeply into the dialectic of history, still either get lost in
foggy mysticism or remain trapped in contradictions they are unable to resolve.

The proletariat, however, does not face this ideological barrier. Its social
being allows it (and thus also proletarian revolutionary writers) to transcend
this barrier and clearly see the class relationships, the development of the
class struggle, that lies behind the fetishized forms of capitalist society.
Clarity about these connections and their laws of development also means
clarity as to the role of the subjective factor in this development: both the
determination of this subjective factor by the objective economic and his-
torical development, and the active function of this subjective factor in the
transformation of objective conditions. This knowledge is in no way a
mechanical and immediate product of social being. It has rather to be
produced. The process of its production, however, is both a product of the
internal (material and ideological) disposition of the proletariat, as well as a
factor promoting the development of the proletariat from a 'class in itself
to a 'class for itself, i.e. promoting its internal organization for the fulfil-
ment of its world-historical task (the rise of trade unions and the party, their
further development, etc.).

If the subjective factor in history is viewed in this way - and this is how it
must be viewed by a proletarian revolutionary writer with a command of
dialectical materialism - then all the problems we have discussed above in
connection with 'tendency' simply cease to be problems at all. Such a writer
can reject the dilemma between 'pure' art and 'tendency 1 art. For in his



IVb Realism as Figuration 399

depiction, a depiction of objective reality with its real driving forces and real
developmental tendencies, there is no space for an 'ideal', whether moral or
aesthetic. He does not introduce any demands on the portrayal of reality 'from
without', for since they are the integral moments of objective reality, from which
they emerge and which they help to mould in their turn, any demands that
grow concretely out of the class struggle are necessarily an inherent part of the
writer's portrayal of reality. This is the necessary result, if the writer seeks to
depict reality correctly, i.e. dialectically. He can also reject, therefore, the other
dilemma of the 'tendentious' introduction of 'tendency' into the portrayal, the
nakedly immediate counterposing of 'tendency' and depiction of reality. He does
not need to distort the reality, to adjust it or 'tendentiously' touch it up, for
his depiction, if it is correct and dialectical, is precisely built up on a knowledge
of those tendencies (in the proper, Marxian sense of the term) that prevail in
the objective development. And no 'tendency' can or need be counterposed to
this objective reality as a 'demand', for the demands that the writer represents
are integral parts of the self-movement of this reality itself, at the same time
the results and premisses of this self-movement.

It clearly emerges from all this that the rejection of 'tendency' in no way
means any 'higher watchtower' of the writer's, in Freiligrath's sense, that would
be above 'the battlements of party' (a view which Mehring, for all his eclectic
defence of 'tendency', inclines towards despite his dislike of it). On the contrary,
a correct dialectical depiction and literary portrayal of reality presupposes the
partisanship of the writer. Naturally, again not some kind of 'partisanship in
general' as defended by Herwegh, something abstract, subjectivist and arbitrary,
but rather partisanship for the class that is the bearer of historical progress in
our period: for the proletariat, and specifically for that 'section of the working-
class party', the Communists, who are distinguished from other proletarians
because 'in the national struggles of the proletarians of the different countries,
they point out and bring to the front the common interests of the entire
proletariat, independently of nationality', while 'in the various stages of develop-
ment which the struggle of the working class against the bourgeoisie has to pass
through, they always and everywhere represent the interests of the movement
as a whole' [Communist Manifesto].

A partisanship of this kind, unlike 'tendency' or 'tendentious' presentation,
does not stand in contradiction to objectivity in the reproduction and portrayal
of reality. It is on the contrary the pre-condition for a true - dialectical -
objectivity. In contrast to 'tendency', where a position taken for some cause
amounts to an idealistic glorification, and a position against something means
simply tearing it to pieces, in contrast also to an 'above party' attitude, whose
motto (never kept to in practice) is 'to understand all is to forgive all' - an
attitude that contains an unconscious and hence almost always mendacious
standpoint - this partisanship champions precisely the position that makes
possible knowledge and portrayal of the overall process as a synthetically grasped
totality of its true driving forces, as the constant and heightened reproduction
of the dialectical contradictions that underlie it. This objectivity, however,
depends on a correct - dialectical - definition of the relationship between



W:



400 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

subjectivity and objectivity, the subjective factor and objective development, and
the dialectical unity of theory and practice. [. . .]

11 Central Committee of the All-Union Communist
Party: 'Decree on the Reconstruction of Literary
and Artistic Organizations'

The 1920s had seen fierce debates in the Soviet Union between advocates of a radical
art committed to direct intervention in society, and a more technically conservative art
which saw its major role as one of reinforcement of social and political developments.
Relatively speaking, the state had abstained from all this. By the 1930s this was
changing, as the increasingly totalitarian state under Stalin sought to intervene in all
walks of life. A Decree passed on 23 April 1932 dissolved all existing art groups and
replaced them with a single, national, Artists' Union. The Decree was reproduced in
Matsa, op. cit. This translation is drawn from Bowlt, op. cit.

The Central Committee states that over recent years literature and art have
made considerable advances, both quantitative and qualitative, on the basis of
the significant progress of Socialist construction.

A few years ago the influence of alien elements, especially those revived by
the first years of NEP, was still apparent and marked. At this time, when the
cadres of proletarian literature were still weak, the Party helped in every possible
way to create and consolidate special proletarian organs in the field of literature
and art in order to maintain the position of proletarian writers and art workers.

At the present time the cadres of proletarian literature and art have managed
to expand, new writers and artists have come forward from the factories, plants,
and collective farms, but the confines of the existing proletarian literature and
art organizations (VOAPP, RAPP, RAPM, etc.) are becoming too narrow and
are hampering the serious development of artistic creation. This factor creates
a danger: these organizations might change from being an instrument for the
maximum mobilization of Soviet writers and artists for the tasks of Socialist
construction to being an instrument for cultivating elitist withdrawal and loss
of contact with the political tasks of contemporaneity and with the important
groups of writers and artists who sympathize with Socialist construction.

Hence the need for the appropriate reconstruction of literary and artistic
organizations and the extension of the basis of their activity.

Following from this, the Central Committee of the All-Union Communist
Party (Bolsheviks) decrees:



Liquidation of the Association of Proletarian Writers (VOAPP, RAPP).

Integration of all writers who support the platform of the Soviet government

and who aspire to participate in Socialist construction in a single union of

Soviet writers with a Communist faction therein.

Execution of analogous changes with regard to the other arts.

Charging of the Organizational Bureau with working out practical measures

for the fulfilment of this resolution.



ivb Realism as Figuration 401

12 John Reed Club of New York: 'Draft Manifesto'

John Reed was the American journalist who wrote Ten Days That Shook The World, an
eyewitness account of the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917. A network of left-wing art
groups with a broadly 'proletarian' ideology emerged in the United States at the end of
the 1920s. They allied themselves with the programme of the conference of the
International Union of Writers and Artists held at Kharkov in the Soviet Union in 1930.
These groups, named in honour of Reed, existed until the change in international
communist cultural policy to the Popular Front in 1935. The New York group produced
a Draft Manifesto for the national organization, to be submitted to its conference in
May 1932. Originally published in New Masses, June 1932, p. 14.

Mankind is passing through the most profound crisis in its history. An old
world is dying; a new one is being born. Capitalist civilization, which has
dominated the economic, political, and cultural life of continents, is in the
process of decay. It received a deadly blow during the imperialist war which it
engendered. It is now breeding new and more devastating wars. At this very
moment the Far East seethes with military conflicts and preparations which will
have far-reaching consequences for the whole of humanity.

Meantime, the prevailing economic crisis is placing greater and greater
burdens upon the mass of the world's population, upon those who work with
hand or brain. In the cities of five-sixths of the globe, millions of workers are
tramping the streets looking for jobs in vain. In the rural districts, millions of
farmers are bankrupt. The colonial countries reverberate with the revolutionary
struggles of oppressed peoples against imperialist exploitation; in the capitalist
countries the class struggle grows sharper from day to day.

The present crisis has stripped capitalism naked. It stands more revealed than
ever as a system of robbery and fraud, unemployment and terror, starvation and
war.

The general crisis of capitalism is reflected in its culture. The economic and
political machinery of the bourgeoisie is in decay, its philosophy, its literature,
and its art are bankrupt. Sections of the bourgeoisie are beginning to lose faith
in its early progressive ideas. The bourgeoisie is no longer a progressive class,
and its ideas are no longer progressive ideas. On the contrary: as the bourgeois
world moves toward the abyss, it reverts to the mysticism of the middle ages.
Fascism in politics is accompanied by neo-catholicism in thinking. Capitalism
cannot give the mass of mankind bread. It is equally unable to evolve creative
ideas.

This crisis in every aspect of life holds America, like the other capitalist
countries, in its iron grip. Here there is unemployment, starvation, terror, and
preparation for war. Here the government, national, state and local, is dropping
the hypocritical mask of democracy, and openly flaunts a fascist face. The
demand of the unemployed for work or bread is answered with machine-gun
bullets. Strike areas are closed to investigators; strike leaders are murdered in
cold blood. And as the pretense of constitutionalism is dropped, as brute force
is used against workers fighting for better living conditions, investigations reveal



402 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

the utmost corruption and graft in government, and the closest cooperation of
the capitalist political parties and organized crime.

In America, too, bourgeois culture writhes in a blind alley. Since the imper-
ialist war, the best talents in bourgeois literature and art, philosophy and science,
those who have the finest imaginations and the richest craftsmanship, have
revealed from year to year the sterility, the utter impotence of bourgeois culture
to advance mankind to higher levels. They have made it clear that although the
bourgeoisie has a monopoly of the instruments of culture, its culture is in decay.
Most of the American writers who have developed in the past fifteen years betray
the cynicism and despair of capitalist values. The movies are a vast corrupt
commercial enterprise, turning out infantile entertainment or crude propaganda
for the profit of stockholders. Philosophy has become mystical and idealist.
Science goes in for godseeking. Painting loses itself in abstractions or trivialities.

In the past two years, however, a marked change has come over the American
intelligentsia. The class struggle in culture has assumed sharp forms. Recently
we have witnessed two major movements among American intellectuals: the
Humanist movement, frankly reactionary in its ideas; and a movement to the
left among certain types of liberal intellectuals.

The reasons for the swing to the left are not hard to find. The best of the
younger American writers have come, by and large, from the middle classes.
During the boom which followed the war these classes increased their income.
They played the stock-market with profit. They were beneficiaries of the New
Era. The crash in the autumn of 1929 fell on their heads like a thunderbolt.
They found themselves the victims of the greatest expropriation in the history
of the country. The articulate members of the middle classes - the writers and
artists, the members of the learned professions - lost that faith in capitalism
which during the twenties trapped them into dreaming on the decadent shores
of post-war European culture. These intellectuals suddenly awoke to the fact
that we live in the era of imperialism and revolution; that two civilizations are
in mortal combat and that they must take sides.

A number of factors intensified their consciousness of the true state of affairs.
The crisis has affected the intellectual's mind because it has affected his income.
Thousands of school-teachers, engineers, chemists, newspapermen and members
of other professions are unemployed. The publishing business has suffered
acutely from the economic crisis. Middle-class patrons are no longer able to
buy paintings as they did formerly. The movies and theatres are discharging
writers, actors and artists. And in the midst of this economic crisis, the
middle-class intelligentsia, nauseated by the last war, sees another one, more
barbarous still, on the horizon. They see the civilization in whose tenets they
were nurtured going to pieces.

In contrast, they see a new civilization rising in the Soviet Union. They see
a land of 160,000,000 people, occupying one-sixth of the globe, where workers
rule in alliance with farmers. In this vast country there is no unemployment.
Amidst the decay of capitalist economy, Soviet industry and agriculture rise to
higher and higher levels of production every year. In contrast to capitalist
anarchy, they see planned Socialist economy. They see a system with private



IVb Realism as Figuration 403

profit and the parasitic classes which it nourishes abolished; they see a world
in which the land, the factories, the mines, the rivers, and the hands and brains
of the people produce wealth not for a handful of capitalists but for the nation
as a whole. In contrast to the imperialist oppression of the colonies, to the
lynching of Negroes, to Scottsboro cases, they see 132 races and nationalities
in full social and political equality cooperating in the building of a Socialist
society. Above all, they see a cultural revolution unprecedented in history,
unparalleled in the contemporary world. They see the destruction of the
monopoly of culture. They see knowledge, art, and science made more accessible
to the mass of workers and peasants. They see workers and peasants themselves
creating literature and art, themselves participating in science and invention.
And seeing this, they realize that the Soviet Union is the vanguard of the new
Communist society which is to replace the old.

Some of the intellectuals who have thought seriously about the world crisis,
the coming war and the achievements of the Soviet Union, have taken the next
logical step. They have begun to realize that in every capitalist country the
revolutionary working class struggles for the abolition of the outworn and
barbarous system of capitalism. Some of them, aligning themselves with the
American workers, have gone to strike areas in Kentucky and Pennsylvania and
have given their talents to the cause of the working class.

Such allies from the disillusioned middle-class intelligentsia are to be wel-
comed. But of primary importance at this stage is the development of the
revolutionary culture of the working class itself. The proletarian revolution has
its own philosophy developed by Marx, Engels and Lenin. It has developed its
own revolutionary schools, newspapers, and magazines; it has its worker-corres-
pondents, its own literature and art. In the past two decades there have
developed writers, artists and critics who have approached the American scene
from the viewpoint of the revolutionary workers.

To give this movement in arts and letters greater scope and force, to bring
it closer to the daily struggle of the workers, the John Reed Club was formed
in the fall of 1929. In the past two and a half years, the influence of this
organization has spread to many cities. Today there are thirteen John Reed
Clubs throughout the country. These organizations are open to writers and
artists, whatever their social origin, who subscribe to the fundamental program
adopted by the international conference of revolutionary writers and artists
which met at Kharkov, in November, 1930. The program contains six points
upon which all honest intellectuals, regardless of their background may unite
in the common struggle against capitalism. They are:

1 Fight against imperialist war, defend the Soviet Union against capitalist
aggression;

2 Fight against fascism, whether open or concealed, like social-fascism;

3 Fight for the development and strengthening of the revolutionary labor
movement;

4 Fight against white chauvinism (against all forms of Negro discrimination
or persecution) and against the persecution of the foreign-born;



404 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

5 Fight against the influence of middle-class ideas in the work of revolutionary
writers and artists;

6 Fight against the imprisonment of revolutionary writers and artists, as well
as other class-war prisoners throughout the world.

On the basis of this minimum program, we call upon all honest intellectuals,
all honest writers and artists, to abandon decisively the treacherous illusion that
art can exist for art's sake, or that the artist can remain remote from the historic
conflicts in which all men must take sides. We call upon them to break with
bourgeois ideas which seek to conceal the violence and fraud, the corruption
and decay of capitalist society. We call upon them to align themselves with the
working class in its struggle against capitalist oppression and exploitation, against
unemployment and terror, against fascism and war. We urge them to join with
the literary and artistic movement of the working class in forging a new art that
shall be a weapon in the battle for a new and superior world.



13 Diego Rivera (1886-1957) 'The Revolutionary
Spirit in Modern Art'

After working in the Parisian avant-garde during the second decade of the century,
Rivera returned to his native Mexico to participate in, indeed to help formulate, the
country's mural art programme. The idea of such an art was conceived as a counter
to the tradition of easel art, and was stimulated by debates on the social role of art
following the Russian Revolution. A committed Communist, Rivera none the less became
critical of Stalinism and its policy in the arts, and for most of the 1930s was allied with
Trotsky. The present essay was written while Rivera was engaged on commissions in
the United States. Originally published in Modern Quarterly, vol. 6, no. 3, New York,
Autumn 1932, pp. 51-7. ('Super-Realism' is Rivera's name for Surrealism.)

ART is a social creation. It manifests a division in accordance with the division
of social classes. There is a bourgeois art, there is a revolutionary art, there is
a peasant art, but there is not, properly speaking, a proletarian art. The
proletariat produces art of struggle but no class can produce a class art until it
has reached the highest point of its development. The bourgeoisie reached its
zenith in the French Revolution and thereafter created art expressive of itself.
When the proletariat in its turn really begins to produce its art, it will be after
the proletarian dictatorship has fulfilled its mission, has liquidated all class
differences and produced a classless society. The art of the future, therefore,
will not be proletarian but Communist. During the course of its development,
however, and even after it has come into power, the proletariat must not refuse
to use the best technical devices of bourgeois art, just as it uses bourgeois technical
equipment in the form of cannon, machine guns, and steam turbines. [ . . . ]

... the man who is truly a thinker, or the painter who is truly an artist,
cannot, at a given historical moment, take any but a position in accordance with
the revolutionary development of his own time. The social struggle is the richest,



i



IVb Realism as Figuration 405

the most intense and the most plastic subject which an artist can choose.
Therefore, one who is born to be an artist can certainly not be insensible to
such developments. When I say born to be an artist, I refer to the constitution
or make-up of his eyes, of his nervous system, of his sensibility, and of his
brains. The artist is a direct product of life. He is an apparatus born to be the
receptor, the condenser, the transmitter and the reflector of the aspirations, the
desires, and the hopes of his age. At times, the artist serves to condense and
transmit the desires of millions of proletarians; at times, he serves as the
condenser and transmitter only for small strata of the intellectuals or small layers
of the bourgeoisie. We can establish it as a basic fact that the importance of an
artist can be measured directly by the size of the multitudes whose aspirations
and whose life he serves to condense and translate.

The typical theory of nineteenth-century bourgeois esthetic criticism, namely
'art for art's sake, 1 is an indirect affirmation of the fact which I have just
stressed. According to this theory, the best art is the so-called 'art for art's
sake,' or 'pure' art. One of its characteristics is that it can be appreciated only
by a very limited number of superior persons. It is implied thereby that only
those few superior persons are capable of appreciating that art; and since it is
a superior function it necessarily implies the fact that there are very few superior
persons in society. This artistic theory which pretends to be a-political has really
an enormous political content - the implication of the superiority of the few.
Further, this theory serves to discredit the use of art as a revolutionary weapon
and serves to affirm that all art which has a theme, a social content, is bad art.
It serves, moreover, to limit the possessors of art, to make art into a kind of
stock exchange commodity manufactured by the artist, bought and sold on the
stock exchange, subject to the speculative rise and fall which any commercialized
thing is subject to in stock exchange manipulations. At the same time, this
theory creates a legend which envelops art, the legend of its intangible,
sacrosanct, and mysterious character which makes art aloof and inaccessible to
the masses. [ . . . ]

[. . .] Since the proletariat has need of art, it is necessary that the proletariat
take possession of art to serve as a weapon in the class struggle. To take possession
or control of art, it is necessary that the proletariat carry on the struggle on two
fronts. On one front is a struggle against the production of bourgeois art, - and
when I say struggle I mean struggle in every sense - and on the other is a
struggle to develop the ability of the proletariat to produce its own art. It is
necessary for the proletariat to learn to make use of beauty in order to live better.
It ought to develop its sensibilities, and learn to enjoy and make use of the works
of art which the bourgeoisie, because of special advantages of training, has
produced. Nor should the proletariat wait for some painter of good will or good
intentions to come to them from the bourgeoisie; it is time that the proletariat
develop artists from their own midst. By the collaboration of the artists who have
come out of the proletariat and those who sympathize and are in alliance with
the proletariat, there should be created an art which is definitely and in every
way superior to the art which is produced by the artists of the bourgeoisie.
Such a task is the program of the Soviet Union today. [ . . . ]



406 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

[ . . . J [Russian avant-garde artists] carried on a truly heroic struggle to make
that art accessible to the Russian masses. They worked under conditions of
famine, the strain of revolution and counter revolution, and all the material and
economic difficulties imaginable, yet they failed completely in their attempts to
persuade the masses to accept Cubism, or Futurism, or Constructivism as the
art of the proletariat. Extended discussions of the whole problem arose in Russia.
Those discussions and the confusion resulting from the rejection of modern art
gave an opportunity to the bad painters to take advantage of the situation. The
academic painters, the worst painters who had survived from the old regime in
Russia, soon provided competition on a grand scale. Pictures inspired by the
new tendencies of the most advanced European schools were exhibited side by
side with the works of the worst academic schools of Russia. Unfortunately,
those that won the applause of the public were not the new painters and the
new European schools but the old and bad academic painters. Strangely enough,
it seems to me, it was not the modernistic painters but the masses of the Russian
people who were correct in the controversy. Their vote showed not that they
considered the academic painters as the painters of the proletariat, but that the
art of the proletariat must not be a hermetic art, an art inaccessible except to
those who have developed and undergone an elaborate esthetic preparation. The
art of the proletariat has to be an art that is warm and clear and strong. It was
not that the proletariat of Russia was telling these artists: 'You are too modern
for us.' What it said was: 'You are not modern enough to be artists of the
proletarian revolution.' The revolution and its theory, dialectical materialism,
have no use for art of the ivory tower variety. They have need of an art which
is as full of content as the proletarian revolution itself, as clear and forthright
as the theory of the proletarian revolution.

In Russia there exists the art of the people, namely peasant art. It is an art
rooted in the soil. In its colors, its materials, and its force it is perfectly adapted
to the environment out of which it is born. It represents the production of art
with the simplest resources and in the least costly form. For these reasons it
will be of great utility to the proletariat in developing its own art. The better
Russian painters working directly after the Revolution should have recognized
this and then built upon it, for the proletariat, so closely akin to the peasant
in many ways, would have been able to understand this art. Instead of this the
academic artists, intrinsically reactionary, were able to get control of the
situation. Reaction in art is not merely a matter of theme. A painter who
conserves and uses the worst technique of bourgeois art is a reactionary artist,
even though he may use this technique to paint such a subject as the death of
Lenin or the red flag on the barricades. [ . . . ]

Mural art is the most significant art for the proletariat. In Russia mural
paintings are projected on the walls of clubs, of union headquarters, and even
on the walls of the factories. [ . , . ] But the easel picture is an object of luxury,
quite beyond the means of the proletariat.
* # *

Bourgeois art will cease to develop when the bourgeoisie as a class is destroyed.
Great paintings, however, will not cease to give aesthetic pleasure though they




IVb Realism as Figuration 407

have no political meaning for the proletariat. One can enjoy the Crucifixion by
Mantegna and be moved by it aesthetically without being a Christian. Iris my
personal opinion that there is in Soviet Russia today too great a veneration of
the past. To me, art is always alive and vital, as it was in the Middle Ages
when a new mural was painted every time a new political or social event
required one. Because I conceive of art as a living and not a dead thing, I see
the profound necessity for a revolution in questions of culture, even in the
Soviet Union.

Of the recent movements in art, the most significant to the revolutionary
movement is that of Super-Realism. Many of its adherents are members of the
Communist Party. Some of their recent work is perfectly accessible to the
masses. Their maxim is 'Super-Realism at the service of the Revolution.'
Technically they represent the development of the best technique of the
bourgeoisie. In ideology, however, they are not fully Communist. And no
painting can reach its highest development or be truly revolutionary unless it
be truly Communist.

And now we come to the question of propaganda. (All painters have been
propagandists or else they have not been painters. Giotto was a propagandist
of the spirit of Christian charity, the weapon of the Franciscan monks of his
time against feudal oppression. Breughel was a propagandist of the struggle of
the Dutch artisan petty bourgeoisie against feudal oppression. Every artist who
has been worth anything in art has been such a propagandist.) The familiar
accusation that propaganda ruins art finds its source in bourgeois prejudice.
Naturally enough the bourgeoisie does not want art employed for the sake of
revolution. It does not want ideals in art because its own ideals cannot any
longer serve as artistic inspiration. It does not want feelings because its own
feelings cannot any longer serve as artistic inspiration. Art and thought and
feeling must be hostile to the bourgeoisie today. Every strong artist has a head
and a heart. Every strong artist has been a propagandist. I want to be a
propagandist and I want to be nothing else. I want to be a propagandist of
Communism and I want to be it in all that I can think, in all that I can speak,
in all that I can write, and in all that I can paint. I want to use my art as a
weapon. [ . . . ]



14 Mario Sironi (1885-1961) 'Manifesto of Mural
Painting'

After war service, the erstwhile Futurist Sironi became committed to Fascism. After the
Fascists took power in Italy in 1922 he became a leading member of the Novecento
group in Milan, organized by Mussolini's mistress Margherita Sarfatti. He turned increas-
ingly to classical themes in order to bolster Fascist values through an implied equation
with Ancient Rome. This led to an affirmation of mural painting as the art form most
appropriate to Fascism, in virtue of its scale and public accessibility. The 'Manifesto
della pittura murale' was also signed by Achille Funi, Massimo Campigli and Carlo Carra.
Originally published in Colonna, no. 1, Milan, December 1933. Reproduced in Les



408 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

Realismes 1919-1939, Paris (Centre Pompidou), 1980, from which the present trans-
lation is made.

Fascism is a style of life: it is life itself for Italians. No formula will ever succeed
in completely expressing it, let alone defining it. Similarly, no formula will ever
succeed in expressing, let alone defining, what is understood as Fascist art, that
is to say, an art which is the plastic expression of the Fascist spirit.

Fascist art will be created little by little and will be the result of the slow
labour of the best people. That which can and must be done straight away is
to free artists from the numerous doubts which linger on.

In the Fascist state art acquires a social function: an educative function. It must
translate the ethic of our times. It must give a unity of style and grandeur of
contour to common life. Thus art will once again become what it was in the
greatest of times and at the heart of the greatest civilizations: a perfect
instrument of spiritual direction.

The individualist conception of 'art for art's sake' is dead. As a result of this
there is a deep incompatibility between the goals that Fascist art assigns itself
and all the forms of art born of the arbitrary, of individualization, of the
particular aesthetic of a group, of a coterie, an academy. The great disquiet
which troubles all European art is the product of a time of spiritual decom-
position. Modern painting, for years and years technical exercises and minute
analyses of natural phenomena of Nordic origin, today feels the need for a
superior spiritual synthesis.

Fascist art rejects experiments or investigations, the endeavours which the
current century has indulged in. It rejects above all the 'consequences' of these
investigations, which have unfortunately been prolonged into the present. Al-
though seeming varied and often diverse, these investigations all derive from
the vulgar materialist view of life which was characteristic of the past century
and which is not only alien to us, but eventually became intolerable.

Mural painting is social painting par excellence. It acts on the popular imagin-
ation more directly than any other form of painting, and inspires lesser arts
more directly.

The renaissance of mural painting, above all of the fresco, allows the formu-
lation of the problem of Fascist art. The answer is the practical purpose of
mural painting (public buildings, public places with a civic function). They are
governed by laws; it is the supremacy of the stylistic element over the emotional,
it is its intimate association with architecture which forbids the artist from giving
way to improvisation and simple virtuosity. On the contrary, they oblige the
artist to control himself by a decisive and virile technical execution of his task.
The technique of mural painting obliges the artist to develop his own imagin-
ation and to organise it completely. There is no form of painting in which order
and rigour of composition predominate, no form of 'genre' painting, which
stands up to these tests set by the technical demands and large dimensions of
the mural painting technique.

From mural painting will arise the Fascist style' with which the new civilization
will he able to identify. The educative function of painting is above all a question



IVb Realism as Figuration 409

of style. The artist will succeed in making an impression on popular conscious-
ness by the style, by the suggestion of climate, rather than by the subject matter
(as the Communists think).

Questions of 'subject' are too simplistic to be essential to the solution. Mere
political orthodoxy of 'subject' does not suffice: it is a convenient expedient,
erroneously used by the 'advocates of content'. To be in harmony with the
spirit of revolution, the style of Fascist painting will have to be antique as well
as very new: it will have to resolutely dispense with the hitherto predominant
trend of a narrow and monotonous art, based on an alleged, fundamentally false,
'good sense' which reflects neither a 'modern' nor a 'traditional' attitude. It will
have to combat all the false returns which bolster an elementary aestheticism
and constitute an obvious outrage to any true sense of tradition.

A moral question arises for every artist. The artist must renounce this
egocentricity which from now on can only sterilize his spirit, and become a
'militant' artist who serves a moral ideal, subordinating his own individuality
to collective work.

We do not intend to advocate practical anonymity, which is repugnant to the
Italian temperament, but rather an intimate sense of devotion to collective work.
We firmly believe that the artist will become a man amongst men as was the case
in the most prestigious eras of our civilization.

We do not want to advocate hypothetical agreement on a single artistic formula
- which would be practically impossible - but a precise and express artistic will
to free art from subjective and arbitrary elements, such as that specious
originality, which is desired and sustained only by our vanity.

We believe that the voluntary establishment of a work-discipline is necessary to
create true and authentic talent. Our great traditions, principally decorative in
character, mural and stylistic, strongly favour the birth of a fascist style. No
elective affinities with the great epochs of our past can be understood without
a profound understanding of our time. The spirituality of the beginnings of the
Renaissance is closer to us than the splendour of the great Venetians. The art
of pagan and Christian Rome is closer to us than Greek art. We have recently
come to mural painting by virtue of aesthetic principles which have developed
in the Italian spirit since the war. It is not by chance, but by insight into our
times that the most audacious experiments of Italian painters have already
focused, for years, on mural techniques and stylistic problems. The way forward
is indicated by these endeavours, until the necessary unity can be achieved.



15 Andrei Zhdanov (1896-1948) 'Speech to the
Congress of Soviet Writers'

After the dissolution of 'competing' art groups in 1932, the principal event determining
future Soviet cultural policy was the first Congress of Soviet Writers held in Moscow in
August-September 1934. The Congress approved the doctrine of Socialist Realism as
the only art appropriate to the 'building of Communism'. Although the Congress was
devoted to literature, the doctrine applied across the arts. The keynote address,



410 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

enunciating the policy of Socialist Realism, was given by Andrei Zhdanov, then Secretary
of the Communist Party and Stalin's chief cultural commissar. An English translation of
Congress speeches appeared as H. G. Scott (ed.), Problems of Soviet Literature,
London, 1935. This was reprinted as The Soviet Writers Congress 1934, London, 1977.

The key to the success of Soviet literature is to be sought for in the success
of socialist construction. Its growth is an expression of the successes and
achievements of our socialist system. Our literature is the youngest of all
literatures of all peoples and countries. And at the same time it is the richest
in ideas, the most advanced and the most revolutionary literature. Never before
has there been a literature which has organized the toilers and oppressed for
the struggle to abolish once and for all every kind of exploitation and the yoke
of wage slavery. Never before has there been a literature which has based the
subject matter of its works on the life of the working class and peasantry and
their fight for socialism. Nowhere, in no country in the world, has there been
a literature which has defended and upheld the principle of equal rights for the
toilers of all nations, the principle of equal rights for women. There is not,
there cannot be in bourgeois countries a literature which consistently smashes
every kind of obscurantism, every kind of mysticism, priest-hood and super-
stition, as our literature is doing.

The present state of bourgeois literature is such that it is no longer able to
create great works of art. The decadence and disintegration of bourgeois
literature, resulting from the collapse and decay of the capitalist system,
represent a characteristic trait, a characteristic peculiarity of the state of bour-
geois culture and bourgeois literature at the present time. Gone never to return
are the times when bourgeois literature, reflecting the victory of the bourgeois
system over feudalism, was able to create great works of the period when
capitalism was flourishing. Everything now is growing stunted - themes, talents,
authors, heroes.

* * *

[. . .] Those representatives of bourgeois literature who feel the state of things
more acutely are absorbed in pessimism, doubt in the morrow, eulogy of
darkness, extolment of pessimism as the theory and practice of art. [ . . . ]

* * *

That is how matters stand in capitalist countries. Not so with us. Our Soviet
writer derives the material for his works of art, his subject-matter, images,
artistic language and speech, from the life and experience of the men and women
of Dnieprostroy, of Magnitostroy. Our writer draws his material from the heroic
epic of the Chelyuskin expedition, from the experience of our collective farms,
from the creative action that is seething in all corners of our country.

In our country the main heroes of works of literature are the active builders
of a new life - working men and women, men and women collective farmers,
Party members, business managers, engineers, members of the Young Commun-
ist League, Pioneers. Such are the chief types and the chief heroes of our Soviet
literature. Our literature is impregnated with enthusiasm and the spirit of heroic



IVb Realism as Figuration 411

deeds. It is optimistic, but not optimistic in accordance with any 'inward, 1 animal
instinct. It is optimistic in essence, because it is the literature of the rising class
of the proletariat, the only progressive and advanced class. Our Soviet literature
is strong by virtue of the fact that it is serving a new cause - the cause of
socialist construction.

Comrade Stalin has called our writers engineers of human souls. What does
this mean? What duties does the title confer upon you?

In the first place, it means knowing life so as to be able to depict it truthfully
in works of art, not to depict it in a dead, scholastic way, not simply as 'objective
reality,' but to depict reality in its revolutionary development.

In addition to this, the truthfulness and historical concreteness of the artistic
portrayal should be combined with the ideological remoulding and education of
the toiling people in the spirit of socialism. This method in belles lettres and
literary criticism is what we call the method of socialist realism.

Our Soviet literature is not afraid of the charge of being 'tendentious.' Yes,
Soviet literature is tendencious, for in an epoch of class struggle there is not
and cannot be a literature which is not class literature, not tendencious, allegedly
non-political.

And I think that every one of our Soviet writers can say to any dull-witted
bourgeois, to any philistine, to any bourgeois writer who may talk about our
literature being tendencious: 'Yes, our Soviet literature is tendencious, and we
are proud of this fact, because the aim of our tendency is to liberate the toilers,
to free all mankind from the yoke of capitalist slavery.'

To be an engineer of human souls means standing with both feet firmly
planted on the basis of real life. And this in its turn denotes a rupture with
romanticism of the old type, which depicted a non-existent life and non-existent
heroes, leading the reader away from the antagonisms and oppression of real
life into a world of the impossible, into a world of Utopian dreams. Our
literature, which stands with both feet firmly planted on a materialist basis,
cannot be hostile to romanticism, but it must be a romanticism of a new type,
revolutionary romanticism. We say that socialist realism is the basic method of
Soviet belles lettres and literary criticism, and this presupposes that revolutionary
romanticism should enter into literary creation as a component part, for the
whole life of our Party, the whole life of the working class and its struggle
consist in a combination of the most stern and sober practical work with a
supreme spirit of heroic deeds and magnificent future prospects. Our Party has
always been strong by virtue of the fact that it has united and continues to
unite a thoroughly business-like and practical spirit with broad vision, with a
constant urge forward, with a struggle for the building of communist society.
Soviet literature should be able to portray our heroes; it should be able to
glimpse our tomorrow. This will be no Utopian dream, for our tomorrow is
already being prepared for today by dint of conscious planned work.

One cannot be an engineer of human souls without knowing the technique of
literary work, and it must be noted that the technique of the writer's work
possesses a large number of specific peculiarities.

You have many different types of weapons. Soviet literature has every



1



412 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

opportunity of employing these types of weapons (genres, styles, forms and
methods of literary creation) in their diversity and fullness, selecting all the best
that has been created in this sphere by all previous epochs. From this point of
view, the mastery of the technique of writing, the critical assimiliation of the
literary heritage of all epochs, represents a task which you must fulfil without
fail, if you wish to become engineers of human souls.

Comrades, the proletariat, just as in other provinces of material and spiritual
culture, is the sole heir of all that is best in the treasury of world literature.
The bourgeoisie has squandered its literary heritage; it is our duty to gather it
up carefully, to study it and, having critically assimilated it, to advance further.

To be engineers of human souls means to fight actively for the culture of
language, for quality of production. Our literature does not as yet come up to
the requirements of our era. The weaknesses of our literature are a reflection
of the fact that people's consciousness lags behind economic life - a defect from
which even our writers are not, of course, free. That is why untiring work
directed towards self-education and towards improving their ideological equip-
ment in the spirit of socialism represents an indispensable condition without
which Soviet writers cannot remould the mentality of their readers and thereby
become engineers of human souls.



16 David A. Siqueiros (1896-1974) 'Towards a
Transformation of the Plastic Arts'

Like his fellow Mexican muralists Rivera and Orozco, Siqueiros undertook commissions
in the United States in the 1930s. The current essay was written in New York in 1934.
It forms an expansion of his earlier 'Declaration' of 1922 (IVb4), developing the theme
of the necessity of a public mural art. Notably, however, as well as attacks on the
avant-garde, the essay contains severe, albeit veiled, criticism of Rivera, both for the
style of his murals and for the Trotskyist politics underlying them. The present trans-
lation, by Sylvia Calles, is taken from Siqueiros, op. cit.

Painters, sculptors, engravers, newspaper illustrators, photographers, architects
(Mexicans, South Americans, North Americans, Europeans), we have decided
to foment an international movement to transform the plastic arts.

Our movement is based on critical analysis of the two great contemporary art
experiences: the Paris movement and the modern Mexican movement usually
known as the Mexican Renaissance. Both these movements are disintegrating today.

One of our valuable antecedents is the mechanical techniques used by Siquei-
ros in the groups he formed in Los Angeles and Buenos Aires; the Mural Painters
Group of Los Angeles and the Poly graphic team of Buenos Aires.

What do we want?

We want to produce an art which will be physically capable of serving the public
through its material form. True art forms which will reach far and wide. This



IVb Realism as Figuration 413

art must be commercialized according to the possibilities of each country, in
order to avoid the bourgeois elitism of European art and the tourist-oriented
bureaucracy of Mexican art. We must rid ourselves of the European Utopia of
art for art's sake, and also of Mexican demagogic opportunism. We must put an
end to superficial folk art, of the type called 'Mexican Curious' which predomi-
nates in Mexico today, and substitute for it an art which is internationally valid
though based on local antecedents and functional elements.

We must coordinate our abilities and experiences and work together as a
technical team. We must put an end to the egocentrism of modern European art
and the false collectivism of official Mexican art, with its 'socialism'. We shall
both learn and teach our new art in the course of producing it: theory and practice
mill go together. We shall put an end to sterile verbal didactic teaching, which
has produced nothing of value in the last four hundred years of academism,
and which even today is still the only method of teaching art both in Mexico
and all over the world.

We must make use of all the modern tools and materials which serve the purpose
of our art, and put an end to the incredible technical anachronism to be found
in Mexico and Europe. Instead, we shall establish the fundamental premise that
art movements should always develop in accordance with the technical possibilities of
their age. Modern technique and mechanics have made such enormous progress
that they can enrich our creative capacity beyond our wildest imagination.
Unfortunately artists today seem to know nothing of the science and technology
from which their materials evolve, and their knowledge is restricted to knowing
in which shop to buy them. Modern industry has made revolutionary changes
in the chemistry of pigments which modern artists know nothing whatever about.

We must develop a polygraphs art which will combine both plastic and graphic
art and provide a greater potential for artistic expression. Art must no longer
be separated into units, either pure painting or pure sculpture, it must find a
new, more powerful, more modern language which will give it much greater
repercussion and validity as an art expression.

We must use new, dialectic forms, rather than dead, scholarly, mechanical ones.
We must evolve a dynamic graphic art in tune with the dynamism of the world
today, and we must rid ourselves of mysticism, of snobbish l archaeologism\ and
the other defects of modern art in both Europe and Mexico.

Our art must have a real scientific basis. We must get rid of the empiricism,
and emotivism which have characterized the art movements of the world until
today. For the first time in history, we shall find scientific truths which can be
proved, either physically, chemically, or psychologically. In this way we will be
able to forge a strong connection between art and science.

We must foment the teaching of exterior mural painting, public painting, in
the street, in the sunlight, on the sides of tall buildings instead of the
advertisements you see there now, in strategic positions where the people can
see them, mechanically produced and materially adapted to the realities of
modern construction. We must put an end to tourist-inspired Mexican muralism
with its archaic technique, and bureaucracy; murals painted in out of the way



414 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

places and which only emerge from hiding in select monographs published for
foreign amateurs. We will be preparing ourselves for the society of the future,
in which our type of art will be preferred to all others, because it is the effective
daily expression of art for the masses.

We shall, of course, conserve all the absolute values of the other art movements,
because we feel that tradition is an accumulation of experiences on which our
work must be based. This is even more important since our movement is a
classical movement, in as much as it responds to the social and technical realities
of the moment in which it exists.

We shall give practical form to our theories by creating workshop schools of
plastic and graphic art, from which we shall exclude archaic, livid monocopy
forms and procedures, such as easel painting; we shall exclude everything which
cannot be reproduced, we shall exclude exhibitions in 'distinguished' galleries
for the benefit of amateurs and critics, expensive limited editions, in fact
everything which can be considered art for the private collector and for a
privileged elite. In this way we shall be consequential with our own period of
history, and we shall be anticipating the art forms of the future. In this way
we shall provide an immediate and evident service to the great masses and to
all humanity.

In our workshop schools we will develop polychromed engraving (both the
traditional and, more especially the modern), polychromed lithography (traditional
and modern); large editions of polychromed posters (mechanically printed); photo-
engraving (by experimental methods); scenography; applied painting (on standards,
flags, posters, curtains and commercial art); reproducible polychromed sculpture
(made of cement, plaster cement and all other modern materials); photo-genic
painting (all our artwork must be able to be photographically reproduced);
photo-montage, cliche montage (applicable to ail kinds of graphic reproduction);
documentary photography and cinema', manual and mechanical printing (the
problem of printing is fundamental to all popular art); modern mural painting
(on cement, with silicates, using a spray gun and other applicable tools or
mechanical means such as electro-ceramics, etc.); the chemical theory and practice
of pigments and all other art materials (to prove the great superiority of modern
materials over traditional ones); descriptive geometry and industrial drawing', the
social history of the arts (rather than anecdotism).

As for publicity, we shall have simultaneous exhibitions (in private buildings
belonging to organizations and in public places; at home and abroad); co-ordi-
nated exhibitions (of multiple painting and photogenic art); we will publish
popular monographs (at prices accessible to the people); we shall set up permanent
sales posts (in towns and villages, in factories, etc.); we will try to make direct
sales of personal work (in order to help our collaborators, etc.). Our workshop
schools will have a publicity section which will take charge of this commercial
programme and invent new sales methods, because we feel that our economic
development depends on our finding a way to commercialize our products in
accordance with the possibilities of the masses.



IVb Realism as Figuration 415

17 Stuart Davis (1894-1964) and Clarence Weinstock
(1910-1964) 'Abstract Painting in America',
'Contradictions in Abstractions' and 4 A Medium
of 2 Dimensions'

This exchange offers a revealing insight into left-wing artistic debates in the 1930s in
the United States. Davis was a painter whose work tended towards abstraction. He did
not embrace an art-for-art's-sake position, however, at least not as usually characterized
by the Left. To the contrary, he addressed the economic condition of American artists
during the Depression, and was prominent in the Artists' Union. The first extract is taken
from Davis's Introduction to the catalogue of an exhibition at the Whitney Museum of
American Art, New York, February-March 1935. In brief, it is a defence of abstract art.
This essay was countered in the pages of Art Front by the magazine's editor, Clarence
Weinstock (vol. 1, no. 4, New York, April 1935). Weinstock opposes Davis from a
fundamentally Social Realist position, claiming that a figurative art alone can adequately
address the conflicts of the modern world. Davis's response, published in Art Front,
May 1935, is to claim that abstract art is itself revolutionary with respect to the
bourgeois figurative tradition, and materialist with respect to the very means from which
it is made. This latter, he claims, may be to the ultimate advantage of the abstract
artist in reacting to the problems of contemporary life. The Davis extracts are reprinted
in D. Kelder, Stuart Davis, New York, 1971. The Weinstock text is reproduced from Art
Front. Passages included in quotes at the end of Davis' second text were among
sections omitted from the printed version of his first.

[. . .] I begin very, very broadly by saying that the American artist became
conscious of abstract art by the impact of the Armory Show in 1913. [. . .]
There was no American artist who saw this show but was forced to revalue his
artistic concepts. The final charge was touched off in the foundations of the
autocracy of the Academy in a blast which destroyed its strangle hold on critical
art values forever. Henceforth the American artist realized his right to free
expression and exercised that right. [. . .]

[. . .] What is abstract art? The question will be answered differently by each
artist to whom the question is put. This is so because the generative idea of
abstract art is alive. It changes, moves and grows like any other living organism.
However, from the various individual answers some basic concordance could
doubtless be abstracted. This basic concordance of opinion would be very
elementary and would probably run something like this. Art is not and never
was a mirror reflection of nature. All efforts at imitation of nature are fore-
doomed to failure. Art is an understanding and interpretation of nature in
various media. Therefore in our efforts to express our understanding of nature
we will always bear in mind the limitations of our medium of expression. Our
pictures will be expressions which are parallel to nature and parallel lines never
meet. We will never try to copy the uncopyable but will seek to establish a
material tangibility in our medium which will be a permanent record of an idea
or emotion inspired by nature. This being so, we will never again ask the
question of painting, 'Is it a good likeness, does it look like the thing it is



416 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

supposed to represent?' Instead we will ask the question, 'Does this painting
which is a defined two-dimensional surface convey to me a direct emotional or
ideological stimulus?' Since we forego all efforts to reflect optical illusions and
concentrate on the reality of our canvas, we will now study the material reality
of our medium, paint on canvas or whatever it may be. The approach has
become scientifically experimental. A painting for example is a two-dimensional
plane surface and the process of making a painting is the act of defining two-
dimensional space on that surface. Any analogy which is drawn from our two-
dimensional expression to three-dimensional nature will only be forceful in the
degree to which our painting has achieved a two-dimensional clarity and logic.
The above is my idea of the basic implications in the abstract concept and I
think it is implicit in all the various explanations and viewpoints which have
been advanced about abstract art. The American artists who from various angles
have oriented themselves about the abstract idea have not in all cases been as
wholeheartedly scientific as the above considerations would seem to call for.
However, I believe that even in those cases where the artistic approach has been
almost entirely emotional, the concept of the autonomous existence of the canvas
as a reality which is parallel to nature has been recognized. [. . .] [DAVIS]

Any painting may be considered abstract at a certain stage of analysis, that stage
in which only the colour-form categories are being studied. The rankest
illustration has that privilege. On the other hand the most abstract painting may
be looked at as though it were the most concrete representation of imagined
objects, simple or complex, in arbitrary space relations.

Mr Davis says a painting is a 'two-dimensional plane surface, and the process
of making a painting is the act of defining two-dimensional space on that
surface'. This seems an extremely mechanical definition in that it is confined
only to the physical description of a canvas, and to the act of composition. It
is like the behaviourist description of a thought as covert mouth muscle moving.
It is also an anti-dialectical definition, in that the emergence of quality is in no
way suggested, not even by the next statement, which is 'Any analogy which is
drawn from our two-dimensional expression to three-dimensional nature will
only be forceful in the degree to which our painting has achieved a two-dimen-
sional clarity and logic'. But how can an analogy arise between the merely
parallel systems of art and nature? As to two-dimensional clarity and logic, the
poet fulfils the same demand when he objectifies his similes and metaphors,
makes them stand on their own legs as things in their own right. But just as
the poet's metaphors could not exist unless there were some element in common
between the things to which they apply and themselves, so this two-dimensional
clarity and logic could never produce analogies to three-dimensional nature
unless the systems of art and nature were not parallel but continuous, unless
there were a dynamic relation between the experience of events and aesthetic
experience. Meaning is the element in terms of which nature and art are united,
and just meaning is omitted from this abstract conception of painting. Thus,
abstract art is produced by an intention founded on a limited definition of
painting in general. Its pursuit demands of the artist a fiery passion for form,



ivb Realism as Figuration 417

in fact one might say it can be justified only when this passion exists. But this
passion is too confined, it burns only in one corner of the eye. Form becomes
like so much monopoly capital to which the society of art is sacrificed.

The absence of meaning, that is, of an apprehension of objects in much more
than their visual character, determines the fatal contradiction of abstract art. It
makes this art like the intellectualist philosophy of scholasticism, based on a
faith in God. Here all the clarity and logic are based on faith in the spectator,
on a naive hope that he will make the same interpretation of the colour forms
that the artist did. That this hope is not valid is proven by the frequent question
of simple people and workers, 'What does it mean?' They are not prepared to
take the liberties with an artist's work at which no lorgnetted art lover hesitates.

No meaning is the equivalent of any meaning. Thus an abstract painting is
at the mercy of whatever physical associations the spectator has in mind which
may make alterations of planes and masses running directly counter to the
intention of the artist . . .

An art in which emotion and ideology are so random must lose out amidst
modern conflict. It can exist only in relatively undisturbed societies, or where
an artificial stability has been temporarily built by a small section of society,
rich patrons and dependent creators. This breakwater, leaky at all times, is now
washed away. [. . .]

With this world in advancing motion before him, with men breaking through
cruelty, hunger, imperialism, fascism, war, to a consciousness of them, for power
over them, can the modern artist deny the claim of all meaningful experience
to be subject for him? He can, but not very lightly. [WEINSTOCK]

Mr. Weinstock finds contradictions in abstract art in his comments on the
'Abstract Painting in America' exhibition at the Whitney Museum. There is
nothing surprising in this as Mr Weinstock is supposedly an advocate of the
general theory of dialectical materialism, in which nature and society are
perceived to be in a constant state of revolutionary movement through the
struggle of the contradictions or opposites present in all unities.

I think that in searching for the contradictions he has overlooked some very
apparent affirmations. One, that abstract painting actually does exist. Two, that
a number of abstract paintings of the last twenty-five years clearly come within
the field of first-rate art. Three, the revolutionary history of abstract painting.

[ . . . ] In his desire to affirm the approaching revolutionary art of the inter-
national labor movement he is undialectical in his tendency to deny the reality
of bourgeois origins and concomitants. For example, in the recent exhibitions
of painting and sculpture at the Artists' Union, there were quite a few exhibits
well within the category of abstract art, and no one could say that they were
among the worst of the exhibits. True, these abstractions were not in general
the expression of that class consciousness which a more lengthy participation in
any union activities tends to produce. But these, and all abstractions, were the
result of a revolutionary struggle relative to the bourgeois academic traditions
of the immediate past and even the present. In the materialism of abstract art
in general, is implicit a negation of many ideals dear to the bourgeois heart.



418 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

Abstract art will in turn be negated along with its bourgeois associations, but
in our awareness of this let us see the situation realistically and admit that
abstract art is still in the picture. Does Mr Weinstock pretend that the abstract
tendencies in painting and the Fascist tendencies of the American Scene school
of Benton, etc.. are both alike because they are both within the bourgeois
scheme? Such a view would not seem to be realistic.

In regard to Mr Weinstock's criticism of my introduction to the catalogue of
the Abstract Show at the Whitney Museum, I can well imagine that the
introduction is open to criticism. However, I am not sure that the points selected
by Mr Weinstock are the weakest. My description of a painting as a two-dimen-
sional space definition which is parallel to nature, and which is forceful to the
degree of its logical clarity, he finds inadequate and undialectical. Perhaps it is,
to one not too familiar with the subject, but with this theory I have gotten
results which are admitted to be good relative to the time and place. The
definition assumed that the artist was already in possession of an idea which
was the result of his contact with nature, which idea was qualitatively different
[from] the sum of the sources of its generation. Add conditioning by the mind
material and the emergence of a new quality by its transference to a medium
of two dimensions, the canvas. Maybe the use of the phrase 'parallel to nature'
is incorrect from the standpoint of philosophical usage. But the definition was
meant to be a description of the material quality of a painting and did not by
intention imply that because the painting was a quality distinct from its sources,
it had no connection with them. Further, it did not by intention imply that the
two-dimensional space definition was an act undirected by social purpose.

[. . .] 'The adherents of this school argue that abstract art was divorced from
reality, that it had no contact with the people. While admitting its technical
contributions they deny it any cultural validity. Because fundamentally the
concern of the abstract artist had been his own canvas and a select group of
those interested in art. The abstract artist did not concern himself with the life
problems of the people around him. Therefore, says the social-content school,
he has betrayed his place of trust as cultural leader. He has not been realistic.'

'But the abstract artist was realistic at least with regard to his materials.'

'If the historical process is forcing the artist to relinquish his individualistic
isolation and come into the arena of life problems, it may be the abstract artist
who is best equipped to give vital artistic expression to such problems - because
he has already learned to abandon the ivory tower in his objective approach to
his materials.' [DAVIS]



18 Grant Wood (1892-1942) from Revolt Against the City

The author was a prominent Regionalist, a representative of 'American Scene' painting
in the 1930s. Whereas the other major school of contemporary figurative painting,
Social Realism, was associated with urban conditions and the political Left, Regionalism
tended to espouse conservative values as embodied in the American agricultural
heartland. Both were suspicious of the avant-garde. Wood's pamphlet was originally



IVb Realism as Figuration 419

issued by the independent publisher Frank Luther Mott in Iowa City, 1935. It is reprinted
as an Appendix to James M. Dennis, Grant Wood: A Study in American Art and Culture,
New York, 1975, from which the present extracts are taken. (PWA refers to the Public
Works of Art Project, later the Federal Arts Project, under which American artists were
given employment between 1933 and 1943, many of them on the decoration of public
buildings.)

. . . painting has declared its independence from Europe, and is retreating from
the cities to the more American village and country life. Paris is no longer the
Mecca of the American artist. The American public, which used to be interested
solely in foreign and imitative work, has readily acquired a strong interest in
the distinctly indigenous art of its own land; and our buyers of paintings and
patrons of art have naturally and honestly fallen in with the movement away
from Paris and the American pseudo-Parisians. It all constitutes not so much a
revolt against French technique as against the adoption of the French mental
attitude and the use of French subject matter in favour of an American way of
looking at things, and a utilization of the materials of our own American scene.

This is no mere chauvinism. If it is patriotic, it is so because a feeling for
one's own milieu and for the validity of one's own life and its surroundings is
patriotic. Certainly I prefer to think of it, not in terms of sentiment at all, but
rather as a common-sense utilization for art of native materials - an honest
reliance by the artist upon subject matter which he can best interpret because
he knows it best.

Because of this new emphasis upon native materials, the artist no longer finds
it necessary to migrate even to New York, or to seek any great metropolis. No
longer is it necessary for him to suffer the confusing cosmopolitanism, the noise,
the too intimate gregariousness of the large city. True, he may travel, he may
observe, he may study in various environments, in order to develop his
personality and achieve backgrounds and a perspective; but this need be little
more than incidental to an educative process that centers in his own home
region.
* * *

Let me try to state the basic idea of the regional movement. Each section has
a personality of its own, in physiography, industry, psychology. Thinking
painters and writers who have passed their formative years in these regions,
will, by care-taking analysis, work out and interpret in their productions these
varying personalities. When the different regions develop characteristics of their
own, they will come into competition with each other; and out of this com-
petition a rich American culture will grow. It was in some such manner that
Gothic architecture grew out of competition between different French towns as
to which could build the largest and finest cathedrals. And indeed the French
Government has sponsored a somewhat similar kind of competition ever since
Napoleon's time.

The germ of such a system for the United States is to be found in the art
work recently conducted! under the PWA. This was set up by geographical
divisions, and it produced remarkable results in the brief space of time in which



420 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

it was in operation. I should like to see such encouragement to art work
continued and expanded. The Federal Government should establish regional
schools for art instruction to specially gifted students in connection with
universities or other centers of culture in various sections.

In suggesting that these schools should be allied with the universities, I do
not mean to commit them to pedantic or even strictly academic requirements.
But I do believe that the general liberal arts culture is highly desirable in a
painter's training. The artist must know more today than he had to know in
former years. My own art students, for example, get a general course in natural
science - not with any idea of their specializing in biology or physics, but
because they need to know what is going on in the modern world. The main
thing is to teach students to think, and if they can to feel. Technical expression,
though important, is secondary; it will follow in due time, according to the
needs of each student. Because of this necessity of training in the liberal arts,
the Government art schools should be placed at educational centers.

The annual exhibits of the work of schools of this character would arouse
general interest and greatly enlarge our American art public. A local pride would
be excited that might rival that which even hard-headed business men feel for
home football teams and such enterprises. There is nothing ridiculous about
such support; it would be only a by-product of a form of public art education
which, when extended over a long period of time would make us a great
art-loving nation.

Mural painting is obviously well adapted to Government projects, and it is
also highly suitable for regional expression. It enables students to work in
groups, to develop original ideas under proper guidance, and to work with a
very definite purpose. I am far from commending all the painting that has gone
onto walls in the past year or two, for I realize there has not been much success
in finding a style well suited to the steel-construction building; but these things
will come, and there is sure to be a wonderful development in mural painting
within the next few years. In it I hope that art students working with
Government aid may play a large part. My students at the State University of
Iowa hope to decorate the entire University Theatre, when the building is
finished, in true fresco; and there is to be regional competition for the murals
and sculpture in three new Iowa postoffices . . .

I am willing to go so far as to say that I believe the hope of a native American
art lies in the development of regional art centers and the competition between
them. It seems the one way to the building up of an honestly art-conscious
America. [. . .]

But whatever may be the future course of regional competitions, the fact of
the revolt against the city is undeniable. Perhaps but few would concur with
Thomas Jefferson's characterization of cities as 'ulcers on the body politic';
but, for the moment at least, much of their lure is gone. Is this only a passing
phase of abnormal times? Having at heart a deep desire for a widely dif-
fused love for art among our whole people, I can only hope that the next
few years may see a growth of non-urban and regional activity in the arts and
letters.



ivb Realism as Figuration 421

19 Francis Klingender (1907-1955) 'Content and
Form in Art'

Originally trained as an economist and historian, Klingender none the less conceived
art as possessed of a significant social role, as what he called 'one of the great
value-forming agencies in the social structure'. An orthodox Marxist, he was during the
1930s a member of the executive committee of the London-based Artists' International
Association. The present text was originally written as one of five contributions to an
AIA symposium on the subject of 'Revolutionary Art'. This resulted in the publication
Five on Revolutionary Art, ed. Betty Rea, London, 1935, from which the present extract
is taken.

Like all other forms of social consciousness art is an expression of social
existence, an ideological reflection of the everchanging forms which the struggle
between social man and nature assumes in the process of human development.
If we are to analyse art, we must thus commence by analysing the social group
whose art it is. The character of any given phase of social reality is objectively
determined first by its technical equipment for the struggle with nature, by its
productive resources, and secondly by the specific manner in which its individual
members co-operate with one another in applying their technique to the tasks
of production. In all phases of social development intermediary between the
classless communities of the early hunting tribes and the classless society of
Communism the latter criterion is expressed in the class structure of the given
social unit.

Art, however, is more than a mere reflection of social reality. It is at the same
time, and even primarily, a revolutionary agent for the transformation of that
reality. Untrammelled by the rigid fetters of transcendental dogma, without, on
the other hand, having to resort to the lengthy processes of logical deduction
and experimental verification, art is the most spontaneous form of social
consciousness. As such it immediately reacts to any change in the basic factors
of existence, it immediately senses the resulting discrepancy between the new
conditions of life and the old forms of consciousness, which it at once sets about
to transform. In continually changing the consciousness of man, art is one of
the most powerful and indispensable allies of all forces of advance.

Viewed in this light, the problem of content assumes an entirely new
significance. Content is not, what it necessarily appears to be if art is approached
as an independent entity, if the study of art is divorced from the study of social
Teality, the mere 'literary' subject-matter of art, its history is not mere icono-
graphy. The content of art is an expression of the peculiar emotional and
intellectual response of a given social group to the material conditions of its
existence, a response that is given an immediately convincing, because emotion-
ally heightened, form in art. Form without content, form torn from its vital
source of social existence must necessarily be sterile. The negation of content
leaves art a lifeless abstraction doomed to decay. Form is the language by which
content is communicated, to remain convincing it must change with every change
of the content it is destined to express. Content and form are thus the



422 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

inseparable poles of a greater unity, the unity of style that has its roots in the
mother soil of social reality.
# # *

The conquest of nature was the great historical mission of capitalism. By
training the former small-scale producers in the discipline of collective work,
by equipping that new working class with the tools of modern science and
industry and thus raising the productivity of man at a hitherto unheard of rate,
capitalism produced the material conditions required for the successful estab-
lishment of a free, classless, society. This progressive role of the bourgeoisie
was embodied in the mechanical materialism of 19th century science and in the
objective realism culminating in the art of Courbet.

Once the technical revolution was achieved, as it was in the France of the
1870s, the continued existence of capitalist accumulation with its symptoms of
permanent poverty for the great mass of the population and of the rapid
enrichment of a small minority (symptoms indispensable for its specific task of
rapidly increasing the productivity of human labour) ceased to be a historical
necessity. The capitalist class joined the forces of reaction, the proletariat took
its place as the vanguard of human progress.

The historical task of the proletariat is the solution of the problem of human
relations in society: the abolition of class exploitation and the transfer of the
means of production to society that alone enables the new mastery over nature
to be applied for increasing the welfare of all. Thus the next step in the content
sphere of art is the step from the objective interpretation of nature to the active
transformation of social reality (a step corresponding to the replacement of
mechanical by dialectic, historical, materialism). The defeat of the Commune
and the social ostracism of the progressive bourgeois artists who had dared
openly to support it (the campaign of deliberate calumny of which Courbet was
the victim, a campaign persisting even in recent art historical literature, has its
equal only in the heresy hunts of the mediaeval inquisition), for a long time
delayed this step.

The development of modern art from impressionism to abstract form has, I
submit, the following two-fold significance: in the first place it embodies the
ever more frantic flight from content, i.e. from social reality, from all reality
whatever, of the retrogressive capitalist class. Even during the imperialist era,
however, the scientific and technical conquest of nature continued to proceed
at a rapid rate, although its fruits could not increase the welfare of man, were
in fact applied to the more efficient destruction of man, as long as it remained
fettered to the interests of monopoly capitalism. In the same way the progressive
energies of the artists, barred as they were by their service to the bourgeoisie
from the vital sphere of content, found an escape in the revolutionary transfor-
mation of the technique of perception, of artistic communication, of form, a
transformation embodying all the optical, acoustic, mechanical achievements of
modern science (the conquest of light and colour, photography, the film, steel
and concrete construction, etc.). It is only necessary to look at any ordinary
news reel in order to realize how greatly our most elementary responsiveness
to shape and sound has been enlarged by the technical discoveries of modern



IVb Realism as Figuration 423

art. Nevertheless, as long as this technical revolution remains fettered to the
escape from content of a decaying class, to the extent that it submits to the
negation of content, modern art inevitably sinks to the level of pure experimen-
tation for the discovery of new facts concerning the psycho-physical response
of the human organism at the present time to different types of shape and
colour patterns: to the level, in fact, of the kaleidoscope and of the Montessori
bricks. Far from achieving the emancipation of art, the destruction of content
necessarily leads to the destruction also of form - a climax epically symbolized
in the white square painted on a white canvass of square shape by the
suprematist Malevitch. In its final decay the capitalist class destroys its art, as
it destroys its science.

Impoverished, reduced to the income level of the skilled factory hand, or
unemployed, the scientist, the technician, the artist increasingly comes to see in
the working class of today the standard bearer of all human progress. Transfused
with the vital energy of the new social content the technical achievements of
modern art will at last lead to an undreamed of enrichment of human experience.



20 Adolf Hitler (1889-1945) Speech Inaugurating the
'Great Exhibition of German Art'

The exhibition of 'Degenerate Art' ('Entartete Kunst) was held in Munich in the summer
of 1937. Representative works of avant-garde art were presented as evidence of
corruption, madness and 'cultural bolshevism': the work, as Hitler put it in 1935, of
'fools, liars, or criminals who belong in insane asylums or prisons'. Concurrently the
Nazis mounted an exhibition of 'true German art' in the Haus der Deutschen Kunst, also
in Munich. Hitler's inaugural speech was originally published as 'Der Fuhrer eroffnet die
Grosse Deutsche Kunstausstellung 1937' in Die Kunst im Dritten Reich, I, nos. 7-8,
Munich, July-August 1937, pp. 47-61. The present extracts are taken from the English
translation by Use Falk published in H.B. Chipp (ed.), Theories of Modern Art, California,
1968.

[. . .] That flood of slime and ordure which the year 1918 belched forth into
our lives was not a product of the lost war, but was only freed in its rush to
the surface by that calamity. Through the defeat, an already thoroughly diseased
body experienced the total impact of its inner decomposition. Now, after the
collapse of the social, economic, and cultural patterns which continued to
function in appearance only, the baseness already underlying them for a long
time, triumphed, and indeed this was so in all strata of our life.

[. . .] On (these) cultural grounds, more than on any others, Judaism had
taken possession of those means and institutions of communication which form,
and thus finally rule over public opinion. Judaism was very clever indeed,
especially in employing its position in the press with the help of so-called art
criticism and succeeding not only in confusing the natural concepts about the
nature and scope of art as well as its goals, but above all in undermining and
destroying the general wholesome feeling in this domain, . . .



424 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

Art, on the one hand, was defined as nothing but an international communal
experience, thus killing altogether any understanding of its integral relationship
with an ethnic group. On the other hand its relationship to time was stressed,
that is: There was no longer any art of peoples or even of races, but only an
art of the times. [. . .]

According to such a theory, as a matter of fact, art and art activities are
lumped together with the handiwork of our modern tailor shops and fashion
industries. And to be sure, following the maxim: Every year something new.
One day Impressionism, then Futurism, Cubism, maybe even Dadaism, etc. A
further result is that even for the most insane and inane monstrosities thousands
of catchwords to label them will have to be found, and have indeed been found.
If it weren't so sad in one sense, it would almost be a lot of fun to list all the
slogans and cliches with which the so-called 'art initiates' have described and
explained their wretched products in recent years. . . .

Until the moment when National-Socialism took power, there existed in
Germany a so-called 'modern art,' that is, to be sure, almost every year another
one, as the very meaning of this word indicates. National-Socialist Germany,
however, wants again a 'German Art,' and this art shall and will be of eternal
value, as are all truly creative values of a people. Should this art, however, again
lack this eternal value for our people, then indeed it will mean that it also has
no higher value today.

When, therefore, the cornerstone of this building was laid, it was with the
intention of constructing a temple, not for a so-called modern art, but for a
true and everlasting German art, that is, better still, a House for the art of the
German people, and not for any international art of the year 1937, '40, '50 or
'60. For art is not founded on time, but only on peoples. It is therefore
imperative for the artist to erect a monument, not so much to a period, but to
his people. For time is changeable, years come and go. Anything born of and
thriving on a certain epoch alone, would perish with it. And not only all which
had been created before us would fall victim to this mortality, but also what is
being created today or will be created in the future.

But we National-Socialists know only one mortality, and that is the mortality of
the people itself. Its causes are known to us. As long as a people exists, however, it
is the fixed pole in the flight of fleeting appearances. It is the being and the lasting
permanence. And, indeed, for this reason, art as an expression of the essence of this
being, is an eternal monument. . . .
* * *

Art can in no way be a fashion. As little as the character and the blood of
our people will change, so much will art have to lose its mortal character and
replace it with worthy images expressing the life-course of our people in the
steadily unfolding growth of its creations. Cubism, Dadaism, Futurism, Impres-
sionism, etc., have nothing to do with our German people. For these concepts
are neither old nor modern, but are only the artifactitious stammerings of men
to whom God has denied the grace of a truly artistic talent, and in its place
has awarded them the gift of jabbering or deception. I will therefore confess
now, in this very hour, that I have come to the final inalterable decision to



IVb Realism as Figuration 425

clean house, just as I have done in the domain of political confusion, and from
now on rid the German art life of its phrase-mongering.

'Works of art' which cannot be understood in themselves but, for the
justification of their existence, need those bombastic instructions for their use,
finally reaching that intimidated soul, who is patiently willing to accept such
stupid or impertinent nonsense - these works of art from now on will no longer
find their way to the German people.

All those catchwords: 'inner experience,' 'strong state of mind,' 'forceful will,'
'emotions pregnant with the future,' 'heroic attitude,' 'meaningful empathy,'
'experienced order of the times,' 'original primitivism,' etc. - all these dumb,
mendacious excuses, this claptrap or jabbering will no longer be accepted as
excuses or even recommendations for worthless, integrally unskilled products.

I have observed among the pictures submitted here, quite a few paintings
which make one actually come to the conclusion that the eye shows things
differently to certain human beings than the way they really are, that is, that
there really are men who see the present population of our nation only as rotten
cretins; who, on principle, see meadows blue, skies green, clouds sulphur yellow,
and so on, or, as they say, experience them as such. I do not want to enter into
an argument here about the question of whether the persons concerned really
do or do not see or feel in such a way; but, in the name of the German people,
I want to forbid these pitiful misfortunates who quite obviously suffer from an
eye disease, to try vehemently to foist these products of their misinterpretation
upon the age we live in, or even to wish to present them as 'Art.'

No, here there are only two possibilities: Either these so-called 'artists' really
see things this way and therefore believe in what they depict; then we would
have to examine their eyesight-deformation to see if it is the product of a
mechanical failure or of inheritance. In the first case, these unfortunates can
only be pitied; in the second case, they would be the object of great interest to
the Ministry of Interior of the Reich which would then have to take up the
question of whether further inheritance of such gruesome malfunctioning of the
eyes cannot at least be checked. If, on the other hand, they themselves do not
believe in the reality of such impressions but try to harass the nation with this
humbug for other reasons, then such an attempt falls within the jurisdiction of
the penal law.

This House, in any case, has neither been planned, nor was it built for the
works of this kind of incompetent or art criminal. . . .

[. . .] No, I say. The diligence of the builder of this House and the diligence
of his collaborators must be equaled by the diligence of those who want to be
represented in this House. Beyond this, I am not the least bit interested in
whether or not these 'also-rans' of the art world will cackle among themselves
about the eggs they have laid, thereby giving to each other their expert opinion.

For the artist does not create for the artist, but just like every one else he creates
for the people.

And we will see to it that from now on the people will once again be called
upon to be the judges of their own art. . . .



426 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

I do not want anybody to have false illusions: National-Socialism has made
it its primary task to rid the German Reich, and thus, the German people and
its life of all those influences which are fatal and ruinous to its existence. And
although this purge cannot be accomplished in one day, I do not want to leave
the shadow of a doubt as to the fact that sooner or later the hour of liquidation
will strike for those phenomena which have participated in this corruption.

But with the opening of this exhibition the end of German art foolishness and the
end of the destruction of its culture will have begun.

From now on we will wage an unrelenting war of purification against the last
elements of putrefaction in our culture. [. . .]



1



IVc

Realism as Critique



1 Leon Trotsky (1879-1940) from Literature and
Revolution

Trotsky's book is the most sustained contribution by a leading Bolshevik politician to
the debate on art initiated by the Russian Revolution. In contrast to later, official,
interventions it is marked by a comparative openness to the avant-garde, and by a
general assertion of the relative autonomy of art. These extracts are mainly concerned
with the Soviet avant-garde and with a critical conception of realism in art. The 'Lef '
mentioned at the outset refers to the group 'Left Front of the Arts' organized in 1923
by the poet Mayakovsky around the journal of the same name (see IIId9 and IVc8).
Written during the summers of 1922 and 1923, Trotsky's book was originally published
in Moscow in 1924. It was translated into English by Rose Strunsky in 1925, from which
text the present extracts are taken. The translation has been reprinted: by University
of Michigan, I960, and RedWords, London, 1991.

The error of the 'Lef, at least of some of its theorists, appears to us in its
most generalized form, when they make an ultimatum for the fusion of art with
life. It is not to be argued that the separation of art from other aspects of social
life was the result of the class structure of society, that the self-sufficient
character of art is merely the reverse side of the fact that art became the property
of the privileged classes, and that the evolution of art in the future will follow
the path of a growing fusion with life, that is, with production, with popular
holidays and with the collective group life. It is good that the 'Lef understands
this and explains it. But it is not good when they present a short-time ultimatum
on the basis of the present-day art, when they say: leave your 'lathe' and fuse
with life. In other words, the poets, the painters, the sculptors, the actors must
cease to reflect, to depict, to write poems, to paint pictures, to carve sculptures,
to speak before the footlights, but they must carry their art directly into life.
But how, and where, and through what gates? Of course, one may hail every
attempt to carry as much rhythm and sound and colour as is possible into
popular holidays and meetings and processions. But one must have a little
historical vision, at least, to understand that between our present-day economic
and cultural poverty and the time of the fusion of art with life, that is, between



428 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

the time when life will reach such proportions that it will be entirely formed
by art, more than one generation will have come and gone. Whether for good
or for bad, the iathe-like' art will remain for many years more, and will be the
instrument of the artistic and social development of the masses and their
aesthetic enjoyment, and this is true not only of the art of painting, but of
lyrics, novels, comedies, tragedies, sculpture and symphony. To reject art as a
means of picturing and imaging knowledge because of one's opposition to the
contemplative and impressionistic bourgeois art of the last few decades, is to
strike from the hands of the class which is building a new society its most
important weapon. Art, it is said, is not a mirror, but a hammer: it does not
reflect, it shapes. But at present even the handling of a hammer is taught with
the help of a mirror, a sensitive film which records all the movements.
Photography and motion-picture photography, owing to their passive accuracy
of depiction, are becoming important educational instruments in the field of
labour. If one cannot get along without a mirror, even in shaving oneself, how
can one reconstruct oneself or one's life, without seeing oneself in the 'mirror'
of literature? Of course no one speaks about an exact mirror. No one even thinks
of asking the new literature to have a mirror-like impassivity. The deeper
literature is, and the more it is imbued with the desire to shape life, the more
significantly and dynamically it will be able to 'picture' life.

What does it mean to 'deny experiences', that is, deny individual psychology
in literature and on the stage? This is a late and long outlived protest of the
left wing of the intelligentsia against the passive realism of the Chekhov school
and against dreamy symbolism. [. . .] In what way, on what grounds, and in
the name of what, can art turn its back to the inner life of present-day man
who is building a new external world, and thereby rebuilding himself? If art
will not help this new man to educate himself, to strengthen and refine himself,
then what is it for? And how can it organize the inner life, if it does not
penetrate it and reproduce it? Here Futurism merely repeats its own ABCs
which are now quite behind the times.

The same may be said about institutional life. Futurism arose as a protest
against the art of petty realists who sponged on life. Literature suffocated and
became stupid in the stagnant little world of the lawyer, the student, the amorous
lady, the district civil servant, and of all their feelings, their joys and their
sorrows. But should one carry one's protest against sponging on life to the
extent of separating literature from the conditions and forms of human life? If
the Futurist protest against a shallow realism had its historical justification, it
was only because it made room for a new artistic re-creating of life, for
destruction and reconstruction on new pivots. [. . .]

In reply to criticisms against the 'Lef ', which are often more insulting than
convincing, the point is emphasized that the 'Lef is still constantly seeking.
Undoubtedly the 'Lef seeks more than it has found. But this is not a sufficient
reason why the party cannot do that which is persistently recommended, and
canonize the 'Lef or even a definite wing of it, as 'Communist Art'. It is as
impossible to canonize seekings as it is impossible to arm an army with an
unrealized invention.



iVc Realism as Critique 429

But does this mean that the 'Lef stands absolutely on a false road, and that
we can have nothing to do with it? No, it does not mean this. The situation is
not that the party has definite and fixed ideas on the question of art in the
future, and that a certain group is sabotaging them. This is not the case at all.
The party has not, and cannot have, ready-made decisions on versification, on
the evolution of the theatre, on the renovation of the literary language, on
architectural style, etc., just as in another field the party has not and cannot
have ready-made decisions on the best kind of fertilization, on the most correct
organization of transport, and on the most perfect machine guns. But as regards
machine guns and transportation and fertilization, the practical decisions are
needed immediately. What does the party do then? It assigns certain party
workers to the task of considering and mastering these problems, and it checks
up these party workers by the practical results of their achievements. In the
field of art the question is both simpler and more complex. As far as the political
use of art is concerned, or the impossibility of allowing such use by our enemies,
the party has sufficient experience, insight, decision and resource. But the actual
development of art, and its struggle for new forms, are not part of the party's
tasks, nor is it its concern. The partv does not delegate anyone for such work.

# * #

When one breaks a hand or a leg, the bones, the tendons, the muscles, the
arteries, the nerves and the skin do not break and tear in one line, nor afterwards
do they grow together and heal at the same time. So, in a revolutionary break
in the life of society, there is no simultaneity and no symmetry of processes
either in the ideology of society, or in its economic structure. The ideological
premises which are needed for the revolution are formed before the revolution,
and the most important ideological deductions from the revolution appear only
much later. It would be extremely flippant to establish by analogies and
comparisons the identity of Futurism and Communism, and so form the
deduction that Futurism is the art of the proletariat. Such pretensions must be
rejected. But this does not signify a contemptuous attitude towards the work
of the Futurists. In our opinion they are the necessary links in the forming of
a new and great literature. But they will prove to be only a significant episode
in its evolution. To prove this, one has to approach the question more concretely
and historically. The Futurists in their way are right when, in answer to the
reproach that their works are above the heads of the masses, they say that
Marx's Capital is also above their heads. Of course the masses are culturally
and aesthetically unprepared, and will rise only slowly. But this is only one of
the causes of it being above their heads. There is another cause. In its methods
and in its forms, Futurism carries within itself clear traces of that world, or
rather, of that little world in which it was born, and which - psychologically
and not logically - it has not left to this very day. It is just as difficult to strip
Futurism of the robe of the intelligentsia as it is to separate form from content.
And when this happens, Futurism will undergo such a profound qualitative
change that it will cease to be Futurism. This is going to happen, but not
tomorrow. But even todav one can sav with certainty that much in Futurism



430 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

will be useful and will serve to elevate and to revive art, if Futurism will learn
to stand on its own legs, without any attempt to have itself decreed official by
the government, as happened in the beginning of the Revolution. The new forms
must find for themselves, and independently, an access into the consciousness
of the advanced elements of the working class as the latter develop culturally.
Art cannot live and cannot develop without a flexible atmosphere of sympathy
around it. On this road, and on no other, does the process of complex
interrelation lie ahead. The cultural growth of the working class will help and
influence those innovators who really hold something in their bosom. The
mannerisms which inevitably crop out in all small groups will fall away, and
from the vital sprouts will come fresh forms for the solution of new artistic
tasks. This process implies, first of all, an accumulation of material culture, a
growth of prosperity and a development of technique. There is no other road.
It is impossible to think seriously that history will simply conserve the works
of the Futurists, and will serve them up to the masses after many years, when
the masses will have become ripe for them. This, of course, would be passeism
of the purest kind. When that time, which is not immediate, will come, and
the cultural and aesthetic education of the working masses will destroy the wide
chasm between the creative intelligentsia and the people, art will have a different
aspect from what it has today. In the evolution of that art, Futurism will prove
to have been a necessary link. And is this so very little?
* * *

Our Marxist conception of the objective social dependence and social utility
of art, when translated into the language of politics, does not at all mean a
desire to dominate art by means of decrees and orders. It is not true that we
regard only that art as new and revolutionary which speaks of the worker, and
it is nonsense to say that we demand that the poets should describe inevitably
a factory chimney, or the uprising against capital! Of course the new art cannot
but place the struggle of the proletariat in the centre of its attention. But the
plough of the new art is not limited to numbered strips. On the contrary, it
must plough the entire field in all directions. Personal lyrics of the very smallest
scope have an absolute right to exist within the new art. [ . . . ] No one is going
to prescribe themes to a poet or intends to prescribe them. Please write about
anything you can think of! But allow the new class which considers itself, and
with reason, called upon to build a new world, to say to you in any given case:
It does not make new poets of you to translate the philosophy of life of the
Seventeenth Century into the language of the Acmeists. The form of art is, to
a certain and very large degree, independent, but the artist who creates this
form, and the spectator who is enjoying it, are not empty machines, one for
creating form and the other for appreciating it. They are living people, with a
crystallized psychology representing a certain unity, even if not entirely har-
monious. This psychology is the result of social conditions. The creation and
perception of art forms is one of the functions of this psychology. And no
matter how wise the Formalists try to be, their whole conception is simply
based upon the fact that they ignore the psychological unity of the social man,
who creates and who consumes what has been created.



IVc Realism as Critique 431

The proletariat has to have in art the expression of the new spiritual point
of view which is just beginning to be formulated within him, and to which art
must help him give form. This is not a state order, but an historical demand.
Its strength lies in the objectivity of historical necessity. You cannot pass this
by, nor escape its force.
* * *

Can we christen revolutionary art with any of the names that we have? Osinsky
somewhere called it realistic. The thought here is true and significant, but there
ought to be an agreement on a definition of this concept to prevent falling into
a misunderstanding.

The most perfect realism in art is coincident in our history with the 'golden
age' of literature, that is, with the classical literature of the noblemen.

The period of tendentious themes, when a work was judged primarily by the
social ideals of the author, coincides with the period when the awakening
intelligentsia sought an outlet to public activity, and tried to make a union with
the 'people' against the old regime.

The Decadent school and Symbolism, which appeared in opposition to the
'realism' which ruled before them, correspond to the period when the intelli-
gentsia tried to separate itself from the people and began to worship its own
moods and experiences. Though, in fact, it submitted itself to the bourgeoisie,
it tried not to dissolve itself into the bourgeoisie psychologically or scientifically.
In this cause Symbolism invoked the aid of heaven.

Pre-war Futurism was an attempt of the intelligentsia to rise out of the wreck
of Symbolism, while still holding on to individualism, to find a personal pivot
in the impersonal conquests of material culture.

Such is the rough logic of the succession of the large periods in the
development of Russian literature. Each one of these tendencies contained a
definite social and group attitude towards the world which laid its impress upon
the themes of the works, upon their content, upon the selection of environment,
of the dramatic characters, etc. The idea of content does not refer to subject
matter, in the ordinary sense of the term, but to social purpose. A lyric without
a theme can express an epoch or a class or its point of view as well as a social
novel.

Then there comes the question of form. Within certain limits, this develops
in accord with its own laws, like any other technology. Each new literary school
- if it is really a school and not an arbitrary grafting - is the result of a preceding
development, of the craftsmanship of word and colour already in existence, and
only pulls away from the shores of what has been attained in order to conquer
the elements anew.

Evolution is dialectical in this case, too. The new tendency in art negates the
preceding one, and why? Evidently there are sentiments and thoughts which
feel crowded within the framework of the old methods. But at the same time,
the new moods find in the already old and fossilized art some elements which
when further developed can give them adequate expression. The banner of revolt
is raised against the 'old' as a whole, in the name of the elements which can
be developed. Each literary school is contained potentially in the past and each



432 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

one develops by pulling away hostilely from the past. The relation between form
and content (the latter is to be understood not simply as a 'theme 1 but as a
living complex of moods and ideas which seek artistic expression) is determined
by the fact that a new form is discovered, proclaimed and developed under the
pressure of an inner need, of a collective psychological demand, which, like all
human psychology, has its roots in society.

This explains the dualism of every literary tendency; on the one hand, it adds
something to the technique of art, heightening (or lowering) the general level
of craftsmanship; on the other hand, in its concrete historical form, it expresses
definite demands which, in the final analysis, have a class character. We say
class, but this also means individual, because a class speaks through an individ-
ual. It also means national, because the spirit of a nation is determined by the
class which rules it and which subjects literature to itself. [ . . . ]

What are we to understand under the term realism? At various periods, and
by various methods, realism gave expression to the feelings and needs of
different social groups. Each one of these realistic schools is subject to a separate
and social literary definition, and a separate formal and literary estimation. What
have they in common? A definite and important feeling for the world. It consists
in a feeling for life as it is, in an artistic acceptance of reality, and not in a
shrinking from it, in an active interest in the concrete stability and mobility of
life. It is a striving either to picture life as it is or to idealize it, either to justify
or to condemn it, either to photograph it or generalize and symbolize it. But
it is always a preoccupation with our life of three dimensions as a sufficient
and invaluable theme for art. In this large philosophical sense and not in the
narrow sense of a literary school, one may say with certainty that the new art
will be realistic. [ . . . ]

This means a realistic monism, in the sense of a philosophy of life, and not
a 'realism' in the sense of the traditional arsenal of literary schools. On the
contrary, the new artist will need all the methods and processes evolved in the
past, as well as a few supplementary ones, in order to grasp the new life. And
this is not going to be artistic eclecticism, because the unity of art is created
by an active world-attitude and active life-attitude. [. . .]



Andre Breton (1896-1966)
Manifesto of Surrealism



from the First



Breton was introduced to Freudian analysis [see Ia4] while serving in a medical capacity
in the First World War. After the apparent exhaustion of Dada, Breton assumed the
leadership of the left wing of the avant-garde, opposing the irrational and the work of
the subconscious to the nationalism and technicism of the Esprit Nouveau group (see
IIIa7). To this end he articulated the definitive formulation of the concept of Surrealism.
The term had been coined by Apollinaire, who had also promoted the idea of a 'new
spirit' (see IIIa2). Breton's first Manifesto of Surrealism was originally published in Paris
in 1924. The present extracts are taken from the translation by R. Seaver and H.R.
Lane in Andre Breton, Manifestoes of Surrealism, Michigan, 1969.



ivc Realism as Critique 433

[. ..] Beloved imagination, what I most like in you is your unsparing quality.
The mere word 'freedom' is the only one that still excites me. I deem it
capable of indefinitely sustaining the old human fanaticism. It doubtless satisfies
my only legitimate aspiration. Among all the many misfortunes to which we are
heir, it is only fair to admit that we are allowed the greatest degree of freedom
of thought. It is up to us not to misuse it. To reduce the imagination to a state
of slavery - even though it would mean the elimination of what is commonly
called happiness - is to betray all sense of absolute justice within oneself.
Imagination alone offers me some intimation of what can be, and this is enough
to remove to some slight degree the terrible injunction; enough, too, to allow
me to devote myself to it without fear of making a mistake (as though it were
possible to make a bigger mistake). Where does it begin to turn bad, and where
does the mind's stability cease? For the mind, is the possibility of erring not
rather the contigency of good?

There remains madness, 'the madness that one locks up,' as it has aptly been
described. That madness or another. ... We all know, in fact, that the insane
owe their incarceration to a tiny number of legally reprehensible acts and that,
were it not for these acts their freedom (or what we see as their freedom) would
not be threatened. I am willing to admit that they are, to some degree, victims
of their imagination, in that it induces them not to pay attention to certain rules
- outside of which the species feels itself threatened - which we are all supposed
to know and respect. But their profound indifference to the way in which we
judge them, and even to the various punishments meted out to them, allows us
to suppose that they^rive a great deal of comfort and consolation from their
imagination, that they enjoy their madness sufficiently to endure the thought
that its validity does not extend beyond themselves. And, indeed, hallucinations,
illusions, etc., are not a source of trifling pleasure. [. . .]

The case against the realistic attitude demands to be examined, following the
case against the materialistic attitude. The latter, more poetic in fact than the
former, admittedly implies on the part of man a kind of monstrous pride which,
admittedly, is monstrous, but not a new and more complete decay. It should
above all be viewed as a welcome reaction against certain ridiculous tendencies
of spiritualism. Filially, it is not incompatible with a certain nobility of thought.
By contrast, the realistic attitude, inspired by positivism, from Saint Thomas
Aquinas to Anatole France, clearly seems to me to be hostile to any intellectual
or moral advancement. I loathe it, for it is made up of mediocrity, hate, and
dull conceit. It is this attitude which today gives birth to these ridiculous books,
these insulting plays. It constantly feeds on and derives strength from the
newspapers and stultifies both science and art by assiduously flattering the lowest
of tastes; clarity bordering on stupidity, a dog's life. The activity of the best
minds feels the effects of it; the law of the lowest common denominator finally
prevails upon them as it does upon the others. [. . .]

* * *

We are still living under the reign of logic ... But in this day and age logical
methods are applicable only to solving problems of secondary interest. The
absolute rationalism that is still in vogue allows us to consider only facts relating



434 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

directly to our experience. Logical ends, on the contrary, escape us. It is
pointless to add that experience itself has found itself increasingly circumscribed.
It paces back and forth in a cage from which it is more and more difficult to
make it emerge. It too leans for support on what is most immediately expedient,
and it is protected by the sentinels of common sense. Under the pretense of
civilization and progress, we have managed to banish from the mind everything
that may rightly or wrongly be termed superstition, or fancy; forbidden is any
kind of search for truth which is not in conformance with accepted practices.
It was, apparently, by pure chance that a part of our mental world which we
pretended not to be concerned with any longer - and, in my opinion by far the
most important part - has been brought back to light. For this we must give
thanks to the discoveries of Sigmund Freud. On the basis of these discoveries
a current of opinion is finally forming by means of which the human explorer
will be able to carry his investigations much further, authorized, as he will
henceforth be not to confine himself solely to the most summary realities. The
imagination is perhaps on the point of reasserting itself, of reclaiming its rights.
If the depths of our mind contain within it strange forces capable of augmenting
those on the surface, or of waging a victorious battle against them, there is
every reason to seize them - first to seize them, then, if need be, to submit
them to the control of our reason. The analysts themselves have everything to
gain by it. But it is worth noting that no means has been designated a priori
for carrying out this undertaking, that until further notice it can be constructed
to be the province of poets as well as scholars, and that its success is not
dependent upon the more or less capricious paths that will be followed.

Freud very rightly brought his critical faculties to bear upon the dream. It is,
in fact, inadmissible that this considerable portion of psychic activity (since, at
least from man's birth until his death, thought offers no solution of continuity,
the sum of the moments of dream, from the point of view of time, and taking
into consideration only the time of pure dreaming, that is the dreams of sleep,
is not inferior to the sum of the moments of reality, or, to be more precisely
limiting, the moments of waking) has still today been so grossly neglected. I
have always been amazed at the way an ordinary observer lends so much more
credence and attaches so much more importance to waking events than to those
occurring in dreams. It is because man, when he ceases to sleep, is above all
the plaything of his memory, and in its normal state memory takes pleasure in
weakly retracing for him the circumstances of the dream, in stripping it of any
real importance, and in dismissing the only determinant from the point where
he thinks he has left it a few hours before: this firm hope, this concern. He is
under the impression of continuing something that is worthwhile. Thus the
dream finds itself reduced to a mere parenthesis, as is the night. And, like the
night, dreams generally contribute little to furthering our understanding. This
curious state of affairs seems to me to call for certain reflections:

1 Within the limits where they operate (or are thought to operate) dreams
give every evidence of being continuous and show signs of organization. Memory
alone arrogates to itself the right to excerpt from dreams, to ignore the






IVc Realism as Critique 435

transitions, and to depict for us rather a series of dreams than the dream itself.
By the same token, at any given moment we have only a distinct notion of
realities, the coordination of which is a question of will. What is worth noting
is that nothing allows us to presuppose a greater dissipation of the elements of
which the dream is constituted. I am sorry to have to speak about it according
to a formula which in principle excludes the dream. When will we have sleeping
logicians, sleeping philosophers? I would like to sleep, in order to surrender
myself to the dreamers, the way I surrender myself to those who read me with
eyes wide open; in order to stop imposing, in this realm, the conscious rhythm
of my thought. Perhaps my dream last night follows that of the night before,
and will be continued the next night, with an exemplary strictness. It's quite
possible, as the saying goes. And since it has not been proved in the slightest
that, in doing so, the 'reality' with which I am kept busy continues to exist in
the state of dream, that it does not sink back down into the immemorial, why
should I not grant to dreams what I occasionally refuse reality, that is, this
value of certainty in itself which, in its own time, is not open to my repudiation?
Why should I not expect from the sign of the dream more than I expect from
a degree of consciousness which is daily more acute? Can't the dream also be
used in solving the fundamental questions of life? Are these questions the same
in one case as in the other and, in the dream, do these questions already exist?
Is the dream any less restrictive or punitive than the rest? I am growing old
and, more than that reality to which I believe I subject myself, it is perhaps
the dream, the difference with which I treat the dream, which makes me grow
old.

2 Let me come back again to the waking state. I have no choice but to
consider it a phenomenon of interference. Not only does the mind display, in
this state, a strange tendency to lose its bearings (as evidenced by the slips and
mistakes the secrets of which are just beginning to be revealed to us), but, what
is more, it does not appear that, when the mind is functioning normally, it
really responds to anything but the suggestions which come to it from the depths
of that dark night to which I commend it. However conditioned it may be, its
balance is relative. It scarcely dares express itself and, if it does, it confines
itself to verifying that such and such an idea, or such and such a woman, has
made an impression on it. What impression it would be hard pressed to say,
by which it reveals the degree of its subjectivity, and nothing more. This idea,
this woman, disturb it, they tend to make it less severe. What they do is isolate
the mind for a second from its solvent and spirit it to heaven, as the beautiful
precipitate it can be, that it is. When all else fails, it then calls upon chance,
a divinity even more obscure than the others to whom it ascribes all its
aberrations. Who can say to me that the angle by which that idea which affects
it is offered, that what it likes in the eye of that woman is not precisely what
links it to its dream, binds it to those fundamental facts which, through its own
fault, it has lost? And if things were different, what might it be capable of ? I
would like to provide it with the key to this corridor.

3 The mind of the man who dreams is fully satisfied by what happens to
him. The agonizing question of possibility is no longer pertinent. Kill, fly faster,



436 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

love to your heart's content. And if you should die, are you not certain of
reawaking among the dead? Let yourself be carried along, events will not tolerate
your interference. You are nameless. The ease of everything is priceless.

What reason, I ask, a reason so much vaster than the other, makes dreams
seem so natural and allows me to welcome unreservedly a welter of episodes so
strange that they would confound me now as I write? And yet I can believe my
eyes, my ears; this great day has arrived, this beast has spoken.

If man's awaking is harder, if it breaks the spell too abruptly, it is because
he has been led to make for himself too impoverished a notion of atonement.

4 From the moment when it is subjected to a methodical examination, when,
by means yet to be determined, we succeed in recording the contents of dreams
in their entirety (and that presupposes a discipline of memory spanning gener-
ations; but let us nonetheless begin by noting the most salient facts), when its
graph will expand with unparalleled volume and regularity, we may hope that
the mysteries which really are not will give way to the great Mystery. I believe
in the future resolution of these two states, dream and reality, which are
seemingly so contradictory, into a kind of absolute reality, a surreality, if one
may so speak. It is in quest of this surreality that I am going, certain not to
find it but too unmindful of my death not to calculate to some slight degree
the joys of its possession.

A story is told according to which Saint-Pol-Roux, in times gone by, used to
have a notice posted on the door of his manor house in Camaret, every evening
before he went to sleep, which read: THE POET IS WORKING.

A great deal more could be said, but in passing I merely wanted to touch
upon a subject which in itself would require a very long and much more detailed
discussion ... At this juncture, my intention was merely to mark a point by
noting the hate of the marvelous which rages in certain men, this absurdity
beneath which they try to bury it. Let us not mince words: the marvelous is
always beautiful, anything marvelous is beautiful, in fact only the marvelous is
beautiful.
* # #

One evening . . . before I fell asleep, I perceived, so clearly articulated that it
was impossible to change a word, but nonetheless removed from the sound of
any voice, a rather strange phrase which came to me without any apparent
relationship to the events in which, my consciousness agrees, I was then
involved, a phrase which seemed to me insistent, a phrase, if I may be so bold,
which was knocking at the window. I took cursory note of it and prepared to
move on when its organic character caught my attention. Actually, this phrase
astonished me: unfortunately I cannot remember it exactly, but it was something
like: 'There is a man cut in two by the window,' but there could be no question
of ambiguity, accompanied as it was by the faint visual image of a man walking
cut half way up by a window perpendicular to the axis of his body. Beyond the
slightest shadow of a doubt, what I saw was the simple reconstruction in space
of a man leaning out a window. But this window having shifted with the man,
I realized that I was dealing with an image of a fairly rare sort, and all I could
think of was to incorporate it into my material for poetic construction. No



IVc Realism as Critique 437

sooner had I granted it this capacity than it was in fact succeeded by a whole
series of phrases, with only brief pauses between them, which surprised me only
slightly less and left me with the impression of their being so gratuitous that
the control I had then exercised upon myself seemed to me illusory and all I
could think of was putting an end to the interminable quarrel raging within me.

Completely occupied as I still was with Freud at that time, and familiar as I
was with his methods of examination which I had had some slight occasion to
use on some patients during the war, I resolved to obtain from myself what we
were trying to obtain from them, namely, a monologue spoken as rapidly as
possible without any intervention on the part of the critical faculties, a mono-
logue consequently unencumbered by the slightest inhibition and which was, as
closely as possible, akin to spoken thought. It had seemed to me, and still does
- the way in which the phrase about the man cut in two had come to me is
an indication of it - that the speed of thought is no greater than the speed of
speech, and that thought does not necessarily defy language, nor even the
fast-moving pen. It was in this frame of mind that Philippe Soupault - to whom
I had confided these initial conclusions - and I decided to blacken some paper,
with a praiseworthy disdain for what might result from a literary point of view.
The ease of execution did the rest. By the end of the first day we were able
to read to ourselves some fifty or so pages obtained in this manner, and begin
to compare our results. All in all, Soupault's pages and mine proved to be
remarkably similar: the same overconstruction, shortcomings of a similar nature,
but also, on both our parts, the illusion of an extraordinary verve, a great deal
of emotion, a considerable choice of images of a quality such that we would
not have been capable of preparing a single one in longhand, a very special
picturesque quality and, here and there, a strong comical effect. The only
difference between our two texts seemed to me to derive essentially from our
respective tempers, Soupault's being less static than mine, and, if he does not
mind my offering this one slight criticism, from the fact that he had made the
error of putting a few words by way of titles at the top of certain pages, I
suppose in a spirit of mystification. On the other hand, I must give credit where
credit is due and say that he constantly and vigorously opposed any effort to
retouch or correct, however slightly, any passage of this kind which seemed to
me unfortunate. In this he was, to be sure, absolutely right. It is, in fact, difficult
to appreciate fairly the various elements present; one may even go so far as to
say that it is impossible to appreciate them at a first reading. To you who write,
these elements are, on the surface, as strange to you as they are to anyone else,
and naturally you are wary of them. Poetically speaking, what strikes you about
them above all is their extreme degree of immediate absurdity, the quality of this
absurdity, upon closer scrutiny, being to give way to everything admissible,
everything legitimate in the world: the disclosure of a certain number of
properties and of facts no less objective, in the final analysis, than the others.

In homage to Guillaume Apollinaire, who had just died and who, on several
occasions, seemed to us to have followed a discipline of this kind, without



438 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

however having sacrificed to it any mediocre literary means, Soupault and I
baptized the new mode of pure expression which we had at our disposal and
which we wished to pass on to our friends, by the name of SURREALISM [ . . . ]

Those who might dispute our right to employ the term SURREALISM in the
very special sense that we understand it are being extremely dishonest, for there
can be no doubt that this word had no currency before we came along.
Therefore, I am defining it once and for all:

SURREALISM, n. Psychic automatism in its pure state, by which one proposes
to express - verbally, by means of the written word, or in any other manner -
the actual functioning of thought. Dictated by thought, in the absence of any
control exercised by reason, exempt from any aesthetic or moral concern.

ENCYCLOPEDIA. Philosophy. Surrealism is based on the belief in the superior
reality of certain forms of previously neglected associations, in the omnipotence
of dream, in the disinterested play of thought. It tends to ruin once and for all
all other psychic mechanisms and to substitute itself for them in solving all the
principal problems of life. [ . . . ]

* * *

. . . The mind which plunges into Surrealism relives with glowing excitement
the best part of its childhood. For such a mind, it is similar to the certainty
with which a person who is drowning reviews once more, in the space of less
than a second, all the insurmountable moments of his life. Some may say to
me that the parallel is not very encouraging. But I have no intention of
encouraging those who tell me that. From childhood memories, and from a few
others, there emanates a sentiment of being unintegrated, and then later of
having gone astray, which I hold to be the most fertile that exists. It is perhaps
childhood that comes closest to one's 'real life'; childhood beyond which man
has at his disposal, aside from his laissez-passer, only a few complimentary
tickets; childhood where everything nevertheless conspires to bring about the
effective, risk-free possession of oneself. Thanks to Surrealism, it seems that
opportunity knocks a second time. It is as though we were still running toward
our salvation, or our perdition. In the shadow we again see a precious terror.
Thank God, it's still only Purgatory. With a shudder, we cross what the
occultists call dangerous territory. In my wake I raise up monsters that are lying
in wait; they are not yet too ill-disposed toward me, and I am not lost, since
I fear them. [. . .]

* * *

Surrealism, such as I conceive of it, asserts our complete nonconformism clearly
enough so that there can be no question of translating it, at the trial of the real
world, as evidence for the defense. It could, on the contrary, only serve to
justify the complete state of distraction which we hope to achieve here below.
Kant's absentmindedness regarding women, Pasteur's absentmindedness about
'grapes,' Curie's absentmindedness with respect to vehicles, are in this regard
profoundly symptomatic. This world is only very relatively in tune with thought,
and incidents of this kind are only the most obvious episodes of a war in which



IVc Realism as Critique 439

I am proud to be participating. Surrealism is the 'invisible ray' which will one
day enable us to win out over our opponents. 'You are no longer trembling,
carcass.' This summer the roses are blue; the wood is of glass. The earth, draped
in its verdant cloak, makes as little impression upon me as a ghost. It is living
and ceasing to live that are imaginary solutions. Existence is elsewhere.



3 Louis Aragon (1897-1982) et al. 'Declaration of
the Bureau de Recherches Surrealistes'

By the beginning of 1925 the first two issues of the journal La Revolution Surrealiste
were available, and Aragon's Surrealist 'novel' Paysan de Pahs (Pahs Peasant) had been
published in the Revue Europeenne. Works by Naville, Artaud, Eluard and others had also
appeared. The intention of Surrealism was not, however, to be a mere literary move-
ment, but a revolutionary cultural practice. To this end, later in 1925 the Surrealists
took common cause with the Communist journal Clarte. This attempt to transcend the
limits of a merely artistic practice is prefigured by the 'Declaration' issued under the
imprimatur of the Bureau de Recherches Surrealistes on 27 January 1925. The Decla-
ration had twenty-six signatories in addition to Aragon, including Breton, Eluard, Naville,
Soupault, Artaud, Ernst and Masson. The present translation, by Richard Howard, is
taken from Maurice Nadeau, The History of Surrealism, New York, 1965.

With regard to a false interpretation of our enterprise, stupidly circulated among
the public,

We declare as follows to the entire braying literary, dramatic, philosophical,
exegetical and even theological body of contemporary criticism:

1 We have nothing to do with literature;

But we are quite capable, when necessary, of making use of it like anyone
else.

2 Surrealism is not a new means of expression, or an easier one, nor even a
metaphysic of poetry.

It is a means of total liberation of the mind and of all that resembles it.

3 We are determined to make a Revolution.

4 We have joined the word surrealism to the word revolution solely to show
the disinterested, detached, and even entirely desperate character of this revol-
ution.

5 We make no claim to change the mores of mankind, but we intend to show
the fragility of thought, and on what shifting foundations, what caverns we have
built our trembling houses.

6 We hurl this formal warning to Society: Beware of your deviations and
faux-pas, we shall not miss a single one.

7 At each turn of its thought, Society will find us waiting.

8 We are specialists in Revolt.

There is no means of action which we are not capable, when necessary, of
employing.

9 We say in particular to the Western world: surrealism exists. And what is



440 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

this new ism that is fastened to us? Surrealism is not a poetic form. It is a cry
of the mind turning back on itself, and it is determined to break apart its fetters,
even if it must be by material hammers!

Bureau de Recherches Surrealistes,
15, Rue de Grenelle



4 Andre Breton (1896-1966) Surrealism and Painting

Surrealism originated as a literary movement and rapidly took on a revolutionary
politico-cultural role. The question of its relationship to painting remained unclear, a
difficulty little clarified by art histories which focus merely on the aspect of dream
imagery seen as an idiosyncratic modern art 'style'. The gist of Breton's argument is
that vision is the most powerful of the senses, and so the ability to fix visual images
means that Surrealism does have an interest in painting. The problem was that art had
hitherto concentrated on the outer world, but as such it could never compete with
reality itself. However, by turning to focus on inner reality, painting could indeed be
fruitful terrain for Surrealist work. Breton's model for this was Picasso. It is worth noting,
though, that he maintained a mordant hostility to the conventional business of art
criticism, as well as to other supposedly leading avant-gardists such as Matisse, Derain,
and to a lesser extent even Picasso's original collaborator, Braque; not to mention those
who had turned Cubism into a school. Early Surrealist visual work (the first exhibition
of which took place in November 1925) experimented with collective authorship and
automatic techniques adapted from literary production. Overall, as in other areas of
Surrealist work, the aim was to produce a crisis in bourgeois consciousness, to use
painting, in Breton's words, as an 'expedient' in the service of revolution. Breton's
Surrealism and Painting was first published in full as a pamphlet in 1928, having
previously appeared in episodes in La Revolution Surrealiste. The present extracts are
taken from the translation by David Gascoyne, London, 1936.

The eye exists in its primitive state. The marvels of the earth a hundred feet
high, the marvels of the sea a hundred feet deep, have for their witness only
the wild eye that when in need of colours refers simply to the rainbow. It is
present at the conventional exchange of signals that the navigation of the mind
would appear to demand. But who is to draw up the scale of vision? There are
those things that I have already seen many a time, and that others tell me they
have likewise seen, things that I believe I should be able to remember, whether
I cared about them or not, such, for instance, as the facade of the Paris Opera
House, or a horse, or the horizon; there are those things that I have seen only
very seldom, and that I have not always chosen to forget, or not to forget, as
the case may be; there are those things that having looked at in vain I never
dare to see, which are all the things I love (in their presence I no longer see
anything else); there are those things that others have seen, and that by means
of suggestion they are able or unable to make me see also; there are also those
things that I see differently from other people, and those things that I begin
to see and that are not visible. And that is not all. [. . .]



IVc Realism as Critique 441

The need of fixing visual images, whether these images exist before their
fixation or not, stands out from all time and has led to the creation of a veritable
language, which does not seem to me more artificial than any other, over the
origins of which I do not feel it necessary to linger here. The most I can do
is to consider the present state of this language from the same angle as that
from which I should consider the present state of poetic language. It seems to
me that I can demand a great deal from a faculty which, above almost all others,
gives me advantage over the real, over what is vulgarly understood by the real.
Why is it that I am so much at the mercy of a few lines, a few coloured patches?
The object, the strange object itself draws from these things the greatest amount
of its force of provocation, and God knows whether this is a great provocation,
for / cannot understand whither it is tending. What does it matter to me whether
trees are green, whether a piano is at this moment 'nearer' to me than a
state-coach, whether a ball is cylindrical or round? That is how things are,
nevertheless, if I am to believe my eyes, that is to say up to a certain point.
In such a domain I dispose of a power of illusion whose limits, if I am not
careful, I cease to perceive. If at this moment I turn to some illustration or
other in a book, there is nothing to prevent the world around me from ceasing
to exist. In place of what was surrounding me there is now something else,
since, for example, I can without difficulty take part in quite another ceremony.
. . . The corner formed by the ceiling and two walls in the picture can easily
be substituted for the corner of this ceiling and these two walls. I turn over a
few pages and, in spite of the almost uncomfortable heat, I do not in the least
refuse to consent to this winter landscape. I can play with these winged children.
'He saw before him an illuminated cavern,' says a caption, and I can actually
see it too. I see it in a way in which I do not at this moment see you for whom
I am writing, yet all the same I am writing so as to be able to see you one day,
just as truly as I have lived a second for this Christmas tree, this illuminated
cavern or these angels. It does not matter whether there is a perceptible
difference between beings thus invoked and real beings, for this difference can
at any moment be made light of. So that it is impossible for me to consider a
picture as anything but a window, in which my first interest is to know what
it looks out on, or, in other words, whether, from where I am, there is a 'beautiful
view', for there is nothing I love so much as that which stretches away before
me and out of sight. Within the frame of an unnamed figure, land- or seascape,
I can enjoy an enormous spectacle. [. . .]

Now I declare I have passed like a madman through the slippery-floored halls
of museums; and I am not the only one. In spite of a few marvellous glances
I have received from women just like those of today, I have never for an instant
been the dupe of the unknown that those subterranean and immovable walls
had to offer me. I left adorable supplicants behind without remorse. There were
too many scenes all at once; I had not the heart to speculate upon them. As I
passed by in front of all those religious compositions and pastoral allegories, I
could not help losing the sense of the part I was playing. The enchantments
that the street outside had to offer me were a thousand times more real. It is
not my fault if I cannot help feeling a profound lassitude when confronted by



442 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

the interminable march past of the entries for this gigantic prix de Rome in
which nothing, neither the subjects nor the manner of treating them, has been
left optional.

I do not necessarily mean that no emotion can be aroused by a painting of
'Leda', or that no heart-rending sun can set behind a scene of 'Roman palaces',
nor even that it would be impossible to give some semblance of eternal morality
to the illustration of a fable as ridiculous as Death and the Woodcutter, I simply
mean that genius has nothing to gain by following these beaten tracks and
roundabout paths. There is nothing with which it is so dangerous to take
liberties as liberty.

But all question of emotion for emotion's sake apart, let us not forget that
in this epoch it is reality itself that is in question. How can anyone expect us
to be satisfied with the passing disquiet that such and such a work of art brings
us? There is no work of art that can hold its own before our essential primitivism
in this respect. When I know how the grim struggle between the actual and the
possible will end, when I have lost all hope of enlarging the field of the real,
until now strictly limited, to truly stupefying proportions, when my imagination,
recoiling upon itself, can no longer do more than coincide with my memory, I
will willingly accord myself, like the others, a few relative satisfactions. I shall
then number myself among the 'embroiderers', whom I shall have had to forgive.
But not before.

The very narrow conception of imitation which art has been given as its aim
is at the bottom of the serious misunderstanding that we see continuing right
up to the present. In the belief that they are only capable of reproducing more
or less fortunately the image of that which moves them, painters have been far
too easy-going in their choice of models. The mistake lies in thinking that the
model can only be taken from the exterior world, or even simply that it can be
taken at all. Certainly human sensibility can confer a quite unforeseen distinction
upon even the most vulgar-looking object; none the less, to make the magic
power of figuration which certain men possess serve the purpose of preserving
and reinforcing that which would exist without them anyway, is to make
wretched use of it. There lies the inexcusable abdication. It is in any case
impossible, under the present conditions of thought, when above all the exterior
world appears more and more suspect, still to consent to such a sacrifice. The
plastic work of art, in order to respond to the undisputed necessity of thoroughly
revising all real values, will either refer to a purely interior model or cease to
exist.

It remains to us to determine what is meant by the term interior model, and
at this point it becomes a question of tackling the great problem raised in recent
years by the attitude of those few men who have truly rediscovered a reason to
paint - a problem that a miserable system of art-criticism is forced desperately
to evade. In the domain of poetry, Lautreamont, Rimbaud and Mallarme were
the first to endow the human mind with what it lacked so much: I mean a truly
insolent grace, which has enabled the mind, on finding itself withdrawn from
all ideals, to begin to occupy itself with its own life, in which the attained and
the desired no longer mutually exclude one another, and thereupon to attempt



IVc Realism as Critique 443

to submit to a permanent and most rigorous censorship whatever has constrained
it heretofore. After their appearance, the idea of what is forbidden and what is
allowed adopted its present elasticity, to such a point that the words family,
fatherland, society, for instance, seem to us now to be so many macabre jests.
It was they who really caused us to make up our minds to rely for our
redemption here below upon ourselves alone, so that we have desperately to
pursue their footsteps, animated by that feverish desire for conquest, total
conquest, that will never leave us; so that our eyes, our precious eyes, have to
reflect that which, while not existing, is yet as intense as that which does exist,
and which has once more to consist of visual images, fully compensating us for
what we have left behind. The mysterious path on which fear dogs our every
step and our desire to turn back is only overcome by the fallacious hope of
being accompanied, has for the past fifteen years been swept by a powerful
searchlight. It is now fifteen years since Picasso began to explore this path,
bearing rays of light with him as he went. No one had had the courage to see
anything there before he came. Poets used to talk of a country they had
discovered, where in the most natural way in the world a drawing-room appeared
'at the bottom of a lake', but this image was only a virtual one for us. What
miracle has enabled this man, whom it is my astonishment and good fortune to
know, to body forth all that remained, up till his appearance, in the highest
domain of fantasy? What a revolution must have taken place within him for it
to have been possible for this to happen! [. . .] In order to be able to break
suddenly away from sensible things, or with more reason from the easiness of
their customary appearance, one has to be aware of their treason to such a high
degree that one cannot escape recognizing the fact of Picasso's immense respon-
sibility. A single failure of will-power on his part would be sufficient for
everything we are concerned with to be at least put back, if not wholly lost.
His admirable perseverance is such a valuable guarantee that it dispenses with
all need for us to appeal to any other authority. Shall we ever know what awaits
us at the end of this agonizing journey? All that matters is that the exploration
be continued, and that the objective rallying signs take place without any
possibility of equivocation and follow one another uniterruptedly. [ . . . ]

One would have to have formed no idea of Picasso's exceptional predestination
to dare to fear or hope for a partial renunciation on his part. Nothing seems
to me more amusing or more just than that, in order to discourage insupportable
followers or to draw a sigh of relief from the beast of reaction, he has only
from time to time to offer for their admiration the things he has scrapped.
From the laboratory open to the sky there will continue to escape, at nightfall,
divinely unwonted beings, dancers dragging fragments of marble mantelpieces
behind them, adorably laden tables, beside which yours are mere turning-tables,
and all that remains clinging to the immemorial newspaper: Le Jour. ... It has
been said that there could be no such thing as surrealist painting. Painting,
literature - what are they to us, O Picasso, you who have carried the spirit, no
longer of contradiction, but of evasion, to its furthest point! From each one of
your pictures you have let down a rope-ladder, or rather a ladder made of the
sheets of your bed, and we, and probably you with us, desire only to climb up



444 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

into your sleep and down from it again. And they come and talk to us of
painting, they come and remind us of that lamentable expedient which is
painting!

When we were children we had toys that would make us weep with pity and
anger today. One day, perhaps, we shall see the toys of our whole life, like
those of our childhood, once more. It was Picasso who gave me this idea. [. . .]
We grow up until a certain age, it seems, and our playthings grow up with us.
Playing a part in the drama whose only theatre is the mind, Picasso, creator of
tragic toys for adults, has caused man to grow up and, sometimes under the
guise of exasperating him, has put an end to his puerile fidgeting.

On account of these many considerations, we emphatically claim him as one
of us, even while it is impossible and would be impudent to subject his methods
to the rigorous system of criticism which we propose to institute. If surrealism
has assigned to itself a line of conduct, it has only to submit to it in the way
that Picasso has submitted to it and will continue to submit; I hope by saying
this to prove myself very exacting. I shall always oppose the absurdly restrictive
character of that which any kind of discipline 1 would impose on the activity of
the man from whom we persist in expecting more than from anyone else. The
'cubist' discipline made this mistake long ago. Such restrictions may be suitable
for others, but it seems to me urgently desirable that Picasso and Braque should
be exempted.

I believe that men will long continue to feel the need of following to its
source the magical river flowing from their eyes, bathing with the same
hallucinatory light and shade both the things that are and the things that are
not. Not always quite knowing to what the disturbing discovery is due, they
will place one of these springs high above the summit of any mountain. The
region where the charming vapours of the as yet unknown, with which they are
to fall in love, condense, will appear to them in a lightning-flash. Perhaps even
there they will set up their wretched booths, will multiply and exterminate one
another, and have no other desire than to return to earth after having plundered!
If there then remains in the world, amidst the disorder of vanity and darkness,
a single appearance of perfect resolution, of ideal reduction to a point, of all
those things that swayed us during the distant epoch of our lives, I ask for
nothing better than that this may be the twenty or thirty pictures that we made
our thought's happy shores - happy without knowing it, happy that after all
shores should exist. [. . .]

We shall see the Revolution, concerning the definition of which there can
today be no more misunderstanding, and it will provide a reason for our scruples.
It is only before the Revolution that I consider it to be efficacious to summon
the best men that I know. The responsibility of painters, as of all those to
whom it falls due in no small measure to prevent, in whatever form of expression
is theirs, the survival of the sign for the thing signified, seems to me at present
to be both a heavy and an ill-supported one. Yet that is the price of eternity.
The mind slips up on this apparently fortuitous circumstance as on a piece of
banana-skin. Those who prefer to take no account of the moment when they
expect the least to happen seem to me to lack that mysterious aid which to my



IVc Realism as Critique 445

mind is the only aid of any importance. The revolutionary content of a work,
or merely its content, could not depend upon the choice of the elements which
this work brings into play. This accounts for the difficulty of obtaining a strict
and objective scale of plastic values at a time when a total revision of all values
is about to be undertaken, and when clairvoyance obliges us to recognize only
those values which are likely to hasten this revision.

Confronted by the utter bankruptcy of art-criticism, a bankruptcy that is really
quite comic, it is not for us to complain that the articles of a Raynal, a Vauxcelles
or a Fels surpass the limits of imbecility. The continued scandal of Cezannism,
of neo-academism, or of machinism, is incapable of compromising the issue that
is our real interest. Whether Utrillo is still or already a good 'seller', whether
Chagall happens to be considered a surrealist or not, are matters for grocers'
assistants. Undoubtedly the study of conventions, to which I will content myself
with making a passing allusion, could be profoundly edifying if it were properly
conducted, but it would be a waste of time for me to attempt it here, inasmuch
as these conventions are in perfect accord with all those things which, in a more
general domain, are now being denounced. From an intellectual point of view,
it is simply a question of finding out to what causes can be attributed the
incontestable failure of certain artists, which, in two or three cases, goes so far
as to appear to us as resulting from the loss of a state of grace.

Now that Picasso, absolved by his genius from all merely moral obligations,
he who unceasingly deceives appearances with reality, going so far as to defy,
to a sometimes alarming extent, that which, as we see it, is forever unforgiving
- now that Picasso, finally escaping from all compromise, remains master of a
situation that except for him we should have considered desperate, it does in
fact seem that the majority of his early companions are travelling a road that
is the furthest apart from ours and his own. Those who, with such particularly
prophetic intuition, called themselves ies Fauves', no longer do anything now
except pace ridiculously up and down behind the bars of time, and from their
final pounces, so little to be feared, the least dealer, or tamer, can defend himself
with a chair. These discouraged and discouraging old lions are Matisse and
Derain. They do not even retain their nostalgia for the forest and the desert;
they have passed into a tiny arena: their gratitude to those who mate them and
keep them alive. A Nude by Derain, a new Window by Matisse - what surer
testimony could there be to the truth of the contention that 'not all the water
in the sea would suffice to wash out one drop of intellectual blood'? 2 So will
these men never rise again? Should they now desire to make honourable amends
to the mind, they would find themselves forever lost, both they and the others.
The air once so limpid, the journey that will not be made, the uncrossed distance
that separates the place where one left an object from the place where one finds
it again on waking, the inseparable eternities of this hour and of this place, are
all at the mercy of our first act of submission. I should like to discuss so total
a loss at greater length. But what is to be done? It is too late.

I cannot help being moved by the destiny of Georges Braque. This man has
taken infinite precautions. Between his head and his hands I seem to see a great
hour-glass whose sand appears to be in no greater a hurry thaif the motes that



K



446 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

dance in a ray of sunlight. Sometimes this hour-glass goes down on the horizon
and then the sand flows no more. That is because Braque ' loves the rule that
corrects emotion", while I myself do nothing but violently deny this rule. Where
did he get it from? There must be some idea of God behind it. 3 It's very nice
to paint, and it's very nice not to paint. One can even paint 'well', and not paint
well. In short . . . Braque is at present a great refugee. I am afraid that in a year
or two's time I shall no longer be able to mention his name. But that is being
a little hasty.

Apollinaire turned against him after 1918. When he himself was beginning to
turn out so badly that death was about to stop him, he could hardly find strong
enough terms - and he chose other pretexts - to attack those who were offering
to give in. Braque already appeared to be one of them. I have not the same
reasons for attacking him, and never shall have, and I shall not forget that for
many years he followed on his own account the road on which he and Picasso
stood alone. [. . .]

But one day Braque took pity on reality. I cannot too often repeat that for
every object to be in its place, every one of us must put something of ourselves
there. Think of those interminable seconds of posing which last our whole lives
long. Without fear of consequences, one can indefinitely repeat the gesture of
offering a bouquet. But it is a lot to ask of the bouquet that it should reveal
the hand which offers it and which is trembling. Braque's hand has trembled.

Even were that the 'surrealist' discipline.
Isidore Ducasse.

To speak of God, to think of God is in every respect to give him his due, and when I say that,
it is very certain that I do not make this idea mine, even in order to combat it. / have always
wagered against God, and I regard the little that / have won in this world as simply the outcome
of this bet. The stake (my life) has been so ridiculous that I am conscious of having won to the
full. Everything that is doddering, squint-eyed, infamous, sullying and grotesque is contained for
me in this single word: God. [. . .]



5 Andre Breton (1896-1966) from the Second
Manifesto of Surrealism

Surrealism had maintained a tense relationship with the Communist Party since 1925.
Ever since Breton had insisted, against Pierre Naville, on the necessity for remaining
independent of the Party, the danger had existed of becoming merely an artistic
vanguard. In 1929 Breton purged the by now successful group and issued a second
Manifesto, explicitly embracing Marxism and taking up a position allied to Trotsky,
against orthodox, Stalinist Communism. The Second Manifesto was published as the
final (12th) edition of La Revolution Surreaiiste on 15 December 1929. This journal was
itself replaced by the new, more austere Le Surrealisme au Service de la Revolution,
which ran until 1933. Extracts from the Second Manifesto are taken from the English
translation by Seaver and Lane in Manifestoes of Surrealism (op. cit.).

Surrealism, although a special part of its function is to examine with a critical
eye the notions of reality and unreality, reason and irrationality, reflection and



i



iVc Realism as Critique 447

impulse, knowledge and 'fatal' ignorance, usefulness and uselessness, is analo-
gous at least in one respect with historical materialism in that it too tends to
take as its point of departure the 'colossal abortion' of the Hegelian system. It
seems impossible to me to assign any limitations - economic limitations, for
instance - to the exercise of a thought finally made tractable to negation, and
to the negation of negation. How can one accept the fact that the dialectical
method can only be validly applied to the solution of social problems? The
entire aim of Surrealism is to supply it with practical possibilities in no way
competitive in the most immediate realm of consciousness. I really fail to see
- some narrow-minded revolutionaries notwithstanding - why we should refrain
from supporting the Revolution, provided we view the problems of love, dreams,
madness, art, and religion from the same angle they do. Now, I have no
hesitation in saying that, prior to Surrealism, nothing systematic has been done
in this direction, and at the point where we found it the dialectical method, in
its Hegelian form, was inapplicable for us too. There was, for us too, the necessity
to put an end to idealism properly speaking, the creation of the word 'Sur-
realism' would testify to this [. . .]

We also intend to place ourselves at a point of departure such that for us
philosophy is 'outclassed.' It is, I think, the fate of all those for whom reality
is not only important theoretically but for whom it is also a matter of life or
death to make an impassioned appeal, as Feuerbach desired, to that reality: our
fate to give as we do, completely, without any reservations, our allegiance to the
principle of historical materialism. [. . .]

Our allegiance to the principle of historical materialism . . . there is no way to
play on these words. So long as that depends solely on us - I mean provided
that communism does not look upon us merely as so many strange animals
intended to be exhibited strolling about and gaping suspiciously in its ranks -
we shall prove ourselves fully capable of doing our duty as revolutionaries. [ . . . ]
[. . .] In September 1928, . . . these two questions . . . were asked me:

1. Do you believe that literary and artistic output is a purely individual
phenomenon? Don't you think that it can or must be the reflection of the main
currents which determine the economic and social evolution of humanity?

2. Do you believe in a literature and an art which express the aspirations of
the working class? Who, in your opinion, are the principal representatives of
this literature and this art?

My answers were as follows:

1. Most certainly, the same goes for literary or artistic output as for any
intellectual phenomenon, in that the only question one can rightly raise con-
cerning it is that of the sovereignty of thought. That is, it is impossible to answer
your question affirmatively or negatively, and all one can say is that the only
observable philosophical attitude in such a case consists in playing up 4 the
contradiction (which does exist) between the nature of human thought which
we take to be absolute and the reality of that thought in a crowd of individuals



448 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

of limited thought'. [Engels] [. . .] This thought, in the area where you ask me
to consider such and such a specific expression in relation to it, can only oscillate
between the awareness of its inviolate autonomy and that of its utter dependence.
In our own time, artistic and literary production appears to me to be wholly
sacrificed to the need that this drama, after a century of truly harrowing poetry
and philosophy (Hegel, Feuerbach, Marx, Lautreamont, Rimbaud, Jarry, Freud,
Chaplin, Trotsky), has to work itself out. Under these circumstances, to say
that this output can or must reflect the main currents which determine the
economic and social evolution of humanity would be offering a rather unrefined
judgment, implying the purely circumstantial awareness of thought and giving
little credit to its fundamental nature: both unconditioned and conditioned,
Utopian and realistic, finding its end in itself and aspiring only to serve, etc.

2. I do not believe in the present possibility of an art or literature which
expresses the aspirations of the working class. If I refuse to believe in such a
possibility, it is because, in any prerevolutionary period the writer or artist, who
of necessity is a product of the bourgeoisie, is by definition incapable of
translating these aspirations. I do not deny that he can get some idea of these
aspirations and that, in rather exceptional moral circumstances, he may be
capable of conceiving of the relativity of any cause in terms of the proletarian
cause. I consider it to be a matter of sensitivity and integrity for him. This
does not mean, however, that he will elude the remarkable doubt, inherent in
the means of expression which are his, which forces him to consider from a
very special angle,' within himself and for himself alone, the work he intends
to do. In order to be viable, this work demands to be situated in relationship
to certain other already existing works and must, in its turn, open up new paths.
Making all due allowances, it would, for example, be just as pointless to protest
against the assertion of a poetic determinism, whose laws cannot be promulgated,
as against that of dialectical materialism. Speaking personally, I am convinced
that the two kinds of evolution are strictly similar and, moreover, that they have
at least this much in common: they are both unsparing. Just as Marx' forecasts
and predictions - as far as almost all the external events which have transpired
since his death are concerned - have proved to be accurate, I can see nothing
which would invalidate a single word of Lautreamont's with respect to events
of interest only to the mind. By comparison, any attempt to explain social
phenomena other than by Marx is to my mind as erroneous as any effort to
defend or illustrate a so-called 'proletarian' literature and art at a time in history
when no one can fairly claim any real kinship with the proletarian culture, for
the very excellent reason that this culture does not yet exist, even under
proletarian regimes. [. . .]
* * *

It is incumbent on us ... to try to see more and more clearly what is
transpiring unbeknownst to man in the depths of his mind, even if he should
begin to hold his own vortex against us. We are, in all this, a far cry from
wanting to reduce the portion of what can be untangled, and nothing could be
farther from our minds than being sent back to the scientific study of 'com-
plexes.' To be sure, Surrealism, which as we have seen deliberately opted for



iVc Realism as Critique 449

the Marxist doctrine in the realm of social problems, has no intention of
minimizing Freudian doctrine as it applies to the evaluation of ideas: on the
contrary, Surrealism believes Freudian criticism to be the first and only one
with a really solid basis. While it is impossible for Surrealism to remain
indifferent to the debate which, in its presence, pits qualified practitioners of
various psychoanalytical tendencies against one another - just as it is obliged
to consider daily and with impassioned interest the struggle taking place within
the leadership of the International - it need not interfere in a controversy which,
it would seem, cannot long pursue a useful course except among practitioners.
This is not the area in which Surrealism intends to point up the result of its
personal experiments. But since by their very nature those individuals who are
drawn to Surrealism are especially interested in the Freudian concept which
affects the greater part of their deep concerns as men - the concern to create,
to destroy artistically - I mean the definition of the phenomenon known as
'sublimation,' Surrealism basically asks these people to bring to the accomplish-
ment of their mission a new awareness, to perform an act of self-observation,
which in their case is of very exceptional value, to compensate for what is
insufficient about the penetration of so-called 'artistic' states of mind by men
who for the most part are not artists but doctors. Moreover, Surrealism demands
that, by taking a path opposite from the one we have just seen them follow,
those who possess, in the Freudian sense, the 'precious faculty' we are referring
to, bend their efforts toward studying in this light the most complex mechanism
of all, 'inspiration,' and, from the moment they cease thinking of it as something
sacred, Surrealism demands that, however confident they are of its extraordinary
virtue they dream only of making it shed its final ties, or even - something no
one had ever dared conceive of - of making it submit to them. There is no
point in resorting to subtleties on this point; we all know well enough what
inspiration is. There is no way of mistaking it; it is what has provided for the
supreme needs of expression in every time and clime. It is commonly said that
it is either present or it is not, and if it is absent, nothing of what, by way of
comparison, is suggested by the human cleverness that interest, discursive
intelligence, and the talent acquired by dint of hard work obliterate, can make
up for it. We can easily recognize it by that total possession of our mind which,
at rare intervals, prevents our being, for every problem posed, the plaything of
one rational solution rather than some other equally rational solution, by that
sort of short circuit it creates between a given idea and a respondent idea
(written, for example). Just as in the physical world, a short circuit occurs when
the two 'poles' of a machine are joined by a conductor of little or no resistance.
In poetry and in painting, Surrealism has done everything it can and more to
increase these short circuits. It believes, and it will never believe in anything
more wholeheartedly, in reproducing artificially this ideal moment when man,
in the grip of a particular emotion, is suddenly seized by this something
'stronger than himself which projects him, in self-defense, into immortality.
If he were lucid, awake, he would be terrified as he wriggled out of this tight
situation. The whole point for him is not to be free of it, for him to go on
talking the entire time this mysterious ringing lasts: it is, in fact, the point at



450 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

which he ceases to belong to himself that he belongs to us. These products of
psychic activity, as far removed as possible from the desire to make sense, as
free as possible of any ideas of responsibility which are always prone to act as
brakes, as independent as possible of everything which is not 'the passive life
of the intelligence' - these products which automatic writing and the description
of dreams represent offer at one and the same time the advantage of being
unique in providing elements of appreciation of great style to a body of criticism
which, in the realm of art, reveals itself to be strangely helpless, of permitting
a general reclassification of lyrical values, and of proposing a key capable of
opening indefinitely that box of many bottoms called man, a key that dissuades
him from turning back, for reasons of self-preservation, when in the darkness
he bumps into doors, locked from the outside, of the 'beyond,' of reality, of
reason, of genius, and of love. A day will come when we will no longer allow
ourselves to use it in such cavalier fashion, as we have done, with its palpable
proofs of an existence other than the one we think we are living. We will then
be surprised to realize that, having come so close to seizing the truth, most of
us have been careful to provide ourselves with an alibi, be it literary or any
other, rather than throwing ourselves, without knowing how to swim, into the
water, and without believing in the phoenix, plunging into the fire to reach this
truth. [. . .]



6 George Grosz (1893-1959) and Wieland Herzfelde
(1896-1988) l Art Is in Danger 1

Herzfelde had founded the left-wing publishing house Malik Verlag in 1917, publishing,
inter alia, Grosz's satirical graphic portfolios such as Face of the Ruling Class and Ecce
Homo. By the mid-1920s Grosz had resumed painting, and his art had generally become
more sober under the impact of the Neue Sachlichkeit. However, both authors remained
convinced of the implication of art in social conflict, and therefore militantly opposed
to any notion of a 'pure' art. On the other hand this did not amount to a prescription
for the orthodox figuration then being adopted by many left-wing artists. The essay was
originally published as 'Die Kunst ist in Gefahr: ein Orientierungsversuch' by Malik Verlag,
Berlin, 1925. The present extracts are taken from the translation by Gabriele Bennet
in Lucy Lippard (ed.), Dadas on Art, New Jersey, 1971.



JESUS IN THE TRENCHES

The German Dada movement was rooted in the realization, which came
simultaneously to several of my comrades and myself, that it was complete
insanity to believe that 'spirit' [Geist] or people of 'spirit' ruled the world.
Goethe under bombardment, Nietzsche in rucksack, Jesus in the trenches -
there were still people who continued to believe in the autonomous power of
spirit and art.

Dada was the first significant art movement in Germany in decades. Don't
laugh - through this movement all the 'isms' of art became yesterday's incon-



IVc Realism as Critique 451

sequential studio affairs. Dada was not a 'made' movement, but an organic
product, originating in reaction to the head-in-the-clouds tendency of so-called
holy art, whose disciples brooded over cubes and Gothic art while the generals
were painting in blood. Dada forced the devotees of art to show their colors.

DADA AS EXTERMINATOR

What did the Dadas do? They said it's all the same, whether one just blusters
- or gives forth with a sonnet from Petrarch, Shakespeare, or Rilke; whether
one gilds boot-heels or carves Madonnas: the shooting goes on, profiteering goes
on, hunger goes on, lying goes on; why all that art? Wasn't it the height of
fraud to pretend art created spiritual values? Wasn't it unbelievably ridiculous
that art was taken seriously by itself and no one else? 'Hands off holy art!'
screamed the foes of Dada. 'Art is in danger!' 'Spirit is being dishonoured!'
This prattle about the spirit, when the only spirit was the dishonoured one of
the press, which wrote: Buy war bonds! - What prattle about art, as they finally
arrived at the task of overpainting with beauty and interesting features the face
of Anno 13, which daily unmasked itself more and more.

AGAINST WINDMILLS

Today I know, together with all the other founders of Dada, that our only
mistake was to have been seriously engaged at all with so-called art. Dada was
the breakthrough, taking place with bawling and scornful laughter; it came out
of a narrow, overbearing, and overrated milieu, and floating in the air between
the classes, knew no responsibility to the general public. We saw then the insane
end products of the ruling order of society and burst into laughter. We had not
yet seen the system behind this insanity.

IT DAWNS

The pending revolution brought gradual understanding of this system. There
were no more laughing matters, there were more important problems than those
of art; if art was still to have a meaning, it had to submit to those problems.
In the void in which we found ourselves after overcoming art phraseology, some
of us dadas got lost, mainly those in Switzerland and France, who had
experienced the cultural shocks of the last decade more from the newspaper
perspective. The rest of us saw the great new task: Tendency Art in the service
of the revolutionary cause,

GALLOP THROUGH ART HISTORY

The demand for Tendency irritates the art world, today perhaps more than
ever, to enraged and disdainful opposition. Admittedly all times have had
important works of tendentious character, although such works are not appreci-
ated for their tendentiousness, but rather for their formal, "purely artistic"



452 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

qualities. These circles completely fail to recognize that at all times all art has
a tendency, that onlv the character and clarity of this tendency have changed,
[...]

WANDERERS INTO THE VOID

However, there are still artists who consciously and emphatically attempt to
avoid tendency of any kind by renouncing completely the representational, even
the problematical. Often they believe they can work instinctively and aimlessly,
like Nature, which, without visible purpose, gives form and color to crystals,
plants, stones - everything that exists. They give their paintings obscure names,
or just numbers. Evidently this method is based upon the attempt to produce
pure stimulus, as in music, through intentional elimination of all other effectual
possibilities. The painter is to be nothing but a creator of form and color.
Whether these artists believe their work has no 'deeper meaning,' or whether
they impart to it an emotional or metaphysical meaning hardly perceptible to
the spectator, the fact remains that they intentionally renounce all the artist's
possibilities of ideological influence (in the areas of eroticism, religion, politics,
aesthetics, morality, etc.), standing silent and indifferent, that is, irresponsibly,
in relation to social occurrence, or - in cases where that is not the intention -
they work in vain through ignorance and ineptitude.

NO ANSWER IS ALSO AN ANSWER

When such artists enter the service of industry and applied art, there can be
as little objection raised as when a politician engages himself as a craftsman. A
matter of talent.

When this art of literary attraction is pursued for its own sake, decidedly
blase indifference and irresponsible individualistic feelings are propagated.

SKILL DOES NO HARM

Obviously, the artist's relationship to the world is always expressed in his
work and that relationship inevitably gives it its tendency. Thus it is only
justifiable to blame an artist for his tendency when that tendency contradicts
the artist's broad view, as unintentionally revealed in his style; or when an artist
tries to compensate for ineptitude by adding a tendentious motif or title.
Someone might use inadequate means in support of a tendency of which he is
completely convinced; there too, one cannot object to the tendency because of
his inadequate ability to express it.

But one has never heard of Griitzner being reproached with his propaganda
for German beer or for the monastic joys of manhood, or of Grtinewald being
reproached with his Christian belief. When artlovers attempt to dismiss a work
because of its tendency, as a principle or as a vehicle of sensation, they do not
approach the artist's work critically, but are hostile to the idea for which he
stands.



ivc Realism as Critique 453

WHOSE BREAD I EAT, HIS PRAISE I SING

The artist, whether he likes it or not, lives in continual correlation to the
public, to society, and he cannot withdraw from its laws of evolution, even
when, as today, they include class conflict. Anyone maintaining a sophisticated
stance above or outside of things is also taking sides, for such indifference and
aloofness is automatically a support of the class currently in power - in
Germany, the Middle Class. Moreover, a great number of artists quite con-
sciously support the bourgeois system, since it is within that system that their
work sells.

WHAT WILL I THINK TOMORROW?

In November, 1918, as the tide seemed to be turning - the most sheltered
simpleton suddenly discovered his sympathy for the working people, and for
several months mass-produced red and reddish allegories and pamphlets did
well in the art market. Soon afterward, however, quiet and order returned;
would you believe it, our artists returned with the greatest possible silence to
the higher regions: 'What do you mean? We remained revolutionary - but the
workers, don't even mention them. They are all bourgeois. In this country one
cannot make a revolution.' And so they brood again in their studios over 'really'
revolutionary problems of form, color, and style.

THE YOUNG MAN DIGESTS EVERYTHING

Formal revolution lost its shock effect a long time ago. The modern citizen
digests everything; only the money chests are vulnerable. Today's young mer-
chant is not like his counterpart in Gustav Freytag's times: ice-cold, aloof, he
hangs the most radical things in his apartment. . . . Rash and unhesitating
acceptance so as not to be 'born yesterday' is the password. Automobile - the
newest, most sporty model. Nothing said about professional mission, obligations
of wealth; cool, objective to the point of dullness, sceptical, without illusions,
avaricious, he understands only his merchandise, for everything else - including
the fields of philosophy, ethics, art - for all culture, there are specialists who
determine the fashion, which is then accepted at face value. Even the formal
revolutionaries and 'wanderers into the void' do fairly well, for, underneath,
they are related to those gentlemen, and have, despite all their apparent
discrepancies, the same indifferent, arrogant view of life.

PAINT USEFULLY

Anyone to whom the workers' revolutionary cause is not just a phrase or 'a
beautiful idea, but impossible to realize,' cannot be content to work harmlessly
along dealing with formal problems. He must try to express the workers' battle
idea and measure the value of his work by its social usefulness and effectiveness,
rather than by uncontrollable individual artistic principles or public success.



454 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

LAST ROUND

Let us summarize: the meaning, nature, and history of art are directly related
to the meaning, nature, and history of society. The prerequisite for the
perception and evaluation of contemporary art is an intellect directed at the
knowledge of facts and of correlations with real life and all its convulsions and
tensions. For a hundred years, man has been seizing the earth's means of
production. At the same time, the fight among men for possession of these
means assumes ever more extensive forms, drawing all men into its vortex.
There are workers, employees, civil servants, commercial travelers, and stock-
holders, contractors, merchants, men of finance. Everyone else represents stages
of these two fronts. The struggle for existence of a mankind divided into the
exploited and the exploiters is, in its sharpest and final form: class warfare.

Yes, art is in danger:

Today's artist, if he does not want to run down and become an antiquated
dud, has the choice between technology and class warfare propaganda. In both
cases he must give up 'pure art.' Either he enrolls as an architect, engineer, or
advertising artist in the army (unfortunately very feudalistically organized) which
develops industrial powers and exploits the world; or, as a reporter and critic
reflecting the face of our times, a propagandist and defender of the revolutionary
idea and its partisans, he finds a place in the army of the suppressed who fight
for their just share of the world, for a significant social organization of life.



7 Osip Brik (1888-1945) 'Photography versus Painting'

In Russia by the mid-1 920s, lessening of opportunities for practical intervention in social
construction had led many Constructivists, notably Rodchenko, to develop an interest
in photography. The concept of 'factography' represented the linking of photography to
reportage. Brik argues that photography, far from being a mere craft, is in a position
to eclipse painting as a means of representing reality. His essay thus constitutes both
an attack on revivals of figurative painting, and a recommendation to develop the theory
and practice of photography itself as the most appropriate contemporary mode of
Realism. Originally published in Sovetskoie Foto, no. 2, 1926. The present translation
is taken from David Elliott (ed.), Rodchenko, Oxford, 1979.

Photography pushes painting aside. Painting resists and is determined not to
capitulate. This is how the battle must be interpreted which started a hundred
years ago when the camera was invented and which will only end when
photography has finally pushed painting out of the place it held in daily life.
The photographers' motto was: precision, speed, cheapness. These were their
advantages. Here they could compete with painters. Particularly in the case of
portraits. Even the most gifted painter cannot achieve the degree of faithful
reproduction of which the camera is capable. Even the quickest painter cannot
supply a portrait within minutes. The cheapest painting is more expensive than
the most expensive photograph. After portraits landscapes were tackled, repro-



IVc Realism as Critique 455

ductions, genre pictures. And all had the same advertisement: precision, speed,
cheapness. The painters recognised the danger. The success of photography was
enormous. Immediate steps had to be taken. A stronger counter-attack mounted.

Cheapness and speed could hardly be fought. The camera works more
cheaply and quickly. Precision can be disputed. So this was where the attack
was centred.

Photography is not coloured. Painting is. This means that painting reproduces
an object more faithfully and is without rival in this respect.

This is how the painters argue. And the consumer had to be convinced of
this. But the painters were wrong and many are still wrong today.

It is true that in life we do see objects in colour. And a painting reproduces
these objects by means of colours. But these are different from nature, not
identical with her. Painting cannot transpose real colours, it can only copy -
more or less approximately - a tint we see in nature. And the problem is not
how talented a painter is, but is basic to the very nature of his or her work.
The colour media with which a painter works (oil, watercolour, size) have a
different effect on our eyes than the rays of light which give diverse colours to
objects. However much the painter tries s/he cannot go beyond the narrow-
limits of the palette. S/he cannot give a picture those colours - either in quality
or in quantity - which objects possess in reality.

Photography does not yet reproduce exact colouring, but at least it does not
falsify an object by giving it the wrong colours. And this is an advantage not
to be underestimated.

The most sensitive and progressive painters have long since grasped that
precision of colour reproduction is not at all easy and that the principles of
painterly colouring are not identical with those of reality. So they declared:
'Precision is not the ultimate aim.'

The painter's task certainly does not consist in showing an object as it is but
rather in recreating it in a painting according to different, purely painterly laws.
What do we care for how an object looks? Let observers and photographers deal
with that, we - the painters - make pictures in which nature is not the subject
but merely an initial impetus for ideas. The painter not only has the right to
change reality, it is virtually his duty to do so; otherwise he is not a painter
but a bad copyist - a photographer.

Life cannot be represented in a painting, it would be senseless to imitate it;
that means it must be recreated on canvas in a separate, painterly way. This is
the idea behind the theories and schools of painting which have emerged since
the middle of the 19th century under the names of Impressionism, Cubism,
Suprematism and many others. The painters' repudiation of the idea of repro-
ducing nature marked a decisive divide between photography and painting. They
had separate tasks which could not be compared. Each fulfills its own task. The
photographer captures life and the painter makes pictures. A photograph
transmits no colours at all; a painting gives a consciously different, non-real
colour to an object. The situation seems clear. But here, in Soviet Russia, an
interesting artistic phenomenon can be observed, namely the attempt by the
painters to regain lost positions and to strive for the reproduction of reality in



456 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

line with photography. This is reflected in the activities of the AKhRR
(Association of the Visual Artists of Revolutionary Russia). The social roots of
this phenomenon are quite obvious: Firstly an immense need for a visual record
of the new life. Secondly a lot of painters who abandoned their style because
nobody wanted to buy their pictures, and thirdly far less artistically cultured
buyers who do not distinguish between an exact reproduction of an object and
an approximation. The attempt by the AKhRR to resurrect the so-called
painterly realism is completely hopeless. One of the representatives of the
AKhRR said in a discussion: 4 As long as photography is not sufficiently advanced
in this country realistic painting is necessary.' This 'as long as' shows up in a
nutshell what the work of the AKhRR means. As long as we do not have enough
automobiles we will have to go by horse-drawn carts. But sooner or later we
shall go in automobiles.

The photographer captures life and events more cheaply, quickly and precisely
than the painter. Herein lies his strength, his enormous social importance. And
he is not frightened by any outdated daub.

But the photographers themselves do not realise their social importance. They
know they are doing a necessary, important task, but they think they are only
artisans, humble workers far removed from artists and painters. The photo-
grapher is enormously impressed by the fact that the painter does not work to
commission but for himself, that paintings are presented in large exhibitions
with varnishing days, catalogues, music, buffet food and speeches, that long
essays giving an exact analysis of composition, structure, brushwork and colour
scale are written on every picture, every painter, and that such exhibitions are
regarded as cultural events. All this confirms him in the idea that painting is
true art, photography merely an insignificant craft.

This explains every photographer's dream to achieve a painterly effect in his
photographs. It also explains the attempts to take artistic photographs and to
work on them 'so that they look like reproductions of paintings.'

The photographer does not understand that this chasing after painterly
attitudes and the slavish imitation of painting destroys his craft and takes away
the forcefulness on which its social importance is based. He moves away from
faithful reproduction of nature and submits to aesthetic laws which distort this
very nature. The photographer wants to attain the social recognition which the
painter enjoys. This is a perfectly normal wish. But it is not fulfilled by the
photographer following the painter, but rather by his opposing his own art to
that of the painter. If the photographer follows the main principle of his craft,
which is the ability to capture nature faithfully, he will as a matter of course
create things which will have just as strong an effect on the spectator as the
painting of an artist, whoever he may be.

The photographer must show that it is not just life ordered according to
aesthetic laws which is impressive, but also vivid, everyday life itself as it is
transfixed in a technically perfect photograph.

By battling against the aesthetic distortion of nature the photographer acquires
his right to social recognition, and not by painfully and uselessly striving to
imitate models alien to photography.



ivc Realism as Critique 457

This is not an easy path, but it is the only true one. It is not easy because
neither here nor in the West is there even the beginning of a theory of the art
of photography, the art of how to make highly accomplished photographs. All
that is being written or said on the subject is reduced either to a series of
technical tips and prescriptions or to hints on how to achieve painterly effects,
how to make a photograph not look like a photograph.

And yet some artists and painters do exist who have abandoned painting in
favour of photography; people who understand that photography has its mission,
its aims, its own development; there are some among them who have already
achieved certain results in this field.

What is needed is that these people somehow exchange their views, tell each
other of their experiences, unite their powers in a common effort, a common
battle against the painterly element in photography and towards a new theory
of the art of photography which is independent of the laws of painting. The
experiences of those people who have previously been painters are particularly
interesting in this context.

Former popes and monks make the most convinced campaigners against
religion. Nobody knows the mysteries of churches and monasteries better than
they. The best fighters against painterly aestheticism are former painters.
Nobody knows the secrets of artistic creation better. Nobody can expose the
falseness of artistic reproduction of reality better. They have consciously moved
away from painting, they will consciously fight for photography. One of them
is A. M. Rodchenko, once a brilliant painter, today a committed photographer.
His photographic works are little known by the general public because they are
mainly experimental. The public wants definitely finished products, but for the
professional photographers, for those who take an interest in the development
of a photographic art, an acquaintance with Rodchenko's results is indispensable.

His main task is to move away from the principles of painterly composition
of photographs and to find other, specifically photographic laws for their making
and composition. And this must after all interest everybody who does not see
photography as a pitiable craft but as a subject of enormous social relevance,
called upon to silence painting's chatter about representing life artistically.



8 Sergei Tretyakov (1892-1939) 'We Are Searching'
and 'We Raise the Alarm'

Tretyakov edited Novy Let (New Let), the journal which Mayakovsky restarted in 1927,
the original LEFtsee IIId9) having folded early in 1925. In these short texts he advocates
'factography' as a progressive alternative to a revived academicism in art and literature,
with an emphasis on photography and documentary film. Official hostility to these trends
did not decline, however, and Novy Let ceased publication in 1928. By the early 1930s
attempts to develop a critical Realist practice on the base of innovatory forms had
foundered on the imposition of 'Socialist Realism'. These essays were originally pub-
lished in Novy Lef, no. 11/12, 1927. They were translated by Ben Brewster in Screen,
vol. 12, no. 4, London, Winter 1971-2, from which the present extracts are taken.



m



458 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

We Are Searching

From the outset Lef has worked on the problem of the social function of things
produced by workers in art. The task is to set aside all the vague and often
ostentatious motivations and get at the real social purpose of an art work, at
the effect it produces, then to establish the means and conditions, which will
enable the artist to achieve this effect most fully and with the utmost economy
of force and devices. [. . .]

To the easel painting, which supposedly functions as 'a mirror of reality' Lef
opposes the photograph - a more accurate, rapid and objective means of fixing
fact.

To the easel painting - claimed to be a permanent source of agit - Lef opposes
the placard, which is topical, designed and adapted for the street, the newspaper
and the demonstration, and which hits the emotions with the sureness of artillery
fire.

In literature to belles-lettres and the related claim to 'reflection' Lef opposes
reportage - literature of fact - which breaks with literary art traditions and
moves entirely into the field of 'factography' to serve the newspaper and the
journal. This is what is meant by Lef prose which we are disseminating through
various newspaper articles and publishing in exemplary extracts in the journal
New Lef.

On the other hand, Lef continues to promote poetry which it places within
a definite agit function, assigns clear tasks in journalism and coordinates with
other newspaper material.

These are the two fields from which the Lef formula of art is developing. If
fact is needed - old art is no use. Old art deforms fact - to grasp fact use new
methods.

If stimulus and agit are needed - assemble all the appropriate material
available, but bear in mind that agit divorced from a concrete aim to which it
is directed, agit transformed into agit in general, a play on nerves, stimulation
for its own sake, is agit aesthetics and operates in society like drugs or dangerous
drink. [...]

The fixing of fact and agit represent two basic functions. In considering these
we must also consider the devices through which these functions can be realized.

The art product operates (chiefly) as either intellectualization or emotionali-
zation. In fact these may well represent two functional axes in relation to which
the old concepts 'epic' and 'lyric' are now crystallizing. We consider that with
increased precision of work in art, the former will gain ground at the expense
of the latter. We are moving towards a time when the intellectual content of
facts will give them agit effect far surpassing that of any emotionalized pressuring.

It can be assumed that the schema appropriate to the fine arts will apply
equally to the cinema. [ . . . ]

When Lef theorists analyse formal and material distinctions between the 'play'
film and the 'unplayed' film, Tretyakov proceeds from the film material.
Shklovsky from the narrative structure of the scenario. Zhemchuzhny from the
shooting arrangements, and so on, hence the apparent variations.



ivc Realism as Critique 459

But when the question is the social function of these two categories, then
Lef's orientation emerges immediately and clearly: on the one hand towards the
cinema of fact - the news-reel in the widest sense of the term - and on the
other hand to the pragmatically orientated, topical, actuality agit-film. f. . .]



We Raise the Alarm

The Civil War was also a period of fierce struggle on the art front. The
revolutionary Futurists and Com-Futs were not just a detachment of anti-tradi-
tionalists rushing in to conquer the tastes of the period. They flung art into
the thick of revolutionary activity. They set the tone and held the hegemony
in the field of aesthetic forms. Their innovations and projects, while not always
fully realized, were always significant and grandiose. Tatlin's Tower, Mayakov-
sky's Mystery Bouffe, the Rosta Posters and the RSFSR productions and in
common ideas of the epoch as important and inspiring as those that give rise
to the worker's army and communist Saturday labour. The greatest achievement
of left art in that period was the establishment of the principle of production art,
whereby the former entertainer/joker/clown/conjurer/hanger-on of society's
entertainment world switched categorically to the ranks of the workers, exchang-
ing an aesthetic fantasy for the creation of things that were useful and needed
by the proletariat.

Lef was the form which the activities of revolutionary Futurism took in the
conditions of the New Economic Policy - an association of workers in left art.
Lef means Left front, and Left front implies opposition to any other front. The
novelty of the Lef position as against the position of Com-Fut lay in the fact
that the principles established in the preceding period now had to be realised
in conditions of competitive production with other group suppliers of aesthetic
products. 'Whose side are you on?' proved to be an urgent question in the field
of art too. The whole of academy art ranged itself against Lef. Academy art
was economically powerful for it had once again found its old, well-tried
consumer. It demanded a licence to trade and this was obligingly granted in
the shape of the formula about 'assuming the cultural heritage. 1

'Whose side are you on?' - a frenetic rag fair had broken out in the
marketplace of aesthetic products where talent, charlatanry and all kinds of fine
imitations elbowed each other furiously. Their guidelines were the box office
takings and production costs, their aims, to satisfy the tastes of the consumer.
They lost no time in disassociating themselves from 'Lefism' even while
appropriating Lef formal devices for their own constructivist nicknacks. But Lef
proved to have staying power and vitality. Wherever artistic initiative was
needed. Lef emerged and acted, to each piece of expediency on the part of
academism, Lef raised its own utilitarian-based objection. But since Lef con-
sidered that an aggressive stance was vital, it had at all costs to maintain a
distance between itself and its enemies: failing this it would have found itself
thrust into the general melee where it would have had its arms pinned and been
Paralysed. As it was, the roach that crept up from the right wing of art did in



460 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

fact paralyse Lef to a significant extent by taking over all its inventions,
terminology, techniques, constructivist devices, parading itself in Lef colours to
the point where the inexperienced eye would have been hard put to distinguish
where a wooden construction was a construction and where a postcard with an
inscription, where verse was a controlled organisation of language, and where
simply musty lyricism.

'Whose side are you on?' was transformed into 'anything goes, with anyone,
and anywhere 1 , and embraces all-round. Instead of a struggle there came
the sermon which preached inter-departmental agreement in the bosom of a
single 'Soviet' art. Ideological differences in art were annulled - everything
was reduced to a question of formal and technical differences. A band of all-
embracing associations arose, flying the 'red' 'Revolutionary 1 , 'Soviet 1 , banner.

New Lef had not come into existence by chance, and the bearers of the
innovatory initiative could not accept this 'peace and good-will to all depart-
ments 1 as appropriate soil for the blossoming of a Soviet art which would 'strike
awe in the hearts of our enemies in the remaining five sixths of the world 1 , as
certain admirable and responsible comrades like to put it.

Drawing the teeth of natural enemies in the art field can lead to only one
thing - they all end up toothless. The greatest sin for a worker in the art field
now is not lack of talent or inventiveness, but on the contrary, principles.

The first fact against which Lef must take a stand is this replacement of
intergroup wars of principles by a levelling of all the conflicting tendencies
within the protection of a corporative-type union.

The battle for form has been reduced to a battle for the stylistic sign. New
inventions in the field of form are no longer weapons for cultural advance, but
merely a new ornament, a new embellishing device, a new addition to the
assortment of aesthetic embroideries and rattles offered to the public. [. . .]
The subjection of material to inappropriate formal means can only lead to the
distortion of the splendid material offered by Soviet reality.

Soviet reality fixed by the lens of a Soviet camera (even in the form of a
painted photograph if the preservation of a colour impression is called for) which
finds a place in the pages of an illustrated journal is as important and essential
as daily bread. But the same material hanging on the walls of an AKhRR
exhibition in the form of an easel painting - which for all its sympathies in this
direction the AKhRR hasn't an idea where to put or how to use - is material
fixed by the outworn devices of a transplant art and therefore material ruined.

'Red 1 icon painting devices lend themselves to this kind of distortion of
material (proud, fiery-eyed leaders, selfless marching pioneers, peasant Ivans
with their heraldic sickles): All of this is a feature of the agit-poster, against
which if I am not mistaken, the AKhRR is waging a battle, but whose devices
they seem to be attempting to adapt to their own needs. [. . .]

[*...] It is a fact that once the concern with form lessened, what remained
was the line of least resistance, the reactivation of already worn-out formal
models and the rejection of innovations in form. The persistent cry of the
'saviours of art 1 against so-called stunts and conjuring tricks has led to a situation




IVc Realism as Critique 461

where they are now credited with the defence of either the crudely talentless,
or of the good old stereotype.

The first mistake of these 'saviours' was their endorsement of the formula
form/content, 'whatV'how 1 (rather than Lef's proposed 'material-purpose-
form/thing 1 ) and in the activation of each part separately. The second mistake,
the forced pedalling of the 'primacy of content 1 (i.e. of a completely indeter-
minate and undifferentiated phenomenon) was in fact realized in a deterioration
in form. The 'how 1 flew up the chimney. Surely 'how 1 has its own noun -
'quality 1 . . . and the struggle for how/quality is the struggle for form. The
struggle for quality in art has now been replaced by a struggle for the
reinstatement of the pre-war stereotype, what has happened is a flight backwards
into the wilderness. [. . .]

[ . . . ] Material in raw forms - this is the vanguard of contemporary art. But
raw forms can only serve an informational purpose and this is the tragedy of
the situation - as soon as the question of the use of material on levels other
than that of pure information arises, say in agit - pre-war formal devices
immediately appear on the scene and thanks to them the material is either
deformed as we have seen, or is immediately subjected to the aims of aesthetic
diversion from reality and its task of construction.

But the pre-war norm has its defenders.

Why should art be concerned with raising quality and seeking new forms
when the basic mass of consumers of aesthetic products swallow them in the
pre-war models and even praise them. Down with innovation; down with
experiment; long live the aesthetic inertia of the masses.

There is only one context in which the public can honestly be fed the pre-war
aesthetic norm: when what is intended is the pre-war norm's corresponding
social purpose - to draw the consciousness and emotions of the consumer away
from the essential tasks of reality. And this is the point we have reached. The
pre-war norm in form has drawn after it the pre-war norm in ideology: art as
relaxation, art as pleasant stimulus, art as diversion ... is this not a variation
on the old 'art as dream, day-dream, fantasy 1 ? [. . .]

[. . .] A full stop has been reached. The pre-war norm has been achieved.
The altar of art has resurged out of the tedious abysses of our 'depressing, grey,
everyday reality 1 to provide citizens with a legalised daily escape route into the
kingdom of dream/stereotypes. Topical raw material still survives, but never
mind. . . . The specialists will invent a means of getting imaginative exoticism
from Party history material, or treat it in say, ancient Roman or Babylonian
tones, or even in the Sergievo-suburbs-iconpainting style and everyone will feel
that art is serving revolutionary construction (well of course, look at the themes,
incidents, characters) while in reality art will be serving a philistine escapism
from the revolution.

These are the four dangers:

 levelling

 lowering of form

 pre-war stereotypes

 art as a drug



462 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

Lef is aware and will fight responsibly

for an aggressive, class-active art

for innovation appropriate to the tasks of socialist construction

for art/lifebuilding, art/activisor, art/agit

for the culture of form



9 Siegfried Kracauer (1889-1966) from The Mass
Ornament'

Originally trained in architecture and philosophy, the author was a critical theorist and
cultural commentator in Weimar Germany, working for much of the time on the Frank-
furter Zeitung. He particularly sought out overlooked and marginal areas of life as keys
to the characteristics of modernity, on the paradoxical grounds that it was the critical
scrutiny of the surfaces of life that led one to comprehend the underlying determinations
of reality. In this respect his work resonated with that of other critical Marxists in Weimar
such as Adorno and Benjamin. Kracauer went into exile after the rise of the Nazis,
initially to Paris and then to America. The present essay was published in Frankfurter
Zeitung, 9-10 June 1927. This text is drawn from the two opening sections, in the
translation by Barbara Corell and Jack Zipes in New German Critique, 5, Spring 1975.



I

An analysis of the simple surface manifestations of an epoch can contribute
more to determining its place in the historical process than judgments of the
epoch about itself. As expressions of the tendencies of a given time, these
judgments cannot be considered valid testimonies about its overall situation. On
the other hand the very unconscious nature of surface manifestations allows for
direct access to the underlying meaning of existing conditions. Conversely, the
interpretation of such manifestations is tied to an understanding of these
conditions. The underlying meaning of an epoch and its less obvious pulsations
illuminate one another reciprocally.



II

A change in taste has been taking place quietly in the field of physical culture,
always a popular subject in illustrated newspapers. It began with the Tiller Girls.
These products of American 'distraction factories' are no longer individual girls,
but indissoluble female units whose movements are mathematical demonstra-
tions. Even as they crystallize into patterns in the revues of Berlin, performances
of the same geometrical exactitude are occurring in similarly packed stadiums
in Australia and India, not to mention America. Through weekly newsreels in
movie houses they have managed to reach even the tiniest villages. One glance
at the screen reveals that the ornaments consist of thousands of bodies, sexless
bodies in bathing suits. The regularity of their patterns is acclaimed by the
masses, who themselves are arranged in row upon ordered row.



IVc: Realism as Critique 463

These spectacular pageants, which are brought into existence not only by the
Girls and the spectators at the stadium, have long since taken on an established
form. They have achieved an international stature and have attracted aesthetic
interest.

The bearers of the ornaments are the masses. This is not the same as the
people, for whenever the people form patterns, these patterns do not hover in
mid-air but emerge from community. A current of organic life flows from these
communal groups, whose shared destiny connects them with their ornaments.
These ornaments appear as a magic force so laden with meaning that they cannot
be reduced to a purely linear structure. [ . . . ] The patterns seen in the stadiums
and cabarets ... are composed of elements which are mere building blocks,
nothing more. The construction of an edifice depends on the size of the stones
and their number. It is the mass which makes the impact. Only as parts of a
mass, not as individuals who believe themselves to be formed from within, are
human beings components of a pattern.

The ornament is an end in itself. In its early stages the ballet also yielded
ornaments which moved kaleidoscopically. But even after they had discarded
their ritual meaning, they remained still the plastic formation of the erotic life
which gave rise to them and determined their traits. In contrast, the syn-
chronized movement of the Girls is devoid of any such connections; it is a
linear system which no longer has erotic meaning but at best points to the place
where the erotic resides. Nor do the living constellations in the stadiums have
the meaning of military demonstrations. No matter how orderly the latter
appeared, that order was considered a means to an end; the parade march evolved
out of patriotic feelings and in turn aroused them in soldiers and loyal subjects.
The constellations of Girls, however, have no meaning outside of themselves,
and the masses are not a moral unit like a company of soldiers. The patterns
cannot even be described as ornamental accessories for gymnastic discipline.
The training of the units of Girls is intended instead to produce an immense
number of parallel lines, and the desired effect is to train the greatest number
of people in order to create a pattern of unimaginable dimensions. In the end
there is the closed ornament, whose life components have been drained of their
substance.

Even though the masses bring it about, they do not participate in conceiving
the ornament. And as linear as it may seem, no line juts out of the small
segments to determine the whole of the mass pattern. In this it resembles the
aerial photographs of landscapes and cities for it does not emerge from the
interior of a given reality, but rather appears above it. Similarly, actors are not
aware of stage setting in its totality; yet, they consciously take part in its
formation, and in the case of ballet dancers, the pattern is still open to the
influence of its performers. The more its composition is reduced to linear design,
the further it is removed from the immanent consciousness of those forming it.
Yet this does not mean that it is observed by a more critical eye. The fact is
that nobody would notice the pattern if the crowd of spectators, who have an
aesthetic relation to it and do not represent anyone, were not sitting in front
of it.



lif



464 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

The ornament, detached from its bearers, must be understood rationally. It
consists of degrees and circles like those found in textbooks of euclidean
geometry. Waves and spirals, the elementary structures of physics, are also
included; discarded are the proliferations of organic forms and the radiations of
spiritual life. Hereafter, the Tiller Girls can no longer be reassembled as human
beings. Their mass gymnastics are never performed by whole, autonomous
bodies whose contortions would deny rational understanding. Arms, thighs and
other segments are the smallest components of the composition.

The structure of the mass ornament reflects that of the general contemporary
situation. Since the principle of the capitalist production process does not stem
purely from nature, it must destroy the natural organisms which it regards either
as a means or as a force of resistance. Personality and national community
(Volksgemeinschaft) perish when calculability is demanded; only as a tiny particle
of the mass can the individual human being effortlessly clamber up charts and
service machines. A system which is indifferent to variations of form leads
necessarily to the obliteration of national characteristics and to the fabrication
of masses of workers who can be employed and used uniformly throughout the
world. - Like the mass ornament, the capitalist production process is an end
in itself. The commodities which it creates are not actually produced to be
possessed but to make unlimited profits. Its growth is bound up with that of
the factory. The producer does not work for private gains of which he can only
make limited use - the surplus profits in America are transferred to cultural
accumulation centers such as libraries, universities, etc., in which intellectuals
are groomed who through their later activity reimburse with interest the capital
advanced to them. The producer works for the expansion of the business; values
are not produced for values' sake. Though such work may once have concerned
itself with the production and consumption of values, these have now become
side effects which serve the production process. The activities which have been
invested in the process have divested themselves of their substantial meaning.
- The production process runs its course publicly in secret. Everyone goes
through the necessary motions at the conveyor belt, performs a partial function
without knowing the entirety. Similar to the pattern in the stadium, the
organization hovers above the masses as a monstrous figure whose originator
withdraws it from the eyes of its bearers, and who himself hardly reflects upon
it. - It is conceived according to rational principles which the Taylor system
only takes to its final conclusion. The hands in the factory correspond to the
legs of the Tiller Girls. Psycho-technical aptitude tests seek to compute emo-
tional dispositions above and beyond manual abilities. The mass ornament is
the aesthetic reflex of the rationality aspired to by the prevailing economic
system.

Certain intellectuals have taken offense at the emergence of the Tiller Girls
and the image created by the stadium pageants. Whatever amuses the masses,
they judge as a diversion of the masses. Contrary to such opinion, I would argue
that the aesthetic pleasure gained from the ornamental mass movements is
legitimate. They belong in fact to the isolated configurations of the time,
configurations, which imbue a given material with form. The masses which are



IVc Realism as Critique 465

arranged in them are taken from offices and factories. The structural principle
u >on which they are modeled determines them in reality as well. When great
amounts of reality-content are no longer visible in our world, art must make
do with what is left, for an aesthetic presentation is all the more real the less
it dispenses with the reality outside the aesthetic sphere. No matter how low
one rates the value of the mass ornament, its level of reality is still above that
of artistic productions which cultivate obsolete noble sentiments in withered
forms - even when they have no further significance.
* * *



10 October (Association of Artistic Labour):
'Declaration 1

The group October was formed in Russia in 1928. It constituted a kind of umbrella
organization for those artists who had earlier been associated with the avant-garde,
who were committed to the production of new forms of art as part of the construction
of a new socialist society, but who were simultaneously aligned against what was fast
becoming the actually dominant trend in post-revolutionary art: namely the figurative
realism of the AKhRR, in effect the forerunner of Socialist Realism. The notable feature
of the Declaration is its mobilization of the term 'realism' precisely against what it sees
not as an adequate form of realism at all but as a conservative harking back to the
past. Yet on the other side, while declaring in favour of rational and constructive
approaches, the group renounce the abstract industrialism and technicism into which
some among the avant-garde had fallen. Rodchenko, Stepanova, Lissitsky, Klucis and
Deineka were all represented in the October group's only exhibition, held in Moscow in
June 1930. Other members included the film director Eisenstein; the architect-designers
Gan, Ginsburg, the Vesnin brothers, and the German Hannes Meyer who was expelled
from the Bauhaus in 1929; and the Mexican muralist Diego Rivera who became a
member during his time in Russia in 1928. The group was disbanded in 1932 after the
government decree on the reconstitution of competing artistic groups into a single
Artists Union (see IVbII). The Declaration was originally published in Sovremennya
arkhitektura (Contemporary Architecture) no. 3, March 1928, pp. 73-4. It is translated
in Bowlt, Russian Art of the Avant Garde (op. cit), from which source the present version
is taken.

At the present time all art forms must define their positions at the front of the
Socialist cultural revolution.

We are profoundly convinced that the spatial arts (architecture, painting,
sculpture, graphics, the industrial arts, photography, cinematography, etc.) can
escape their current crisis only when they are subordinated to the task of serving
the concrete needs of the proletariat, the leaders of the peasantry, and the
backward national groups.

In participating consciously in the proletariat's ideological class struggle
against hostile forces and in supporting the rapprochement of the peasantry and
the nationalities with the proletariat, the spatial arts must serve the proletariat
and the working masses in two interconnected fields:



466 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

in the field of ideological propaganda (by means of pictures, frescoes, printing,
sculpture, photography, cinematography, etc.);

in the field of production and direct organization of the collective way of life
(by means of architecture, the industrial arts, the designing of mass festivals,

etc.).

For those artists who are fully aware of these principles, the following

immediate tasks await:

1. The artist who belongs to the epoch of the proletarian dictatorship regards
himself not as an isolated figure passively reflecting reality, but as an active
fighter at the ideological front of the Proletarian Revolution; this is the front
that, by its actions, is organizing mass psychology and is helping to design the
new way of life. This orientation compels the proletarian artist to take stock of
himself continually in order to stand with the revolutionary proletarian avant-
garde at the same high ideological level.

2. He must submit to critical examination all formal and technical artistic
achievements of the past. Of especial value to proletarian art are the achieve-
ments of the last decades, when the methods of the rational and constructive
approaches to artistic creation, which had been lost by the artists of the petty
bourgeoisie, were restored and developed considerably. It was at this time that
artists began to penetrate the creation of dialectical and materialist methodology,
of which artists had not been aware previously, and of the methods of mechanical
and laboratory scientific technology; this has provided a great deal that can and
must serve as material for the development of proletarian art. However, the
fundamental task of the proletarian artist is not to make an eclectic collection
of old devices for their own sake, but with their aid, and on new technological
ground, to create new types and a new style of the spatial arts.

3. The ultimate orientation of the artist who would express the cultural
interests of the revolutionary proletariat should be to propagate the world view
of dialectical materialism by the maximum means of expression within the spatial
arts, and to design materially the mass, collective forms of the new life. In the
light of this, we reject the philistine realism of epigones; the realism of a
stagnant, individualistic way of life; passively contemplative, static, naturalistic
realism with its fruitless copying of reality, embellishing and canonizing the old
way of life, sapping the energy and enervating the will of the culturally
underdeveloped proletariat.

We recognize and will build proletarian realism that expresses the will of the
active revolutionary class; a dynamic realism that reveals life in movement and
in action and that discloses systematically the potentials of life; a realism that
makes things, that rebuilds rationally the old way of life and that, in the very
thick of the mass struggle and construction, exerts its influence through all its
artistic means. But we simultaneously reject aesthetic, abstract industrialism and
unadulterated technicism that passes itself off as revolutionary art. For art to
affect life creatively, we emphasize that all means of expression and design must
be utilized in order to organize the consciousness, will, and emotions of the



IVc Realism as Critique 467

proletariat and of the working masses with maximum force. To this end, the
organic cooperation of all spatial art forms must be established.
* * *

In issuing the present declaration, we disassociate ourselves from all existing
art groups active in the field of the spatial arts. We are prepared to join forces
with some of them as long as they acknowledge the basic principles of our
platform in practical terms. We greet the idea of a federation of art societies
and will support any serious organizational steps in this direction.

We are embarking at a time of transition for the development of the spatial
arts in the USSR. With regard to the basic forces active in modern Soviet art,
the natural process of artistic and ideological self-determination is being ham-
pered by a number of unhealthy phenomena. We consider it our duty to declare
that we reject the system of personal and group patronage and protection for
individual artistic trends and individual artists. We support wholly the unre-
stricted, healthy competition of artistic directions and schools within the areas
of technical competence, higher quality of artistic and ideological production
and stylistic researches. But we reject unhealthy competition between artistic
groups for commissions and patronage of influential individuals and institutions.
We reject any claim by any one association of artists to ideological monopoly
or exclusive representation of the artistic interests of the working and peasant
masses. We reject the system that can allow an artificially created and privileged
position (moral and material) for any one artistic group at the expense of other
associations or groups; this is a radical contradiction of the Party's and the
government's artistic policy. We reject speculation on 'social commissions,'
which occurs beneath the mask of revolutionary theme and everyday realism,
and which replaces any serious effort to formulate a revolutionary world view
and world perception with a simplified interpretation of a hurriedly invented
revolutionary subject. We are against the dictatorship of philistine elements in
the Soviet spatial arts and for the cultural maturity, artistic craftsmanship, and
ideological consistence of the new proletarian artists, who are quickly gaining
strength and advancing to the fore. [. . .]



11 V.N. Volosinov (1895-C.1934) from Marxism and
the Philosophy of Language



Volosinov's work takes as its point of departure the Structuralist linguistics of Ferdinand
de Saussure. His basic critical move, in contrast to Saussure's formalism, is to render
the language system social. The production of meaning, that is, is related to the unequal
power relations of social life: 'class struggle at the level of the sign'. One of the effects
is to throw new light on the complex problems of the relations between base and
superstructure, that is, between cultural forms and society's economic form, and to
resituate debate about ideology on the terrain of language. Volosinov's work was
occluded for decades by Stalinism and only brought to light again in the 1970s, since
when it has been remarkably influential on contemporary thought, in part as a conse-
quence of its conjectural identification with his friend Mikhail Bakhtin (1895-1975). The



468 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

present extracts are taken from The Study of Ideologies' and The Relationship of the
Basis and Superstructures', the first two chapters of Marxism and the Philosophy of
Language, originally published in 1929 as Marksizm i filosofija jazyka. This translation
by Ladislaw Matejka and I.R. Titunik was first published by Seminar Press in 1973. In
attributing authorship of this text to Volosinov rather than Bakhtin we have followed the
conclusion of the translators (as represented in their preface to the 1986 edition,
Cambridge and London).



The Study of Ideologies and Philosophy of Language

[ . . . ] Any ideological product is not only itself a part of a reality (natural or
social), just as is any physical body, any instrument of production, or any
product for consumption, it also, in contradistinction to these other phenomena,
reflects and refracts another reality outside itself. Everything ideological pos-
sesses meaning: it represents, depicts, or stands for something lying outside itself.
In other words, it is a sign. Without signs there is no ideology. A physical body
equals itself, so to speak; it does not signify anything but wholly coincides with
its particular, given nature. In this case there is no question of ideology.

However, any physical body may be perceived as an image; for instance, the
image of natural inertia and necessity embodied in that particular thing. Any
such artistic-symbolic image to which a particular physical object gives rise is
already an ideological product. The physical object is converted into a sign.
Without ceasing to be a part of material reality, such an object, to some degree,
reflects and refracts another reality.



Thus, side by side with the natural phenomena, with the equipment of
technology, and with articles for consumption, there exists a special world - the
world of signs.

Signs also are particular, material things; and, as we have seen, any item of
nature, technology, or consumption can become a sign, acquiring in the process
a meaning that goes beyond its given particularity. A sign does not simply exist
as a part of a reality - it reflects and refracts another reality. Therefore, it may
distort that reality or be true to it, or may perceive it from a special point of
view, and so forth. Every sign is subject to the criteria of ideological evaluation
(i.e., whether it is true, false, correct, fair, good, etc.). The domain of ideology
coincides with the domain of signs. They equate with one another. Wherever
a sign is present, ideology is present, too. Everything ideological possesses semiotic
value.

Within the domain of signs - i.e., within the ideological sphere - profound
differences exist: it is, after all, the domain of the artistic image, the religious
symbol, the scientific formula, and the judicial ruling, etc. Each field of
ideological creativity has its own kind of orientation toward reality and each
refracts reality in its own way. Each field commands its own special function
within the unity of social life. But it is their semiotic character that places all
ideological phenomena under the same general definition.



iVc Realism as Critique 469

Every ideological sign is not only a reflection, a shadow, of reality, but is also
itself a material segment of that very reality. Every phenomenon functioning as
an ideological sign has some kind of material embodiment, whether in sound,
physical mass, color, movements of the body, or the like. In this sense, the
reality of the sign is fully objective and lends itself to a unitary, monistic,
objective method of study. A sign is a phenomenon of the external world. Both
the sign itself and all the effects it produces (all those actions, reactions, and
new signs it elicits in the surrounding social milieu) occur in outer experience.
This is a point of extreme importance. Yet, elementary and self-evident as it
may seem, the study of ideologies has still not drawn all the conclusions that
follow from it.

The idealistic philosophy of culture and psychologistic cultural studies locate
ideology in the consciousness. Ideology, they assert, is a fact of consciousness;
the external body of the sign is merely a coating, merely a technical means for
the realization of the inner effect, which is understanding.

Idealism and psychologism alike overlook the fact that understanding itself
can come about only within some kind of semiotic material (e.g., inner speech),
that sign bears upon sign, that consciousness itself can arise and become a viable
fact only in the material embodiment of signs. The understanding of a sign is,
after all, an act of reference between the sign apprehended and other, already
known signs; in other words, understanding is a response to a sign with signs.
And this chain of ideological creativity and understanding, moving from sign
to sign and then to a new sign, is perfectly consistent and continuous: from
one link of a semiotic nature (hence, also of a material nature) we proceed
uninterruptedly to another link of exactly the same nature. And nowhere is
there a break in the chain, nowhere does the chain plunge into inner being,
nonmaterial in nature and unembodied in signs.

This ideological chain stretches from individual consciousness to individual
consciousness, connecting them together. Signs emerge, after all, only in the
process of interaction between one individual consciousness and another. And
the individual consciousness itself is filled with signs. Consciousness becomes
consciousness only once it has been filled with ideological (semiotic) content,
consequently, only in the process of social interaction.

Despite the deep methodological differences between them, the idealistic
philosophy of culture and psychologistic cultural studies both commit the same
fundamental error. By localizing ideology in the consciousness, they transform
the study of ideologies into a study of consciousness and its laws; it makes no
difference whether this is done in transcendental or in empirical-psychological
terms. This error is responsible not only for methodological confusion regarding
the interrelation of disparate fields of knowledge, but for a radical distortion of
the very reality under study as well. Ideological creativity - a material and social
fact - is forced into the framework of the individual consciousness. The
individual consciousness, for its part, is deprived of any support in reality. It
becomes either all or nothing.

For idealism it has become all: its locus is somewhere above existence and it
determines the latter. In actual fact, however, this sovereign of the universe is



470 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

merely the hypostatization in idealism of an abstract bond among the most
general forms and categories of ideological creativity.

For psychological positivism, on the contrary, consciousness amounts to
nothing: it is just a conglomeration of fortuitous, psychophysiological reactions
which, by some miracle, results in meaningful and unified ideological creativity.

The objective social regulatedness of ideological creativity, once misconstrued
as a conformity with laws of the individual consciousness, must inevitably forfeit
its real place in existence and depart either up into the superexistential empyrean
of transcendentalism or down into the presocial recesses of the psychophysical,
biological organism.

However, the ideological, as such, cannot possibly be explained in terms of
either of these superhuman or subhuman, animalian, roots. Its real place in
existence is in the special, social material of signs created by man. Its specificity
consists precisely in its being located between organized individuals, in its being
the medium of their communication.

Signs can arise only on intenndividual territory. It is territory that cannot be
called 'natural' in the direct sense of the word: signs do not arise between any
two members of the species Homo sapiens. It is essential that the two individuals
be organized socially, that they compose a group (a social unit); only then can
the medium of signs take shape between them. The individual consciousness
not only cannot be used to explain anything, but, on the contrary, is itself in
need of explanation from the vantage point of the social, ideological medium.

The individual consciousness is a social-ideological fact. [ . . . ]

[. . .] Consciousness takes shape and being in the material of signs created
by an organized group in the process of its social intercourse. The individual
consciousness is nurtured on signs; it derives its growth from them; it reflects
their logic and laws. The logic of consciousness is the logic of ideological
communication, of the semiotic interaction of a social group. If we deprive
consciousness of its semiotic, ideological content, it would have absolutely
nothing left. Consciousness can harbor only in the image, the word, the
meaningful gesture, and so forth. Outside such material, there remains the sheer
physiological act unilluminated by consciousness, i.e., without having light shed
on it, without having meaning given to it, by signs.

All that has been said above leads to the following methodological conclusion:
the study of ideologies does not depend on psychology to any extent and need not be
grounded in it. ... it is rather the reverse: objective psychology must he grounded
in the study of ideologies. The reality of ideological phenomena is the objective
reality of social signs. The laws of this reality are the laws of semiotic
communication and are directly determined by the total aggregate of social and
economic laws. Ideological reality is the immediate superstructure over the
economic basis. Individual consciousness is not the architect of the ideological
superstructure, but only a tenant lodging in the social edifice of ideological signs.

With our preliminary argument disengaging ideological phenomena and their
regulatedness from individual consciousness, we tie them in all the more firmly
with conditions and forms of social communication. The reality of the sign is
wholly a matter determined by that communication. After all, the existence of



IVc Realism as Critique 471

the sign is nothing but the materialization of that communication. Such is the
nature of all ideological signs.

But nowhere does this semiotic quality and the continuous, comprehensive
role of social communication as conditioning factor appear so clearly and fully
expressed as in language. The word is the ideological phenomenon par excellence.

The entire reality of the word is wholly absorbed in its function of being a
sign. A word contains nothing that is indifferent to this function, nothing that
would not have been engendered by it. A word is the purest and most sensitive
medium of social intercourse.

# * *

One other property belongs to the word that is of the highest order of
importance and is what makes the word the primary medium of the individual
consciousness. Although the reality of the word, as is true of any sign, resides
between individuals, a word, at the same time, is produced by the individual
organism's own means without recourse to any equipment or any other kind of
extracorporeal material. This has determined the role of word as the semiotic
material of inner life ~ of consciousness (inner speech). Indeed, the consciousness
could have developed only by having at its disposal material that was pliable
and expressible by bodily means. And the word was exactly that kind of material.
The word is available as the sign for, so to speak, inner employment: it can
function as a sign in a state short of outward expression. For this reason, the
problem of individual consciousness as the inner word (as an inner sign in general)
becomes one of the most vital problems in philosophy of language.

It is clear, from the very start, that this problem cannot be properly ap-
proached by resorting to the usual concept of word and language as worked out
in nonsociological linguistics and philosophy of language. What is needed is
profound and acute analysis of the word as social sign before its function as the
medium of consciousness can be understood.

It is owing to this exclusive role of the word as the medium of consciousness
that the word functions as an essential ingredient accompanying all ideological
creativity whatsoever. The word accompanies and comments on each and every
ideological act. The processes of understanding any ideological phenomenon at
all (be it a picture, a piece of music, a ritual, or an act of human conduct)
cannot operate without the participation of inner speech. All manifestations of
ideological creativity - all other nonverbal signs - are bathed by, suspended in,
and cannot be entirely segregated or divorced from the element of speech.

This does not mean, of course, that the word may supplant any other ideological
sign. None of the fundamental, specific ideological signs is replacable wholly by
words. It is ultimately impossible to convey a musical composition or pictorial image
adequately in words. Words cannot wholly substitute for a religious ritual; nor is
there any really adequate verbal substitute for even the simplest gesture in human
behaviour. To deny this would lead to the most banal rationalism and simplisticism.
Nonetheless, at the very same time, every single one of these ideological signs,
though not supplantable by words, has support in and is accompanied by words,
just as is the case with singing and its musical accompaniment.

* * *



472 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

Concerning the Relationship of the Basis and
Superstructures



Every sign, as we know, is a construct between socially organized persons in
the process of their interaction. Therefore, the forms of signs are conditioned above
all by the social organization of the participants involved and also by the immediate
conditions of their interaction. When these forms change, so does sign. And it
should be one of the tasks of the study of ideologies to trace this social life of
the verbal sign. Only so approached can the problem of the relationship between
sign and existence find its concrete expression; only then will the process of the
causal shaping of the sign by existence stand out as a process of genuine
existence-to-sign transit, of genuine dialectical refraction of existence in the sign.

To accomplish this task certain basic, methodological prerequisites must be
respected:

1 Ideology may not be divorced from the material reality of sign (i.e., by locating
it in the 'consciousness' or other vague and elusive regions);

2 The sign may not be divorced from the concrete forms of social intercourse (seeing
that the sign is part of organized social intercourse and cannot exist, as such,
outside it, reverting to a mere physical artifact);

3 Communication and the forms of communication may not be divorced from the
material basis.

Every ideological sign - the verbal sign included - in coming about through
the process of social intercourse, is defined by the social purview of the given
time period and the given social group. So far, we have been speaking about
the form of the sign as shaped by the forms of social interaction. Now we shall
deal with its other aspect - the content of the sign and the evaluative accentuation
that accompanies all content.

Every stage in the development of a society has its own special and restricted
circle of items which alone have access to that society's attention and which are
endowed with evaluative accentuation by that attention. Only items within that
circle will achieve sign formation and become objects in semiotic communication.
What determines this circle of items endowed with value accents?

In order for any item, from whatever domain of reality it may come, to enter
the social purview of the group and elicit ideological semiotic reaction, it must
be associated with the vital socioeconomic prerequisites of the particular group's
existence; it must somehow, even if only obliquely, make contact with the bases
of the group's material life.

Individual choice under these circumstances, of course, can have no meaning
at all. The sign is a creation between individuals, a creation within a social
milieu. Therefore the item in question must first acquire interindividual signi-
ficance, and only then can it become an object for sign formation. In other
words, only that which has acquired social value can enter the world of ideology,
take shape, and establish itself there.



IVc Realism as Critique 473

For this reason, all ideological accents, despite their being produced by the
individual voice (as in the case of word) or, in any event, by the individual
organism - all ideological accents are social accents, ones with claim to social
recognition and, only thanks to that recognition, are made outward use of in
ideological material.

Let us agree to call the entity which becomes the object of a sign the theme
of the sign. Each fully fledged sign has its theme. And so, every verbal
performance has its theme.

An ideological theme is always socially accentuated. Of course, all the social
accents of ideological themes make their way also into the individual conscious-
ness (which, as we know, is ideological through and through) and there take on
the semblance of individual accents, since the individual consciousness assimi-
lates them as its own. However, the source of these accents is not the individual
consciousness. Accent, as such, is interindividual. The animal cry, the pure
response to pain in the organism, is bereft of accent; it is a purely natural
phenomenon. For such a cry, the social atmosphere is irrelevant, and therefore
it does not contain even the germ of sign formation.

The theme of an ideological sign and the form of an ideological sign are
inextricably bound together and are separable only in the abstract. Ultimately,
the same set of forces and the same material prerequisites bring both the one
and the other to life.

Indeed, the economic conditions that inaugurate a new element of reality into
the social purview, that make it socially meaningful and 'interesting,' are exactly
the same conditions that create the forms of ideological communication (the
cognitive, the artistic, the religious, and so on), which in turn shape the forms
of semiotic expression.

Thus, the themes and forms of ideological creativity emerge from the same
matrix and are in essence two sides of the same thing.

The process of incorporation into ideology - the birth of theme and birth of
form - is best followed out in the material of the word. This process of
ideological generation is reflected two ways in language: both in its large-scale,
universal-historical dimensions as studied by semantic paleontology, which has
disclosed the incorporation of undifferentiated chunks of reality into the social
purview of prehistoric man, and in its small-scale dimensions as constituted
Within the framework of contemporaneity, since, as we know, the word sensi-
tively reflects the slightest variations in social existence.

Existence reflected in sign is not merely reflected but refracted. How is this
refraction of existence in the ideological sign determined? By an intersecting of
differently oriented social interests within one and the same sign community,
i.e., by the class struggle.

Class does not coincide with the sign community, i.e., with the community
which is the totality of users of the same set of signs for ideological communi-
cation. Thus various different classes will use one and the same language. As
a result, differently oriented accents intersect in every ideological sign. Sign
becomes an arena of the class struggle.

This social multiaccentuality of the ideological sign is a very crucial aspect.



474 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

By and large, it is thanks to this intersecting of accents that a sign maintains
its vitality and dynamism and the capacity for further development. A sign that
has been withdrawn from the pressures of the social struggle - which, so to
speak, crosses beyond the pale of the class struggle - inevitably loses force,
degenerating into allegory and becoming the object not of live social intelligi-
bility but of philological comprehension. The historical memory of mankind is
full of such worn out ideological signs incapable of serving as arenas for the
clash of live social accents. However, inasmuch as they are remembered by the
philologist and the historian, they may be said to retain the last glimmers of
life.

The very same thing that makes the ideological sign vital and mutable is also,
however, that which makes it a refracting and distorting medium. The ruling
class strives to impart a supraclass, eternal character to the ideological sign, to
extinguish or drive inward the struggle between social value judgments which
occurs in it, to make the sign uniaccentual.

In actual fact, each living ideological sign has two faces, like Janus. Any
current curse word can become a word of praise, any current truth must
inevitably sound to many other people as the greatest lie. This inner dialectic
quality of the sign comes out fully in the open only in times of social crises or
revolutionary changes. In the ordinary conditions of life, the contradiction
embedded in every ideological sign cannot emerge fully because the ideological
sign in an established, dominant ideology is always somewhat reactionary and
tries, as it were, to stabilize the preceding factor in the dialectical flux of the
social generative process, so accentuating yesterday's truth as to make it appear
today's. And that is what is responsible for the refracting and distorting
peculiarity of the ideological sign within the dominant ideology. [. . .]



12 Georges Bataille (1892-1962) from 'Critical
Dictionary'

Bataitle became de facto leader of a dissident Surrealist group after the expulsions of
1930 and Breton's explicit inscription of Marxism into Surrealism's perspective. To
Breton's 'historical materialism' Bataille opposed a more basic materialism per se: a
materialism of matter, of sheer stuff, devoid of form, but a materialism which also
acknowledges the actual diversity and untidiness of social and psychological experi-
ence. Hence his fundamental category of the Informe'. The present short texts,
'Esthete', 'Informe' and 'Materialisme', are taken from Bataille's 'Critical Dictionary',
published in various issues of the journal Documents, Paris, 1929-30. Reprinted in G.
Bataille, Documents, Paris, 1968, from which the present translations are made.



Aesthete

It being well understood that no one accepts such a title, it must, however, be
understood that this word has been devalued to the same extent and in the same



IVc Realism as Critique 475

way as artist or poet. ('This man is an Artist' or 4 I esteem Poets' and, above
all, 'the pleasant exactness that Aesthetes give their character' . . . ) When it
comes down to it, these words have the power to disturb and to nauseate: after
fifteen years, one finds the shoe of a dead woman at the bottom of a cupboard;
one throws it in the rubbish bin. There is a cynical pleasure in considering
words which take something of us with them to the dustbin.

Moreover, the automatic protest against an obsolete character type is by now
a more or less transparent dodge. The unfortunate who says that art no longer
works, because that way one remains disengaged from the 'dangers of action',
says something deserving of the same attention as the dead woman's shoe.
Although it may be quite disgusting to look at, a cliche is as much subject to
conditions of obsolescence as an internal combustion engine. Everything in the
emotional order which responds to an allowable need is condemned to a process
of improvement, which, from another viewpoint, one is obliged to regard with
the same disquieted (or cynical) curiosity which some Chinese torture might
attract.



The Formless

A dictionary should begin from the point when it is no longer concerned with
the meaning but only with the use of words. Thus formless is not only an
adjective with a certain meaning, but a term serving to deprecate, implying the
general demand that everything should have a form. That which it designates
has no rights to any sense, and is everywhere crushed under foot like a spider
or a worm. For the satisfaction of academics, the universe must take shape. The
entirety of philosophy has no other end in view: it puts a frock-coat on that
which is, a frock-coat of mathematics. To affirm on the other hand that the
universe does not resemble anything and is nothing but formless amounts to the
claim that the universe is something like a spider or a gob of spittle.



Materialism

Most materialists, although they want to eliminate all spiritual things, have
ended up describing an order of being which, insofar as it involves hierarchical
relations, is characterized as specifically idealistic. They have located dead matter
at the summit of a conventional hierarchy of facts of diverse orders, without
noticing that they have thereby succumbed to the obsession with an ideal form
of matter, with a form more approximate than any other to that which matter
should be. Dead matter, the pure idea, and God each respond in the same way,
which is to say perfectly, unremarkably, like a docile student, answering a
question that can only be put by idealist philosophers: the question of the
essence of things, the exact idea by which things become intelligible. The
classical materialists have not even really substituted the cause for modal necessity



476 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

(the quare for quamobrem, that is, determinism for fatalism, the past for the
future). In the role that they have unwittingly assigned to the idea of science,
in order to supply their need for external authority, all expectation has in effect
been placed on the concept of modal necessity. If the principle of order that they
have defined is precisely the stable element which has permitted science to attain
its apparently unassailable position, a real divine eternity, the choice of this
principle can hardly be attributed to chance. The conformity of dead matter to
the idea of science is substituted by most materialists for a religious relation,
established earlier in history, between the divine maker and its creations, the
one being the idea of the others.

Materialism will be considered as a senile form of idealism to the extent that
it fails to ground itself directly on psychological or social facts, rather than on
abstractions such as artificially isolated physical phenomena. Thus it is from
Freud, among others - rather than from physicists, long since dead, whose
concepts are today beyond consideration - that it is necessary to take a
representation of matter. We shall not be concerned that the fear of psychological
ramifications (fear which testifies solely to intellectual debility) leads timid
spirits to view this standpoint as an evasion, or as a return to spiritual values.
It is time, when the concept of materialism is involved, to refer to the direct
interpretation of raw phenomena, excluding all idealism; and not to some system
based on fragmentary elements of an ideological analysis, developed in the name
of a religious analogy.



13 Georges Bataille (1892-1962) 'The Lugubrious
Game'*

This text takes its title from a painting of 1929 by Salvador Dali, which Bataille
interpreted diagrammatically (on the grounds that Dali had refused permission for its
reproduction). Originally published as le "Jeu lugubre" ' in Documents, no. 7, Paris,
December 1929, from which this translation is made.

Intellectual despair culminates neither in cowardice nor in dreaming, but in
violence. Thus there is no question of abandoning certain investigations. It is
simply a matter of knowing how to give vent to rage; that's all that's required
for thrashing around in prisons like madmen - or for overthrowing them.

Against the half-measures, the evasions, the ravings, which betray great poetic
powerlessness, one can oppose nothing but a black rage and an unspeakable
bestiality. There is no other way to act than like a pig, guzzling in the dung
and the mud, rooting with its snout, its repugnant voracity unstoppable.

If the forms brought together by a painter on a canvas were without
repercussions, if, for example - since we are speaking of voracity (even in the
intellectual realm), of horrible shadows which affront the mind - jaws with
hideous teeth did not protrude from Picasso's skull to frighten those who still
have the impudence to think respectable thoughts, then painting would serve
well to distract people from their rage, as bars and American films do. But why




IVc Realism as Critique 477

hesitate to say that when Picasso paints, the dislocation of forms leads to the
dislocation of thought. The immediate process of thought, which in other cases
culminates in an idea, aborts. We cannot ignore the fact that flowers are
aphrodisiacs, that a single outburst of laughter can penetrate and excite a crowd,
consequently that an outburst of screaming constitutes an equally obstinate form
of miscarriage, susceptible to the reverberations of a non serviam opposed by
brute humanity to the idea. This idea has the same degrading power over man
that a harness has over a horse: I can snort and rail; I cannot go left or right;
the head is bridled and held fast by the idea which forces all men to walk in
a straight line. They walk under the symbol, amongst others, of papers printed
with the coat of arms of the State. By trickery almost, human life is made
always to conform to the image of the soldier commanded to act. Sudden
cataclysms, great popular outbursts, demonstrations, monstrous revolutionary
killings, are the measures of the inevitable compensations.

I am trying to say, almost without preamble, that the paintings of Picasso are
hideous, that those of Dali are of a terrible ugliness. To assure oneself otherwise
is to be a victim of the intractability of words, or even of an evil somehow
relevant to the practices of black magic. To measure the extent of the evil all
that's required is bluntly to imagine a small girl, with a charming look, whose
soul will be the abominable mirror of Dali. The language of this small girl is
not a language but a pestilence. And if she still appears admirably beautiful, it
is, as one says, as black blood is beautiful, running over the coat of a cow or
the neck of a woman. (If violence can save a being from profound boredom, it
is because they can reach, by some obscure error, a terrible but satisfying
ugliness. It has to be said, moreover, that ugliness can be horrible without
redress, and thus, unfortunately, that nothing is more common than ambiguous
ugliness provocatively offering the illusion of its opposite. As for irrevocable
ugliness, it is just as detestable as certain forms of beauty: beauty which does
not disguise anything, which is nothing but the mask of lost immodesty, which
never fails and remains eternally at attention like a coward.)

Little by little the contradictory signs of servitude and revolt reveal themselves
in all things. The great constructions of the intelligence are by definition prisons:
that is why they are persistently overthrown. The dreams and illusory darknesses
remain within reach of diehard irresolutes whose unconscious calculation is not
after all so clumsy, since they innocently put revolt within the shelter of the law.
How can one not admire loss of will, blind attraction, uncertainty adrift, going
from voluntary distraction to attention? It is true that I speak here of that which
*s already forgotten as Dali's razors slice from our faces the grimaces of horror,
which probably risk making us spew up like drunks this servile nobility, this
Miotic idealism which leaves us under the charm of some comical slavemaster.

Strangely sick dogs have for so long licked the fingers of their masters howling
a t death in the country in the middle of the night. To these frightful howlings
there respond, as a thunderbolt responds to the fracas of the rain, such cries
a s are difficult to speak of without excitement.

A few days before July 1789, the Marquis de Sade, doomed to rage in his
dungeon in the Bastille, drew a crowd around his prison by uttering an insane



478 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

scream through the drain which served to empty his dirty water, in doubtless
the most consequential noise ever produced by human larynx. This cry had
historic consequences, for it went: 'People of Paris, they are killing the prison-
ers'. It was like the cry of an old pensioner having his throat cut at night in a
suburb. It is known that Governor Launay, alarmed at the gathering uproar,
had the prisoner transferred to another prison, which did not prevent his own
head from going, a few hours later, to terrify the city from the top of a stake.

But if one wants to account explicitly for the excessive character of the cry,
it is necessary to turn to the deposition of Rose Keller, who accused de Sade
of having used her for his services. This deposition, recently discovered by Mr
Maurice Heine, is categorical. The young woman recounts that after having
been tortured with a whip, she tried to move him by her tears and by her
pleadings, he being a man at once so prepossessing and so evil. As she invoked
all manner of things saintly and touching, Sade suddenly halted, and deaf to
everything, gave forth with dreadful and absolutely sickening cries.

It is understood that a chronic disquiet over a course of years may signify
nothing other than the feeling that something is lacking in existence. It is hardly
worth making the point that what is lacking are the cries themselves, whether
uttered or heard; that everywhere the disturbed have apparently lost their heads,
consigning human life to ennui and disgust, but pretending at the same moment
to conserve it, even to defend it, and sometimes heroically, against the defile-
ments which appeared to them ignoble.

This is said without critical intent of any kind; for it is evident that violence
is often quite brutally hilarious, to exhaust the questioner's patience. Here alone
I take my stand. I have no choice - thus pursuing this bestial hilarity to its
extreme - but to lift my heart to Dali, and to grunt like a pig before his canvases.



14 Salvador Dali (1904-1989) 'The Stinking Ass'

Born in Spain, Daii contacted the Surrealist movement in Paris in 1929, and was
welcomed to the cause by Breton at a time when the authority of the latter's theoriza-
tions was subject to challenge from the 'materialist' position of Bataille. Dali had already
worked with Luis Buhuel on the film Un Chien Andalou (An Andaiusian Dog). The 'stinking
ass' refers to one of the film's typically surreal and disturbing images. The 'Modern
Style' refers to the Art Nouveau architecture vividly exemplified in the work of Dali's
compatriot Gaudi, which he takes as an 'automatistic' counter to the rationalism of the
Modern Movement. The essay stakes an avant-garde claim for Dali's own basically
conservative technique. His case is that the unusual juxtaposition and 'doubling' of
minutely figurative images is causally connected to the mental processes of paranoia.
The resulting images are possessed of a critical and emancipatory potential, he asserts,
in so far as they reveal what is normally concealed by the mechanisms of repression.
Dali was expelled from the movement in 1934, though he continued to exhibit as a
Surrealist until the end of the decade. This essay was first published in La Femme
Visible, Editions Surrealistes, Paris, 1930. Translated by J. Bronowski in This Quarter,
vol. 5, no. 1, September 1932, pp. 49-54; reprinted in L. Lippard, Surrealists on Art,
New Jersey, 1970, pp. 97-100, from which the present text is taken.




IVc Realism as Critique 479



To Gala Eluard



It is possible for an activity having a moral bent to originate in a violently
paranoiac will to systematize confusion.

The very fact of paranoia, and particularly consideration of its mechanism as
a force and power, brings us to the possibility of a mental attack which may
be of the order of, but in any case is at the opposite pole to, the attack to
which we are brought by the fact of hallucination.

I believe the moment is at hand when, by a paranoiac and active advance of
the mind, it will be possible (simultaneously with automatism and other passive
states) to systematize confusion and thus to help to discredit completely the
world of reality.

The new images which paranoiac thought may suddenly release will not merely
spring from the unconscious; the force of their paranoiac power will itself be
at the service of the unconscious.

These new and menacing images will act skilfully and corrosively, with the
clarity of daily physical appearances; while its particular self-embarrassment will
make us yearn for the old metaphysical mechanism having about it something
we shall readily confuse with the very essence of nature, which, according to
Heraclitus, delights in hiding itself.

Standing altogether apart from the influence of the sensory phenomena with
which hallucination may be considered more or less connected, the paranoiac
activity always employs materials admitting of control and recognition. It is
enough that the delirium of interpretation should have linked together the
implications of the images of the different pictures covering a wall for the real
existence of this link to be no longer deniable. Paranoia uses the external world
in order to assert its dominating idea and has the disturbing characteristic of
making others accept this idea's reality. The reality of the external world is
used for illustration and proof, and so comes to serve the reality of our mind.

Doctors agree that the mental processes of paranoiacs are often inconceivably
swift and subtle, and that, availing themselves of associations and facts so refined
as to escape normal people, paranoiacs often reach conclusions which cannot be
contradicted or rejected and in any case nearly always defy psychological
analysis.

The way in which it has been possible to obtain a double image is clearly
paranoiac. By a double image is meant such a representation of an object that
it is also, without the slightest physical or anatomical change, the representation
of another entirely different object, the second representation being equally
devoid of any deformation or abnormality betraying arrangement.

Such a double image is obtained in virtue of the violence of the paranoiac
thought which has cunningly and skilfully used the requisite quantity of pretexts,
coincidences, &c, and so taken advantage of them as to exhibit the second
image, which then replaces the dominant idea.

The double image (an example of which is the image of a horse which is at



480 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

the same time the image of a woman) may be extended, continuing the paranoiac
advance, and then the presence of another dominant idea is enough to make a
third image appear (for example, the image of a lion), and so on, until there is
a number of images limited only by the mind's degree of paranoiac capacity.

I challenge materialists to examine the kind of mental attack which such an
image may produce. I challenge them to inquire into the more complex problem,
which of these images has the highest probability of existence if the intervention
of desire is taken into account; and also into the problem, even graver and more
general, whether the series of these representations has a limit, or whether, as
we have every reason to think, such a limit does not exist, or exists merely as
a function of each individual's paranoiac capacity.

All this (assuming no other general causes intervene) is certainly enough for
me to contend that our images of reality themselves depend upon the degree
of our paranoiac faculty, and yet that theoretically a man sufficiently endowed
with this faculty may at will see the form of any real object change, exactly as
in voluntary hallucination, but with this (destructively) important difference,
that the various forms assumed by the object in question are universally open
to control and recognition as soon as the paranoiac has merely indicated
them.

The paranoiac mechanism whereby the multiple image is released is what
supplies the understanding with the key to the birth and origin of all images,
the intensity of these dominating the aspect which hides the many appearances
of the concrete. It is precisely thanks to the intensity and traumatic nature of
images, as opposed to reality, and to the complete absence of interpenetration
between reality and images, that we are convinced of the (poetic) impossibility
of any kind of comparison. It would be possible to compare two things only if
they admitted of no sort of mutual relation, conscious or unconscious. If such
a comparison could be made tangible, it would clearly illustrate our notion of
the arbitrary.

It is by their failure to harmonize with reality, and owing also to the arbitrary
element in their presence, that images so easily assume the forms of reality and
that the latter in turn adapts itself so readily to the violences of images, which
materialist thought idiotically confuses with the violences of reality. 1

Nothing can prevent me from recognizing the frequent presence of images in
the example of the multiple image, even when one of its forms has the
appearance of a stinking ass and, more, that ass is actually and horribly putrefied,
covered with thousands of flies and ants; and, since in this case no meaning is
attachable to the distinct forms of the image apart from the notion of time,
nothing can convince me that this foul putrefaction of the ass is other than the
hard and blinding flash of new gems.

Nor can we tell if the three great images - excrement, blood and putrefaction
- are not precisely concealing the wished for 'Treasure Island.'

Being connoisseurs of images, we have long since learned to recognize the
image of desire in images of terror, and even the new dawn of the 'Golden
Age' in the shameful scatologous images.



IB



IVc Realism as Critique 481

In accepting images the appearance of which reality strives painfully to imitate,
we are brought to desire ideal objects.

Perhaps no image has produced effects to which the word ideal can more
properly be applied than the tremendous image which is the staggering ornamen-
tal architecture called the 'Modern Style.' No collective effort has produced a
dream world so pure and so disturbing as the 'Modern Style' buildings, these
being, apart from architecture, the true realization in themselves of desires grown
solid. Their most violent and cruel automatism pitifully betrays a hatred of
reality and a need for seeking refuge in an ideal world, just as happens in
infantile neurosis.

This, then, is something we can still like, the imposing mass of these cold
and intoxicating buildings scattered over Europe and despised and neglected by
anthologies and scholarship. This is enough to confound our swinish contem-
porary aestheticians, the champions of the execrable 'modern art, 1 and enough
too to confound the whole history of art.

It has to be said once for all to art critics, artists, &c, that they need expect
nothing from the new surrealist images but disappointment, distaste and repul-
sion. Quite apart from plastic investigation and other buncombe, the new images
of surrealism must come more and more to take the forms and colours of
demoralization and confusion. The day is not far off when a picture will have
the value, and only the value, of a simple moral act, and yet this will be the
value of a simple unmotivated act.

As a functional form of the mind, the new images will come to follow the
free bent of desire at the same time as they are vigorously repressed. The
desperate activity of these new images may also contribute, simultaneously with
other surrealist activities, to the destruction of reality, and so benefit everything
which, through infamous and abominable ideals of all kinds, aesthetic, human-
itarian, philosophical, &c, brings us back to the clear springs of masturbation,
exhibitionism, crime, and love.

We shall be idealists subscribing to no ideal. The ideal images of surrealism
will serve the imminent crisis of consciousness; they will serve Revolution.

What I have in mind here are, in particular, the materialist ideas of Georges Bataille, but also,
in general, all the old materialism which this gentleman dodderingly claims to rejuvenate when
he bolsters it up with modern psychology.



15 Walter Benjamin (1892-1940) Letter to Gershom
Scholem

A German Jew as well as a Marxist, Benjamin had a lifelong friendship with the Talmudic
scholar Gershom Scholem. At one time in the 1930s there were plans for Benjamin to
join Scholem in Palestine and to settle there. From the other side, Scholem's brother
was a Communist Party militant in Berlin. In the early 1930s, furthermore, Benjamin
became close to the Communist playwright Bertolt Brecht. Against the background of



u*.



482 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

a world which seemed to be declining into barbarism, this complex network of politics,
religion, art, and individual morality produced a correspondence of mordant reflection.
Scholem had challenged Benjamin on the propriety of his maintaining a Marxist stance
when it was perfectly obvious that the Party orthodoxy of the time would have ruled
out his practice had he been a member. Benjamin's bleak reply, written in 1931, is
published and translated in Gershom Scholem, Walter Benjamin: Story of a Friendship,
London, 1982.

Berlin-Wilmersdorf, April 17, 1931

[. . .] your letter, though not intended to go beyond ad hominem arguments,
breaks through my own position to hit projectile-like the center of the position
that a small but extremely important avant garde occupies here at present. Much
of what has led me increasingly to declare my solidarity with Brecht's production
is expressed in your letter; this means, however, much in that production with
which you are not yet acquainted.

From the tone of these lines you will notice that your logical expectation that
your letter will provoke a polemical statement from me cannot materialize. Nor
can your letter elicit any expansive or emotional reaction on my part, the reason
being that my situation is much too precarious for me to be able to afford this
sort of thing. After all, I would not dream of claiming that my situation is
infallible or even correct in a different sense - that of being necessarily,
symptomatically, productively false. (Such sentences do not accomplish much,
but since from such a distance you have recognized so clearly the great outlines
of what is going on here, I must try to give you an idea also of smaller things,
of the reflexive overtones, so to speak.) In particular you should not think that
I am under the slightest illusions concerning the fate of my writings in the
Party or the duration of a possible membership in the Party. It would be
shortsighted not to regard this situation as capable of change, albeit under no
lesser condition than a German Bolshevik revolution. It is not as though a
victorious Party would revise its position toward my present writings in the
least, but it would make it possible for me to write differently. This means that
I am determined to stand by my case under all circumstances, but this case is
not the same under every circumstance; it is, rather, a corresponding one. It is
not given to me to respond to false circumstances correctly, i.e., with the 'correct
thing.' Nor is this desirable for as long as one exists, and is minded to exist,
as an individual.

Something else that must be formulated just as provisionally is this: there is
the question of vicinity. Where is my production plant located? It is located
(and on this, too, I do not harbor the slightest illusions) in Berlin W. [West],
W.W. [West West], if you like. The most sophisticated civilization and the most
'modern' culture are not only part of my private comfort; some of them are the
very means of my production. This means that it is not in my power to shift
my production plant to Berlin O. [East] or N. [North]. (It would be in my
power to move to Berlin East or North, but I would have to do something
different there from what I am doing here. I admit that such a step could be
demanded for moral reasons. But for the time being I shall not accede to such



IVc Realism as Critique 483

a demand; I shall say that I, especially I and a great many others whose position
is like mine, are being given an extremely hard time.) But do you really want
to impede me with my little writing factory located right in the middle of Berlin
West quite simply because of my imperious need to distinguish myself from a
neighborhood that for certain reasons I must accept - do you want to prevent
me from hanging a red flag out of my window, saying that it is only a little
piece of cloth? If someone produces 'counterrevolutionary' writings, as you quite
correctly characterize mine from the Party's point of view, should he also
expressly place them at the disposal of the counterrevolution? Should he not,
rather, denature them, like ethyl alcohol, and make them definitely and reliably
unusable for the counterrevolution at the risk that no one will be able to use
them? Can one ever be too clearly distinguished from the pronouncements and
the language of people whom one learns more and more to avoid in life? Is not
this clear distinction, if anything, understated in my writings, and should it be
increased in a direction other than the Communist one?

If I were in Palestine, it is entirely possible that things would be quite
different. Your position on the Arab question proves that you have quite
different methods there of unambiguous differentiation from the bourgeoisie.
Here there are no such methods. Here there is not even this method. For with
a certain justification you could call what I call unambiguous the height of
ambiguity. All right, I am going to extremes. A castaway who drifts on a wreck
by climbing to the top of an already crumbling mast. But from there he has a
chance to give a signal leading to his rescue.



16 Walter Benjamin (1892-1940) 'The Author as
Producer'

At his death by suicide, fleeing from the Nazis in 1940, Benjamin was virtually unknown
outside a coterie of Marxist critical philosophers in the orbit of the Frankfurt School.
Posthumously he has become accepted as one of the century's most original Marxist
thinkers. The present text was delivered as a lecture on 27 April 1934 to the Institute
for the Study of Fascism, an organization based in Paris where Benjamin, like many of
his audience no doubt, was in exile from the Nazis. The essay is inherently difficult,
trying as it does to bring about a rapprochement between aesthetic quality and political
correctness in the work of art. Its argument is at least initially inextricable from the
context of its delivery. As an organization of the sort assimilated into the Popular Front,
the Institute would have favoured a form of Social Realism, an art in which content is
assumed to be all. By linking political correctness to quality, which he in turn identified
with technical innovation, Benjamin was standing this assumption on its head. At least
a part of his text's manifold inference is that it was in the experimental, critical
avant-garde that political virtue was to be found. The present version is taken from the
translation by Anna Bostock in Walter Benjamin, Understanding Brecht, London, 1983.
The passage quoted from a 'perceptive critic' [p. 487] is Benjamin's own.

You will remember how Plato, in his project for a Republic, deals with writers.
In the interests of the community, he denies them the right to dwell therein.



484 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

Plato had a high opinion of the power of literature. But he thought it harmful
and superfluous - in a perfect community, be it understood. Since Plato, the
question of the writer's right to exist has not often been raised with the same
emphasis; today, however, it arises once more. Of course it only seldom arises
in this form. But all of you are more or less conversant with it in a different
form, that of the question of the writer's autonomy: his freedom to write just
what he pleases. You are not inclined to grant him this autonomy. You believe
that the present social situation forces him to decide in whose service he wishes
to place his activity. The bourgeois author of entertainment literature does not
acknowledge this choice. You prove to him that, without admitting it, he is
working in the service of certain class interests. A progressive type of writer
does acknowledge this choice. His decision is made upon the basis of the class
struggle: he places himself on the side of the proletariat. And that's the end of
his autonomy. He directs his activity towards what will be useful to the
proletariat in the class struggle. This is usually called pursuing a tendency, or
'commitment'.

Here you have the key word around which a debate has been going on for a
long time. You are familiar with it, and so you know how unfruitful this debate
has been. For the fact is that this debate has never got beyond a boring
'on-the-one-hand', 'on-the-other-hand': on the one hand one must demand the
right tendency (or commitment) from a writer's work, on the other hand one is
entitled to expect his work to be of a high quality. This formula is, of course,
unsatisfactory so long as we have not understood the precise nature of the
relationship which exists between the two factors, commitment and quality. One
can declare that a work which exhibits the right tendency need show no further
quality. Or one can decree that a work which exhibits the right tendency must,
of necessity, show every other quality as well.

This second formulation is not without interest; more, it is correct. I make
it my own. But in doing so I refuse to decree it. This assertion must be proved.
And it is for my attempt to prove it that I now ask for your attention. - You
may object that this is a rather special, indeed a far-fetched subject. You may
ask whether I hope to advance the study of fascism with such a demonstration.
- That is indeed my intention. For I hope to be able to show you that the
concept of commitment, in the perfunctory form in which it generally occurs
in the debate I have just mentioned, is a totally inadequate instrument of political
literary criticism. I should like to demonstrate to you that the tendency of a
work of literature can be politically correct only if it is also correct in the literary
sense. That means that the tendency which is politically correct includes a
literary tendency. And let me add at once: this literary tendency, which is
implicitly or explicitly included in every correct political tendency, this and
nothing else makes up the quality of a work. It is because of this that the correct
political tendency of a work extends also to its literary quality: because a political
tendency which is correct comprises a literary tendency which is correct.

[. . .] Social relations, as we know, are determined by production relations.
And when materialist criticism approached a work, it used to ask what was the
position of that work vis-d-vis the social production relations of its time. That



IVc Realism as Critique 485

is an important question. But also a very difficult one. The answer to it is not
always unequivocal. And I should now like to propose a more immediate
question for your consideration. A question which is somewhat more modest,
which goes less far, but which, it seems to me, stands a better chance of being
answered. Instead of asking: what is the position of a work vis-d-vis the
productive relations of its time, does it underwrite these relations, is it reac-
tionary, or does it aspire to overthrow them, is it revolutionary? - instead of
this question, or at any rate before this question, I should like to propose a
different one. Before I ask: what is a work's position vis-d-vis the production
relations of its time, I should like to ask: what is its position within them? This
question concerns the function of a work within the literary production relations
of its time. In other words, it is directly concerned with literary technique.

By mentioning technique I have named the concept which makes literary
products accessible to immediate social, and therefore materialist, analysis. At
the same time, the concept of technique represents the dialectical starting-point
from which the sterile dichotomy of form and content can be surmounted. And
furthermore this concept of technique contains within itself an indication of the
right way to determine the relationship between tendency and quality, which
was the object of our original inquiry. If, then, we were entitled earlier on to
say that the correct political tendency of a work includes its literary quality
because it includes its literary tendency, we can now affirm more precisely that
this literary tendency may consist in a progressive development of literary
technique, or in a regressive one.

* * *

[ . . . ] One of the decisive developments in Germany during the last ten years
was that many of her productive minds, under the pressure of economic
circumstances, underwent a revolutionary development in terms of their men-
tality - without at the same time being able to think through in a really
revolutionary way the question of their own work, its relationship to the means
of production and its technique. As you see, I am speaking of the so-called left
intelligentsia and in so doing I propose to confine myself to the bourgeois left
intelligentsia which, in Germany, has been at the centre of the important
literary-political movements of the last decade. I wish to single out two of these
movements, Activism and New Objectivity (Neue Sachlickkeit), in order to show
by their example that political commitment, however revolutionary it may seem,
functions in a counter-revolutionary way so long as the writer experiences his
solidarity with the proletariat only in the mind and not as a producer.

* * *

Brecht has coined the phrase 'functional transformation' (Umfunktiomerung)
to describe the transformation of forms and instruments of production by a
progressive intelligentsia - an intelligentsia interested in liberating the means of
Production and hence active in the class struggle. He was the first to address
to the intellectuals the far-reaching demand that they should not supply the
production apparatus without, at the same time, within the limits of the possible,
hanging that apparatus in the direction of Socialism. 'The publication of the
Versuche,'* we read in the author's introduction to the series of texts published



486 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

under that title, 'marks a point at which certain works are not so much intended
to.represent individual experiences (i.e. to have the character of finished works)
as they are aimed at using (transforming) certain existing institutes and institu-
tions.' It is not spiritual renewal, as the fascists proclaim it, that is desirable;
what is proposed is technical innovation. I shall return to this subject later.
Here I should like to confine myself to pointing out the decisive difference
between merely supplying a production apparatus and changing it. I should like
to preface my remarks on the New Objectivity with the proposition that to
supply a production apparatus without trying, within the limits of the possible,
to change it, is a highly disputable activity even when the material supplied
appears to be of a revolutionary nature. For we are confronted with the fact -
of which there has been no shortage of proof in Germany over the last decade

- that the bourgeois apparatus of production and publication is capable of
assimilating, indeed of propagating, an astonishing amount of revolutionary
themes without ever seriously putting into question its own continued existence
or that of the class which owns it. In any case this remains true so long as it
is supplied by hacks, albeit revolutionary hacks. And I define a hack as a man
who refuses as a matter of principle to improve the production apparatus and
so prise it away from the ruling class for the benefit of Socialism. I further
maintain that an appreciable part of so-called left-wing literature had no other
social function than that of continually extracting new effects or sensations from
this situation for the public's entertainment. Which brings me to the New
Objectivity. It launched the fashion for reportage. Let us ask ourselves whose
interests were advanced by this technique.

For greater clarity let me concentrate on photographic reportage. Whatever
applies to it is transferable to the literary form. Both owe their extraordinary
development to publication techniques - radio and the illustrated press. Let us
think back to Dadaism. The revolutionary strength of Dadaism lay in testing
art for its authenticity. You made still-lifes out of tickets, spools of cotton,
cigarette stubs, and mixed them with pictorial elements. You put a frame round
the whole thing. And in this way you said to the public: look, your picture
frame destroys time; the smallest authentic fragment of everyday life says more
than painting. Just as a murderer's bloody fingerprint on a page says more than
the words printed on it. Much of this revolutionary attitude passed into
photomontage. You need only think of the works of John Heartfield, whose
technique made the book jacket into a political instrument. But now let us
follow the subsequent development of photography. What do we see? It has
become more and more subtle, more and more modern, and the result is that
it is now incapable of photographing a tenement or a rubbish-heap without
transfiguring it. Not to mention a river dam or an electric cable factory: in front
of these, photography can now only say, 'How beautiful.' The World Is Beautiful

- that is the title of the well-known picture book by Renger-Patzsch in which
we see New Objectivity photography at its peak. It has succeeded in turning
abject poverty itself, by handling it in a modish, technically perfect way, into
an object of enjoyment. For if it is an economic function of photography to
supply the masses, by modish processing, with matter which previously eluded



iVc Realism as Critique 487

mass consumption - Spring, famous people, foreign countries - then one of its
S political functions is to renovate the world as it is from the inside, i.e. by modish
techniques.

Here we have an extreme example of what it means to supply a production
apparatus without changing it. Changing it would have meant bringing down
one of the barriers, surmounting one of the contradictions which inhabit the
productive capacity of the intelligentsia. What we must demand from the
photographer is the ability to put such a caption beneath his picture as will
rescue it from the ravages of modishness and confer upon it a revolutionary use
value. And we shall lend greater emphasis to this demand if we, as writers, start
taking photographs ourselves. Here again, therefore, technical progress is, for
the author as producer, the basis of his political progress. In other words,
intellectual production cannot become politically useful until the separate
spheres of competence to which according to the bourgeois view, the process
of intellectual production owes its order, have been surmounted; more precisely,
the barriers of competence must be broken down by each of the productive
forces they were created to separate, acting in concert. By experiencing his
solidarity with the proletariat, the author as producer experiences, directly and
simultaneously, his solidarity with certain other producers who, until then,
meant little to him.
* * *

I have spoken of the way in which certain modish photographers proceed in
order to make human misery an object of consumption. Turning to the New
Objectivity as a literary movement, I must go a step further and say that it has
turned the struggle against misery into an object of consumption. In many cases,
indeed, its political significance has been limited to converting revolutionary
reflexes, in so far as these occurred within the bourgeoisie, into themes of
entertainment and amusement which can be fitted without much difficulty into
the cabaret life of a large city. The characteristic feature of this literature is the
way it transforms political struggle so that it ceases to be a compelling motive
for decision and becomes an object of comfortable contemplation; it ceases to
be a means of production and becomes an article of consumption. A perceptive
critic has commented on this phenomenon, using Erich Kastner as an example,
mi the following terms: 'This left-radical intelligentsia has nothing to do with
the working-class movement. It is a phenomenon of bourgeois decadence and
as such the counterpart of that mimicry of feudalism which, in the Kaiser's
time, was admired in a reserve lieutenant. Left-radical journalists of Kastner's,
Tucholsky's or Mehring's type are a mimicry of the proletarian for decadent
strata of the bourgeoisie. Their function, viewed politically, is to bring forth
not parties but cliques; viewed from the literary angle, not schools but fashions;
viewed economically, not producers but agents. Agents or hacks who make a
Sreat display of their poverty and turn the gaping void into a feast. One couldn't
be more comfortable in an uncomfortable situation.'

This school, as I said, made a great display of its poverty. By so doing it
e vaded the most urgent task of the writer of today: that of recognizing how
Poor he is and how poor he must be in order to be able to begin again at the



488 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

beginning. For that is the point at issue. True, the Soviet State does not, like
Plato's Republic, propose to expel its writers, but it does - and this is why I
mentioned Plato at the beginning - propose to assign to them tasks which will
make it impossible for them to parade the richness of the creative personality,
which has long been a myth and a fake, in new masterpieces. To expect a
renovation - in the sense of more personalities and more works of this kind -
is a privilege of fascism, which, in this context, produces such foolish formu-
lations as the one with which Gunther Grundel rounds off the literary section
of The Mission of the Young Generation: 'We cannot close this . . . review of the
present and outlook into the future ... in a better way than by saying that the
Wilhelm Meister, the Griine Heinnch of our generation have not yet been written.'
Nothing will be further from the mind of an author who has carefully thought
about the conditions of production today than to expect or even to want such
works to be written. He will never be concerned with products alone, but always,
at the same time, with the means of production. In other words, his products
must possess an organizing function besides and before their character as
finished works. And their organizational usefulness must on no account be
confined to propagandistic use. Commitment alone will not do it. The excellent
Lichtenberg said: 'It is not what a man is convinced of that matters, but what
his convictions make of him.' Of course opinions matter quite a lot, but the
best opinion is of no use if it does not make something useful of those who
hold it. The best 'tendency' is wrong if it does not prescribe the attitude with
which it ought to be pursued. And the writer can only prescribe such an attitude
in the place where he is active, that is to say in his writing. Commitment is a
necessary, but never a sufficient, condition for a writer's work acquiring an
organizing function. For this to happen it is also necessary for the writer to
have a teacher's attitude. And today this is more than ever an essential demand.
A writer who does not teach other writers teaches nobody. The crucial point,
therefore, is that a writer's production must have the character of a model: it
must be able to instruct other writers in their production and, secondly, it must
be able to place an improved apparatus at their disposal. This apparatus will
be the better, the more consumers it brings in contact with the production
process - in short, the more readers or spectators it turns into collaborators.
We already possess a model of this kind, of which, however, I cannot speak
here in any detail. It is Brecht's epic theatre.

* * *

You may have noticed that the reflections whose conclusions we are now
nearing make only one demand on the writer: the demand to think, to reflect
upon his position in the production process. We can be sure that such thinking,
in the writers who matter - that is to say the best technicians in their particular
branches of the trade - will sooner or later lead them to confirm very soberly
their solidarity with the proletariat. [. . .]

* * *

[. . .] Aragon was therefore perfectly right when, in another context, he said:
l The revolutionary intellectual appears first of all and above everything else as
a traitor to his class of origin,' In a writer this betrayal consists in an attitude



IVc Realism as Critique 489

which transforms him, from a supplier of the production apparatus, into an
engineer who sees his task in adapting that apparatus to the ends of the
proletarian revolution. That is a mediating effectiveness, but it nevertheless frees
the intellectual from the purely destructive task to which Maublanc, and many
comrades with him, believe he has to be consigned. Will he succeed in furthering
the unification of the means of intellectual production? Does he see ways of
organizing the intellectual workers within their actual production process? Has
he suggestions for changing the function of the novel, of drama, of poetry? The
more completely he can address himself to these tasks, the more correct his
thinking will be and, necessarily, the higher will be the technical quality of his
work. And conversely: the more precisely he thus understands his own position
within the production process, the less it will occur to him to pass himself off
as a 'man of mind'. The mind, the spirit that makes itself heard in the name
of fascism, must disappear. The mind which believes only in its own magic
strength will disappear. For the revolutionary struggle is not fought between
capitalism and mind. It is fought between capitalism and the proletariat.



17 Bertolt Brecht (1898-1956) 'Popularity and
Realism'

One of the principal emphases in the extensive cultural debates which took place
between Marxist intellectuals in the 1930s was a focus on the question of Realism in
art. The leading proponent of the concept of Socialist Realism, and hence the most
articulate critic of the Modern Movement, was Georg Lukacs. It fell to Brecht to develop
a response: a hybrid art which critically addressed the realities of its time but did so
not on the basis of outmoded traditional forms but of avant-garde technical innovation.
Principally this work was in the theatre, but it was accompanied by theoretical reflections
on the question as a whole. Written in 1938, these were intended for publication in the
exile periodical Das Wort but, for reasons which remain unclear, were never printed in
Brecht's lifetime. The present version is taken from the translation by Stuart Hood in
Theodor Adorno et al., Aesthetics and Politics, London, 1977.

Whoever looks for slogans to apply to contemporary German literature, must
bear in mind that anything that aspires to be called literature is printed
exclusively abroad and can almost exclusively be read only abroad. The term
popular as applied to literature thus acquires a curious connotation. The writer
in this case is supposed to write for a people among whom he does not live.
Yet if one considers the matter more closely, the gap between the writer and
the people is not as great as one might think. Today it is not quite as great as
it seems, and formerly it was not as small as it seemed. The prevailing aesthetic,
the price of books and the police have always ensured that there is a considerable
distance between writer and people. Nevertheless it would be wrong, that is to
say unrealistic, to view the widening of this distance as a purely 'external' one.
Undoubtedly special efforts have to be made today in order to be able to write
*n a popular style. On the other hand, it has become easier; easier and more



490 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

urgent. The people have split away more clearly from their upper layers; their
oppressors and exploiters have stepped out and joined a bloody battle with them
of vast dimensions. It has become easier to take sides. An open battle has so
to speak broken out among the 'public'.

The demand for a realistic style of writing can also no longer be so easily
dismissed today. It has acquired a certain inevitability. The ruling classes use
lies oftener than before - and bigger ones. To tell the truth is clearly an ever
more urgent task. Suffering has increased and with it the number of sufferers.
In view of the immense suffering of the masses, concern with little difficulties
or with difficulties of little groups has come to be felt as ridiculous, contemp-
tible.

There is only one ally against growing barbarism - the people, who suffer so
greatly from it. It is only from them that one can expect anything. Therefore
it is obvious that one must turn to the people, and now more necessary than
ever to speak their language. Thus the terms popular art and realism become
natural allies. It is in the interest of the people, of the broad working masses,
to receive a faithful image of life from literature, and faithful images of life are
actually of service only to the people, the broad working masses, and must
therefore be absolutely comprehensible and profitable to them - in other words,
popular. Nevertheless these concepts must first be thoroughly cleansed before
propositions are constructed in which they are employed and merged. It would
be a mistake to think that these concepts are completely transparent, without
history, uncompromised or unequivocal. ('We all know what they mean - don't
let's split hairs.') The concept of popularity itself is not particularly popular.
It is not realistic to believe that it is. There is a whole series of abstract nouns
ending in 'ity' which must be viewed with caution. Think of utility, sovereignty,
sanctity; and we know that the concept of nationality has a quite particular,
sacramental, pompous and suspicious connotation, which we dare not overlook.
We must not ignore this connotation, just because we so urgently need the
concept popular.

It is precisely in the so-called poetical forms that 'the people' are represented
in a superstitious fashion or, better, in a fashion that encourages supersitition.
They endow the people with unchanging characteristics, hallowed traditions, art
forms, habits and customs, religiosity, hereditary enemies, invincible power and
so on. A remarkable unity appears between tormenters and tormented, exploiters
and exploited, deceivers and deceived; it is by no means a question of the masses
of 'little' working people in opposition to those above them.

The history of the many deceptions which have been practised with this
concept of the people is a long and complicated one - a history of class struggles.
We do not intend to go into it here - we only wish to keep the fact of the
deception in sight, when we say that we need popular art and mean thereby art
for the broad masses, for the many who are oppressed by the few, 'the people
themselves', the mass of producers who were for so long the object of politics
and must now become the subject of politics. Let us recall that the people were
for long held back from any full development by powerful institutions, artificially
and forcefully gagged by conventions, and that the concept popular was given



IVc Realism as Critique 491

an ahistorical, static, undevelopmental stamp. We are not concerned with the
concept in this form - or rather, we have to combat it.

Our concept of what is popular refers to a people who not only play a full
part in historical development but actively usurp it, force its pace, determine
its direction. We have a people in mind who make history, change the world
and themselves. We have in mind a fighting people and therefore an aggressive
concept of what is popular.

Popular means: intelligible to the broad masses, adopting and enriching their
forms of expression / assuming their standpoint, confirming and correcting it /
representing the most progressive section of the people so that it can assume
leadership, and therefore intelligible to other sections of the people as well /
relating to traditions and developing them / communicating to that portion of
the people which strives for leadership the achievements of the section that at
present rules the nation.

Now we come to the concept of realism. This concept, too, must first be
cleansed before use, for it is an old concept, much used by many people and
for many ends. This is necessary because the people can only take over their
cultural heritage by an act of expropriation. Literary works cannot be taken over
like factories; literary forms of expression cannot be taken over like patents.
Even the realistic mode of writing, of which literature provides many very
different examples, bears the stamp of the way it was employed, when and by
which class, down to its smallest details. With the people struggling and
changing reality before our eyes, we must not cling to 'tried' rules of narrative,
venerable literary models, eternal aesthetic laws. We must not derive realism as
such from particular existing works, but we shall use every means, old and new,
tried and untried, derived from art and derived from other sources, to render
reality to men in a form they can master. We shall take care not to describe
one particular, historical form of novel of a particular epoch as realistic - say
that of Balzac or Tolstoy - and thereby erect merely formal, literary criteria for
realism. We shall not speak of a realistic manner of writing only when, for
example, we can smell, taste and feel everything, when there is 'atmosphere' and
when plots are so contrived that they lead to psychological analysis of character.
Our concept of realism must be wide and political, sovereign over all conventions.

Realistic means: discovering the causal complexes of society / unmasking the
prevailing view of things as the view of those who are in power / writing from
the standpoint of the class which offers the broadest solutions for the pressing
difficulties in which human society is caught up / emphasizing the element of
development / making possible the concrete, and making possible abstraction
from it.

These are vast precepts and they can be extended. Moreover we shall allow
the artist to employ his fantasy, his originality, his humour, his invention, in
following them. We shall not stick to too detailed literary models; we shall not
bind the artist to too rigidly defined modes of narrative.

We shall establish that the so-called sensuous mode of writing - where one
c an smell, taste and feel everything - is not automatically to be identified with
a realistic mode of writing; we shall acknowledge that there are works which



492 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

are sensuously written and which are not realistic, and realistic works which are
not written in a sensuous style. We shall have to examine carefully the question
whether we really develop a plot best when our ultimate objective is to reveal
the spiritual life of the characters. Our readers will perhaps find that they have
not been given the key to the meaning of the events if, led astray by various
artistic devices, they experience only the spiritual agitation of the heroes. By
adopting the forms of Balzac and Tolstoy without testing them thoroughly, we
might weary our readers - the people - as much as these writers often do
themselves. Realism is not a mere question of form. Were we to copy the style
of these realists, we would no longer be realists.

For time flows on, and if it did not, it would be a bad prospect for those
who do not sit at golden tables. Methods become exhausted; stimuli no longer
work. New problems appear and demand new methods. Reality changes; in order
to represent it, modes of representation must also change. Nothing comes from
nothing; the new comes from the old, but that is why it is new.

The oppressors do not work in the same way in every epoch. They cannot
be defined in the same fashion at all times. There are so many means for them
to avoid being spotted. They call their military roads motor-ways; their tanks
are painted so that they look like MacDuff's woods. Their agents show blisters
on their hands, as if they were workers. No: to turn the hunter into the quarry
is something that demands invention. What was popular yesterday is not today,
for the people today are not what they were yesterday.

Anyone who is not a victim of formalistic prejudices knows that the truth
can be suppressed in many ways and must be expressed in many ways. [ . . . ]

I am speaking from experience when I say that one need not be afraid to
produce daring, unusual things for the proletariat so long as they deal with its
real situation. There will always be people of culture, connoisseurs of art, who
will interject: 'Ordinary people do not understand that.' But the people will
push these persons impatiently aside and come to a direct understanding with
artists. There is high-flown stuff, made for cliques, and intended to create new
cliques - the two-thousandth reblocking of an old felt hat, the spicing of old,
rotting meat: this the proletariat rejects ('What a state they must be in!') with
an incredulous, yet tolerant shake of the head. It was not the pepper that was
rejected, but the decaying meat: not the two-thousandth blocking, but the old
felt. When they themselves wrote and produced for the stage they were
wonderfully original. So-called agitprop art, at which people, not always the
best people, turned up their noses, was a mine of new artistic methods and
modes of expression. From it there emerged magnificent, long-forgotten ele-
ments from ages of genuine popular art, boldly modified for new social aims:
breathtaking contractions and compressions, beautiful simplifications, in which
there was often an astonishing elegance and power and a fearless eye for the
complex. Much of it might be primitive, but not in that sense in which the
spiritual landscapes of bourgeois art, apparently so subtle, are primitive. It is a
mistake to reject a style of representation because of a few unsuccessful
compositions - a style which strives, frequently with success, to dig down to
the essentials and to make abstraction possible. [ . . . ]



iVc Realism as Critique 493

The criteria for popular art and realism must therefore be chosen both
generously and carefully, and not drawn merely from existing realistic works
and existing popular works, as often happens; by so doing, one would arrive at
formalistic criteria, and at popular art and realism in form only.

Whether a work is realistic or not cannot be determined merely by checking
whether or not it is like existing works which are said to be realistic, or were
realistic in their time. In each case, one must compare the depiction of life in
a work of art with the life itself that is being depicted, instead of comparing it
with another depiction. Where popularity is concerned, there is one extremely
formalistic procedure of which one must beware. The intelligibility of a literary
work is not guaranteed merely if it is written exactly like other works which
were understood in their time. These other works which were understood in
their time were also not always written like the works before them. Steps had
been taken to make them intelligible. In the same way, we must do something
for the intelligibility of new works today. There is not only such a thing as
being popular, there is also the process of becoming popular.

If we wish to have a living and combative literature, which is fully engaged
with reality and fully grasps reality, a truly popular literature, we must keep
step with the rapid development of reality. The great working masses are already
on the move. The industry and brutality of their enemies is proof of it.



18 Fernand Leger (1881-1955) 'The New Realism
Goes On'

The question of Realism was debated also on the French Left. Louis Aragon, who had
withdrawn from the Surrealist group in favour of the more orthodox Communism which
he then maintained for the rest of his life, was the leading figure in the Maison de la
Culture, an institution supported by the Communist Party in Paris. A series of discus-
sions on questions of Realism took place there in the mid-1930s. These involved
perspectives as divergent as those of Aragon himself and the architect Le Corbusier.
The painter Leger's intervention called for a 'New Realism': a modem art which would
consciously sustain an address to the modern world. His lecture was published in
Querelle du Realisme, Paris, 1936, and in English translation by the American left-wing
journal Art Front, vol. 3 f no. 1, New York, February 1937, pp. 7-8. The present extracts
are taken from Fernand Leger, The Function of Painting, New York, 1973.

Each art era has its own realism: it invents it, more or less, in relation to
preceding epochs. Sometimes this is a reaction, at other times a continuation
of the same line.

* * *

Realisms vary by reason of the fact that the artist finds himself always living
m a different era, in a new environment, and amid a general trend of thought,
dominating and influencing his mind.

For a half-century now, we have been living in an extremely rapid age, one
r *ch in scientific, philosophical and social evolutions. This speed has, I think,



494 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

rendered possible the precipitation and the realization of the new realism, which
is quite different from the plastic conceptions that have gone before.

It was the Impressionists who 'broke the line.' Cezanne in particular. The
moderns have followed by accentuating this liberation. We have freed color and
geometric form. They have conquered the world. This new realism wholly rules
the last fifty years, in the easel picture as well as in the decorative art of street
and interior.

As for those pictures which made possible this evolution, the common
reproach is that they have been snatched up by the dealers and the big collectors
and that the people have no access to them. Whose fault is it? That of the
present social order. If our works have not made their way among the people,
the fault, I repeat, is that of the social order; it is not due to any lack of human
quality on the part of the works in question. Under such a pretext as the latter,
they would have us burn our bridges, coolly pass sentence of death upon that
painting which brought us our freedom - a freedom so hard won - and turn
our steps backward, God knows where. The names of Rembrandt and Rubens
are evoked.

Under the pretext that we are to attempt to win at once the wholly admirable
masses, whose instinct is so sure, and who are merely waiting to grasp the new
verity - under such a pretext, they would have us start those same masses
backward from century to century, traveling at first by rail and, later on, by
horse and buggy and by cart, until they end up 'going in for the antique' on
foot. This is an insult to these men of a new world, who ask nothing better
than to understand and to go forward. It is officially to pronounce them
incapable of rising to the level of that new realism which is their age - the age
in which they live, in which they work, and which they have fashioned with
their own hands. They are told that le moderne is not for us; it is for the rich,
a specialized art, a bourgeois art, an art that is false from the bottom up.

It is possible for us to create and to realize a new collective social art: we are
merely waiting for social evolution to permit it.

Our tastes, our traditions incline to the primitive and popular artists of before
the Renaissance. It is from this same Renaissance that individualism in painting
dates; and I do not believe there is any use in looking in this direction, if we
desire to bring into being a fresh mural art, one that shall be at once popular,
collective and contemporary. Our age is sufficiently rich in plastic materials to
furnish us with the elements. But unfortunately, until new social conditions
shall have been brought about, the people will fail to benefit from those
elements.

I should like to say a word as to leisure - the creation and organization of
leisure for workers. That, I take it, is the cardinal point of this discussion.
Everything depends on it.

At no period in the history of the world have workers had access to plastic
beauty, for the reason that they have never had the necessary time and freedom
of mind. Free the masses of the people, give them the possibility of thinking,
of seeing, of self-cultivation - that is all we ask; they will then be in a position
to enjoy to the utmost the plastic novelties which modern art has to offer. The



IVc Realism as Critique 495

people themselves every day create manufactured objects that are pure in tonal
quality, finished in form, exact in their proportions; they have already visualized
the real and the potential plastic elements. Hanging on the wall in the popular
bals-musettes, you will find aeroplane propellers. They strike everyone as being
objects of beauty, and they are very close to certain modern sculptures.

It would require no great effort for the masses to be brought to feel and to
understand the new realism, which has its origins in modern life itself, the
continuing phenomena of life, under the influence of manufactured and geome-
trical objects, transposed to a realm where the imagination and the real meet
and interlace, a realm from which all literary and descriptive sentimentality has
been banished, all dramatization such as comes from other poetic or bookish
tendencies. [. . .]

The working class has a right to all this. It has a right, on its walls, to mural
paintings signed by the best modern artists. Give it time and leisure, and it
will make itself at home with such paintings, will learn to live with and to love
them.

What kind of representational art, may I ask, would you impose upon the
masses, to compete with the daily allurements of the movies, the radio,
large-scale photography and advertising? How enter into competition with the
tremendous resources of modern mechanics, which provide an art popularized
to a very high degree?

An art popular in character but inferior in quality - based upon the excuse
that they will never understand anything about art, anyway - would be unworthy
of them. On the contrary, quality is the thing to be sought, in an art that is
interior and easy to live with. [ . . , ]

[ . . . ] In this domain, where it is a question of manifesting life's intensity
under all its aspects, there are some wholly new possibilities - scenic, musical,
in the way of color, movement, light, and chant - that have not as yet been
grouped and orchestrated to their fullest extent. The man of the people comes
into the world with a feeling for beauty. The ditch-digger who prefers a blue
belt to a red one for holding up his trousers is making an act of choice. His
instinctive judgment passed upon manufactured objects is esthetic in character.
He will say 'the pretty bicycle,' 'the nice car, 1 before he knows whether or not
it will function. This in itself indicates an acceptance of a fact: the new realism.
Seductive shop windows where the isolated object causes the prospective
purchaser to halt: the new realism.

All men, even the most stunted, have in them a potentiality of meeting the
beautiful half way. But in the presence of the art work, the picture or the poem,
if their leisure - I must insist upon it - does not permit them to cultivate this
potentiality, they will go on, all their lives, forming their judgments by
comparison. They will prefer Bouguereau to Ingres, for the reason that Bou-
guereau is the better imitator. Judgment by comparison is not valid; every art
work calls for an individual appraisal, it is an independent whole; and if men
are given assistance, they will succeed in making such an appraisal. The human
masses, demanding their place in the sun, the man of the people - let us not
forget that they are poetry's last great refuge.



LLv' '



496 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

The man of the people it is who invents that mobile and ever new form:
popular speech. He lives in an atmosphere of incessant verbal invention. While
his hand is tightening a bolt, his imagination runs ahead, inventing new : words,
new poetic forms. All down the ages, the people have gone on inventing their
language, which is their own form of realism. This language is unbelievably rich
in substance. Slang is the finest and most vital poetry that there is. Popular
actors, popular singers make use of it in the neighborhood theatres. They are
the masterly inventors of it. This verbal form represents an alliance of realism
and imaginative transposition; it is a new r realism, perpetually in movement.

And is this class of mankind to be excluded, then, from those joys and
satisfactions which the modern art work can give? Are the people to be refused
'their chance' of rising to a higher plastic level, when they themselves every
day are inventing a new language that is wholly new? That is inexcusable. They
have the right to demand that the time's revolution be carried out, and that
they in their turn be permitted to enter the domain of the beautiful, which has
always been closed to them up to now.



IVd

Modernism as Critique



1 Kasimir Malevich (1878-1935) Letter to Meyerhold

Malevich had worked with the experimental theatre director Vsevolod Meyerhold in
1918, designing the sets for a production of Mayakovsky's Mystery Bouffe. The present
letter of 8 April 1932 both refers back to the revolutionary period and suggests reasons
for Malevich's return to a form of figuration in the late 1920s, at a time when his work
was subject to increasing official disfavour. His argument is that if post-revolutionary
culture is to be protected from collapse either into utilitarianism or into conservatism,
its social content must be transformed into artistic values. This he continues to
associate with the specificity and limitations of the medium. But he now associates this
'non-objective' tendency with a re-emergent need to acknowledge the object: specifically
the 'new object' which he believed had appeared as a result of the proletarian revolution.
First published in this translation in Kunst & Museumjournaal, Amsterdam, vol. 1, no.
6, 1990, pp. 9-10.

We have not managed to meet over the last year. Our conversations on the
stairs of the Romanov House of Culture have not clarified anything particular
about the question of the new theatre.

You said to me then that my time was coming. Your confidence started me
thinking about the fact that your artistic ideas are beginning to develop in the
direction of looking for new forms of theatre. That you are beginning to bring to
an end that whole Construed vist course of yours, and moving towards a new phase.

But listen to what I heard when I was in Moscow last April: you are planning
to build a new theatre with the stage in the middle. If this is true, it suggests
to me that your ideas are still stuck in that same Constructivist wheel that is
rolling down the path leading to the destruction of theatre. In this way the art
of theatre is developing along the same path as the art of painting, the path of
Impressionism, Cezannism, Cubism, Futurism and non-objective Suprematism.

Theatre did not of course go the same logical way, and the art of theatre did
not have non-objective form or painters or directors. At the time of Futurism
all hope lay with the painting and literature of Kruchenykh, Khlebnikov,
Kamenski and Burlyuk, and I hoped that Meyerhold would stand at the head
of the theatrical movement and lead it towards non-objective form, as in painting
and literature. But apparently theatre could not go all the way down this path,



498 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

and got no further than inviting new artists to perform in old forms. [. . .] But
sooner or later they will end up on that path. Once people come to understand
that art is non-objective, they will be able to present new and interesting theatre.
But at the moment, in this phase of building socialism in which all the arts
must participate, art must return to backward areas and become figurative.

Painting has turned back from the non-objective way to the object, and the
development of painting has returned to the figurative part of the way that had
led to the destruction of the object. But on the way back, painting came across
a new object that the proletarian revolution had brought to the fore and which
had to be given form, which means that it had to be raised to the level of a
work of art. Enriched by a new painting spectrum, by form and composition,
the new arts must give this object shape on an artistic level, that is to say they
must elevate every thematic subject into a painting, and that painting is the
plane on which a two-dimensional and frontal development of the content takes
place before the spectator. After returning to the figurative way and the way of
the painting, art will end up at the frame, within which, after all, the picture
comes into being.

If you destroyed the footlights, and I cooperated in that in Mayakovski's
Mystery Bouffe, then we must now stop doing that, reinstall the footlights and
place objects or content before them in an artistic form. From now on the
artistic sense will take first place. The main task of the Soviet artist will be to
create great artistic paintings. This is why I am utterly convinced that if you
keep to the way of Constructivism, where you are now firmly stuck, which
raises not one artistic issue except for pure utilitarianism and in theatre simple
agitation, which may be one hundred per cent consistent ideologically but is
completely castrated as regards artistic problems, and forfeits half of its value;
if you go on as you are (keep this letter so that you can check up later), then
Stanislavski will emerge as the winner in the theatre and the old forms will
survive. And as to architecture, if the architects do not produce artistic
architecture, the Greco-Roman style of Zyeltovski will prevail, together with
the Repin style in painting. The culture of the arts must not disappear, and
they are all artists. So found your theatre as an artistic creation, don't build it
on the lines of a circus but in the same footlights as those in which the new
artistic painting will stand. But if you demolish the footlights, if your elements
leap out of the painting, performers who run into the auditorium or appear
from it, it will amount to nothing. These are my thoughts in brief. This question
could be gone into much more deeply in a discussion.



2 Pablo Picasso (1881-1973) 'Conversation with
Picasso'

The present text derives from a conversation which took place at Boisgeloup in 1935.
Picasso's remarks were transcribed immediately afterwards by his interlocutor Christian
Zervos, editor of Cahiers d'Art, a journal in which the artist's work was regularly
reproduced. The resulting notes were informally approved by Picasso prior to their




IVd Modernism as Critique 499

publication. Besides a large number of sculptures, his representative works of the
mid-1 930s include still lifes and lyrical figure subjects painted in a decorative and
brightly coloured late-Cubist style. First published as 'Conversation avec Picasso' in
Cahiers d'Art, X, 7-10, Paris, 1935, pp. 173-8. English translation published in A. H.
Barr Jr, Picasso: Fifty Years of his Art, New York, 1946, from which the present version
is taken.

[. . .] It is my misfortune - and probably my delight - to use things as my
passions tell me. What a miserable fate for a painter who adores blondes to
have to stop himself putting them into a picture because they don't go with
the basket of fruit! How awful for a painter who loathes apples to have to use
them all the time because they go so well with the cloth. I put all the things
I like into my pictures. The things - so much the worse for them; they just
have to put up with it.

In the old days pictures went forward toward completion by stages. Everyday
brought something new. A picture used to be a sum of additions. In my case
a picture is a sum of destructions. I do a picture - then I destroy it. In the
end, though, nothing is lost; the red I took away from one place turns up
somewhere else.

It would be very interesting to preserve photographically, not the stages, but
the metamorphoses of a picture. Possibly one might then discover the path
followed by the brain in materializing a dream. But there is one very odd thing
- to notice that basically a picture doesn't change, that the first 'vision' remains
almost intact, in spite of appearances. I often ponder on a light and a dark when
I have put them into a picture; I try hard to break them up by interpolating a
color that will create a different effect. When the work is photographed, I note
that what I put in to correct my first vision has disappeared, and that, after
all, the photographic image corresponds with my first vision before the trans-
formation I insisted on.

A picture is not thought out and settled beforehand. While it is being done
it changes as one's thoughts change. And when it is finished, it still goes on
changing, according to the state of mind of whoever is looking at it. A picture
lives a life like a living creature, undergoing the changes imposed on us by our
life from day to day. This is natural enough, as the picture lives only through
the man who is looking at it. [. . .]

When you begin a picture, you often make some pretty discoveries. You must
be on guard against these. Destroy the thing, do it over several times. In each
destroying of a beautiful discovery, the artist does not really suppress it, but
rather transforms it, condenses it, makes it more substantial. What comes out
in the end is the result of discarded finds. Otherwise, you become your own
connoisseur. I sell myself nothing.

Actually, you work with few colors. But they seem like a lot more when each
one is in the right place.

Abstract art is only painting. What about drama?

There is no abstract art. You must always start with something. Afterward
you can remove all traces of reality. There's no danger then, anyway, because
the idea of the object will have left an indelible mark. It is what started the



500 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

artist off, excited his ideas, and stirred up his emotions. Ideas and emotions
will in the end be prisoners in his work. Whatever they do, they can't escape
from the picture. They form an integral part of it, even when their presence is
no longer discernible. Whether he likes it or not, man is the instrument of
nature. It forces on him its character and appearance. [ . . . ] One cannot go
against nature. It is stronger than the strongest man. It is pretty much to our
interest to be on good terms with it! We may allow ourselves certain liberties,
but only in details.

Nor is there any 'figurative' and 'nonfigurative' art. Everything appears to us
in the guise of a 'figure.' Even in metaphysics ideas are expressed by means of
symbolic 'figures.' See how ridiculous it is then to think of painting without
'figuration.' A person, an object, a circle are all 'figures'; they react on us more
or less intensely. Some are nearer our sensations and produce emotions that
touch our affective faculties; others appeal more directly to the intellect. They
all should be allowed a place because I find my spirit has quite as much need
of emotion as my senses. Do you think it concerns me that a particular picture
of mine represents two people? Though these two people once existed for me,
they exist no longer. The 'vision' of them gave me a preliminary emotion; then
little by little their actual presences became blurred; they developed into a fiction
and then disappeared altogether, or rather they were transformed into all kinds
of problems. They are no longer two people, you see, but forms and colors:
forms and colors that have taken on, meanwhile, the idea of two people and
preserve the vibration of their life.

I deal with painting as I deal with things, I paint a window just as I look
out of a window. If an open window looks wrong in a picture, I draw the curtain
and shut it, just as I would in my own room. In painting, as in life, you must
act directly. Certainly, painting has its conventions, and it is essential to reckon
with them. Indeed, you can't do anything else. And so you always ought to
keep an eye on real life.

The artist is a receptacle for emotions that come from all over the place: from
the sky, from the earth, from a scrap of paper, from a passing shape, from a
spider's web. That is why we must not discriminate between things. Where
things are concerned there are no class distinctions. We must pick out what is
good for us where we can find it - except from our own works. I have a horror
of copying myself. [. . .]

[. . .] The painter goes through states of fullness and evaluation. That is the
whole secret of art, I go for a walk in the forest of Fontainebleau. I get 'green'
indigestion. I must get rid of this sensation into a picture. Green rules it. A
painter paints to unload himself of feelings and visions. People seize on painting
to cover up their nakedness. They get what they can wherever they can. In the
end I can't believe they get anything at all. They've simply cut a coat to the
measure of their own ignorance. They make everything, from God to a picture,
in their own image. That is why the picture-hook is the ruination of a painting
- a painting which has always a certain significance, at least as much as the
man who did it. As soon as it is brought and hung on a wall, it takes on quite
a different kind of significance, and the painting is done for.



IVd Modernism as Critique 501

Academic training in beauty is a sham. We have been deceived, but so well
deceived that we can scarcely get back even a shadow of the truth. The beauties
of the Parthenon, Venuses, Nymphs, Narcissuses are so many lies. Art is not
the application of a canon of beauty but what the instinct and the brain can
conceive beyond any canon. When we love a woman we don't start measuring
her limbs. We love with our desires - although everything has been done to
try and apply a canon even to love. The Parthenon is really only a farmyard
over which someone put a roof; colonnades and sculptures were added because
there were people in Athens who happened to be working, and wanted to express
themselves. It's not what the artist does that counts, but what he is. Cezanne
would never have interested me a bit if he had lived and thought like Jacques
Emile Blanche, even if the apple he painted had been ten times as beautiful.
What forces our interest is Cezanne's anxiety - that's Cezanne's lesson; the
torments of Van Gogh - that is the actual drama of the man. The rest is a
sham.

Everyone wants to understand art. Why not try to understand the songs of
a bird? Why does one love the night, flowers, everything around one, without
trying to understand them? But in the case of a painting people have to
understand. If only they would realize above all that an artist works of necessity,
that he himself is only a trifling bit of the world, and that no more importance
should be attached to him than to plenty of other things which please us in the
world, though we can't explain them. People who try to explain pictures are
usually barking up the wrong tree. Gertrude Stein joyfully announced to me
the other day that she had at last understood what my picture of the three
musicians was meant to be. It was a still life!

How can you expect an onlooker to live a picture of mine as I lived it? A
picture comes to me from miles away: who is to say from how far away I sensed
it, saw it, painted it; and yet the next day I can't see what I've done myself.
How can anyone enter into my dreams, my instincts, my desires, my thoughts,
which have taken a long time to mature and to come out into the daylight, and
above all grasp from them what I have been about - perhaps against my own
will?

With the exception of a few painters who are opening new horizons to
painting, young painters today don't know which way to go. Instead of taking
up our researches in order to react clearly against us, they are absorbed with
bringing the past back to life - when truly the whole world is open before us,
everything waiting to be done, not just redone. Why cling desperately to
everything that has already fulfilled its promise? There are miles of painting 'in
the manner of; but it is rare to find a young man working in his own way.

Does he wish to believe that man can't repeat himself? To repeat is to run
counter to spiritual laws; essentially escapism.

I'm no pessimist, I don't loathe art, because I couldn't live without devoting
all my time to it. I love it as the only end of my life. Everything I do connected
with it gives me intense pleasure. But still, I don't see why the whole world
should be taken up with art, demand its credentials, and on that subject give
free rein to its own stupidity. Museums are just a lot of lies, and the people



502 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

who make art their business are mostly imposters. I can't understand why
revolutionary countries should have more prejudices about art than out-of-date
countries! We have infected the pictures in museums with all our stupidities,
all our mistakes, all our poverty of spirit. We have turned them into petty and
ridiculous things. We have been tied up to a fiction, instead of trying to sense
what inner life there was in the men who painted them. There ought to be an
absolute dictatorship ... a dictatorship of painters ... a dictatorship of one
painter ... to suppress all those who have betrayed us, to suppress the cheaters,
to suppress the tricks, to suppress mannerisms, to suppress charms, to suppress
history, to suppress a heap of other things. But common sense always gets away
with it. Above all, let's have a revolution against that! The true dictator will
always be conquered by the dictatorship of common sense . . . and maybe not!



3 Herbert Read (1893-1968) 'What Is Revolutionary
Art?'

Written as one of five contributions to the symposium on 'Revolutionary Art' staged by
the Artists' International Association (formerly the Artists' international) in London in
1935 (see also IVb19). Read was the most informed and sympathetic supporter of the
Modern Movement in England in the 1930s, and a close friend of Henry Moore. His essay
testifies on the one hand to the character and persistence of current arguments for a
revolutionary function in culture, and on the other to the separation of the small English
avant-garde into factions which variously reflected the major tendencies of European
art at the time: Social Realism, Surrealism and Abstraction. First published in B. Rea
(ed.), Five on Revolutionary Art, London, 1935, from which the present version is taken.

[. . .] Revolutionary art should be revolutionary. That surely is a simple state-
ment from which we can begin the discussion. We can at once dismiss the feeble
interpretation of such a statement as an injunction to paint pictures of red flags,
hammers and sickles, factories and machines, or revolutionary subjects in general
. . . But such a feeble interpretation does actually persist among Communists,
and was in fact responsible for the failure of the first exhibition organized by
the Artists' International. It is responsible for the partisan adulation of a
competent but essentially second-rate artist like Diego Rivera.

We can best approach the question from the angle of an abstract art like
architecture. [. . .] Architecture is a necessary art, and it is intimately bound
up with the social reconstruction which must take place under a Communist
regime. How do we, as Englishmen, conceive a Communist architecture? As a
reversion to Tudor rusticity, or Georgian stateliness, or the bourgeois pomp of
the neo-classical style? Surely none of these styles can for a moment be
considered in relation to the city of the future. Must we not rather confidently
look forward to a development of the new architecture of which Walter Gropius
is the foremost exponent; of that architecture which, in his own words, 'bodies
itself forth, not in stylistic imitation or ornamental frippery, but in those simple
and sharply modelled designs in which every part merges naturally into the



IVd Modernism as Critique 503

comprehensive volume of the whole.' Only in this manner, by following the
path clearly indicated by Gropius in his work and writings, can we find 'a
concrete expression of the life of our epoch'. [. . . J

But corresponding to the new architecture, to a large extent arising from the
same fertile ground of the Bauhaus experiment founded and directed by
Gropius, is the art generally known as 'abstract'. The name is admittedly a
makeshift, and between an abstract artist like Mondrian or Ben Nicholson at
one end of the scale, and an equally so-called 'abstract' artist like Miro or Henry
Moore, there is only a remote connection. But for the moment these differences
do not matter. Such names represent the modern school in painting and
sculpture in its widest and most typical aspect, and these artists, I wish to claim,
are the true revolutionary artists, whom every Communist should learn to
respect and encourage.

Such an opinion will be met by a formidable opposition, precisely among
Communists who are interested in art. Communist artists from Germany will
tell you that they have 'been through all that'; that abstract art is dead, and
that in any case it is incomprehensible to the proletariat and of no use to the
revolutionary movement. Like the simple bourgeois of another generation, they
ask for something they can understand, a 'realistic' art above all, something they
can use as propaganda.

Actually, I believe that such artists are confessing their failure - as artists.
The abstract movement in art is not dead, and not likely to be for many years
to come. That it will gradually be transformed not only the dialectical conception
of history, but the slightest acquaintance with the history of art, compels us to
admit. But how it will be transformed is more than we can tell. The facts we
have to recognize are: that all the artists of any intellectual force belong to this
movement; that this movement is contemporary and revolutionary; and that only
the apparent independence and isolation of the abstract artist - his refusal to
toe the line and become an emotional propagandist - only this fact hinders the
Communist from accepting the abstract movement in art as the contemporary
revolutionary movement in art.

To describe this attitude in the abstract artist as formalistic, as mere decorative
dilettantism, not only betrays a lack of aesthetic sensibility, but an ignorance of
the actual ideals and personalities of the artists themselves. Most of the artists
in question are more or less openly in sympathy with the Communist movement.
Why, then, do they adopt in all its integrity what is called the formalist attitude?

The question cannot be answered without a short digression on the nature of
art. Any considerable work of art has two distinct elements: a formal element
appealing to our sensibility for reasons which cannot be stated with any clarity,
but which are certainly psychological in origin; and an arbitrary or accidental
element of more complex appeal which is the outer clothing given to these
underlying forms. It is at least arguable that the purely formal element in art
does not change; that the same canons of harmony and proportion are present
in primitive art, in Greek art, in Gothic art, in Renaissance art and in the art
of the present day. Such forms, we may say, are archetypal; due to the physical
structure of the world and the psychological structure of man. And it is for this



504 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

reason that the artist, with some show of reason, can take up an attitude of
detachment. It is his sense of the importance of the archetypal which makes
him relatively indifferent to the phenomenal. The recognition of such universal
formal qualities in art is consistently materialistic. It no more contradicts the
materialistic interpretation of the history of art than does a recognition of the
relative permanency of the human form, or of the forms of crystals in geology.
Certain factors in life are constant; but to that extent they are not a part of
history. History is concerned with that part of life which is subject to change;
and the Marxian dialectic is an interpretation of history, not a theory of the
structure or morphology of life.

Another consideration which mitigates the objection to the formalistic attitude
is that, granted the existence of permanent and unchanging elements in art,
there is, admittedly, at various periods, a different valuation of such elements.
In fact, what is the difference between classical and romantic epochs but a
difference in the emphasis given to the formal basis of works of art? [. . .] It
is merely, we might say, a difference of accent. But it is in precisely such a
way that a reasonable Marxian would expect art to be inflected. We can,
therefore, in any broad historical generalisations, dismiss the underlying formal
structure of art, to concentrate on style and mannerism. For it is in style and
mannerism that the prevailing ideology of a period is expressed.

If we admit so much, it follows that it is a mere illusion for the artist to
imagine that he can for ever maintain an attitude of detachment. I can only see
one logical exception - the artist who can so deprive his work of temporary and
accidental qualities that what he achieves is in effect pure form. And significantly
enough that is the claim of one extreme of the abstract movement, an extreme
which includes some of the most talented artists now living. Having no sympathy
with any existing ideology, they attempt to escape into a world without
ideologies. They shut themselves within the Ivory Tower, and it is just possible
that, for the time being (the very special time in which we live) their tactics may
be of some advantage to the art of the future. Their position will become clearer
as we proceed.

Apart from such a desperate retreat, we have to admit that the artist cannot
in any effective way avoid the economic conditions of his time; he cannot ignore
them, for they will not ignore him. Reality, in one guise or another, forces the
artist along a determined course, and if the artist does not realise this, it is only
because he is in the middle of the stream, where the water is deep and the
current strong.
* * *

[. . .] Excluding the great mass of academic bourgeois art, and within the
general category of revolutionary art, we have two distinct movements, both
professing to be modern, both intentionally revolutionary.

The first of these has no very descriptive label, but it is essentially formalist,
in the sense already mentioned. It is sometimes called abstract, sometimes
non-figurative, sometimes constructivist, sometimes geometric. It is most typic-
ally represented by painters like Mondrian, Helion, Ben Nicholson, Moholv-
Nagy; and by sculptors like Brancusi, Gabo and Barbara Hep worth.



IVd Modernism as Critique 505

The second movement has a distinctive name - Surrealisme or Superrealism,
and is represented by painters like Max Ernst, Salvador Dali, Miro, Tanguy,
and by a sculptor like Arp.

The first movement is plastic, objective and ostensibly non-political.

The second group is literary (even in paint), subjective, and actively Com-
munist.

Those distinctions are obvious, on the surface. But I want to suggest that we
cannot be satisfied with such superficial distinctions. We cannot accept the
surrealistes at their own valuation, and welcome them as the only true revolu-
tionary artists. Nevertheless, they are performing a very important revolutionary
function, and it must be said on their behalf that they realize the importance
of their function with far more clarity than the official Marxians, who have
shown them no favour. For official Marxians, concentrating on their economic
problems, do not see the relevance of the cultural problem, more particularly
the artistic problem. The mind of the artist, they complacently assume, that too
will, in Trotsky's phrase, limp after the reality they are creating.

But everywhere the greatest obstacle to the creation of this new social reality
is the existence of the cultural heritage of the past - the religion, the philosophy,
the literature and the art which makes up the whole complex ideology of the
bourgeois mind. The logic of the facts - the economic facts: war, poverty amidst
plenty, social injustice - that logic cannot be denied. But so long as the bourgeois
mind has its bourgeois ideology, it will deny the facts; it will construct an
elaborate rationalization which effectively ignores them.

The superrealists, who possess very forceful expositors of their point of view
- writers like Andre Breton - realize this very clearly, and the object of their
movement is therefore to discredit the bourgeois ideology in art, to destroy the
academic conception of art. Their whole tendency is negative and destructive.
The particular method they adopt, in so far as they have a common method,
consists in breaking down the barriers between the conscious reality of life and
the unconscious reality of the dream-world - to so mingle fact and fancy that
the normal concept of reality no longer has existence [ . . . ]

We can see, therefore, the place of surrealisme in the revolutionary movement.
What of this other kind of modern art - the art of pure form immured in its
Ivory Tower?

That art too, I wish to contend, has its revolutionary function, and in the
end it is the most important function of all. Superrealism is a negative art, as
I have said, a destructive art; it follows that it has only a temporary role; it is
the art of a transitional period. It may lead to a new romanticism, especially in
literature, but that lies beyond its immediate function.

But abstract art has a positive function. It keeps inviolate, until such time as
society will once more be ready to make use of them, the universal qualities of
art - those elements which survive all changes and revolutions. It may be said
that as such it is merely art in pickle - an activity divorced from reality, of no
immediate interest to the revolutionary. But that, I maintain, is a very short
view of the situation. And actually such art is not so much in pickle as might
be supposed. For in one sphere, in architecture and to some extent in industrial



506 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

arts, it is already in social action. There we find the essential link between the
abstract movement in modern painting and the most advanced movement i n
modern architecture - the architecture of Gropius, Markelius, Le Corbusier. . . . I t
is not merely a similarity of form and intention, but an actual and intimate
association of personalities.

This single link points the way to the art of the future - the art of the new
classless society. It is impossible to predict all the forms of this art, and it will
be many years before it reaches its maturity. But you cannot build a new society
- and you must build such a society, with bricks and mortar, steel and glass -
you cannot build such a society without artists. The artists are waiting for their
opportunity: abstract artists who are, in this time of transition, perfecting their
formal sensibility, and who will be ready, when the time comes, to apply
their talents to the great work of reconstruction. That is not a work for
romanticists and literary sentimentalists. Communism is realist, scientific,
essentially classical. But let us realize that we have romanticists in our midst -
tender-minded idealists who would like to blur the precise outlines of our vision
with democratic ideals of egalitarianism, Tolstoyan simplicity and naivety,
community-singing and boy-scoutism. Such people imagine that revolutionary
art is a kind of folk-art, peasant pottery, madrigals and ballads. Surely that is
not a conception of art worthy of the true Communist. We want something
tougher, something more intellectual and 'difficult', something that we can
without falsity and self-deception put beside the great epochs of art in the past.

REVOLUTIONARY ART IS CONSTRUCTIVE
REVOLUTIONARY ART IS INTERNATIONAL
REVOLUTIONARY ART IS REVOLUTIONARY



4 Meyer Schapiro (b. 1904) The Social Bases of Art'

Schapiro was of the few art historians writing in the English language in the 1930s who
applied the resources of the Marxist intellectual tradition to the problems of analysis
of modern art and its development. In this paper he brings a social-historical form of
explanation to bear on the current conditions of artistic practice. Originally delivered
as a contribution to the First American Artists' Congress in New York in 1936, and first
published in the proceedings of the Congress, Reprinted in D. Shapiro (ed.), Social
Realism - Art as a Weapon; critical studies in American art, New York, 1973, from
which the present version is taken.

[ . . . ] If modern art seems to have no social necessity, it is because the social
has been narrowly identified with the collective as the anti-individual, and with
repressive institutions and beliefs, like the church or the state or morality, to
which most individuals submit. But even those activities in which the individual
seems to be unconstrained and purely egoistic depend upon socially organized
relationships. Private property, individual competitive business enterprise or
sexual freedom, far from constituting non-social relationships, presuppose spec-
ific, historically developed forms of society. Nearer to art there are many




IVd Modernism as Critique 507

unregistered practices which seem to involve no official institutions, yet depend
on recently acquired social interests and on definite stages of material develop-
ment. A promenade, for example (as distinguished from a religious procession
or a parade), would be impossible without a particular growth of urban life and
secular forms of recreation. The necessary means - the streets and the roads -
are also social and economic in origin, beyond or prior to any individual; yet
each man enjoys his walk by himself without any sense of constraint or
institutional purpose.

In the same way, the apparent isolation of the modern artist from practical
activities, the discrepancy between his archaic, individual handicraft and the
collective, mechanical character of most modern production, do not necessarily
mean that he is outside society or that his work is unaffected by social and
economic changes. The social aspect of his art has been further obscured by
two things, the insistently personal character of the modern painter's work and
his preoccupation with formal problems alone. The first leads him to think of
himself in opposition to society as an organized repressive power, hostile to
individual freedom; the second seems to confirm this in stripping his work of
any purpose other than a purely 'aesthetic'.

But if we examine attentively the objects a modern artist paints and the
psychological attitudes evident in the choice of these objects and their forms,
we will see how intimately his art is tied to the life of modern society.

Although painters will say again and again that content doesn't matter, they
are curiously selective in their subjects. They paint only certain themes and
only in a certain aspect. The content of the great body of art today, which
appears to be unconcerned with content, may be described as follows. First,
there are natural spectacles, landscapes or city-scenes, regarded from the view-
point of a relaxed spectator, a vacationist or sportsman, who values the landscape
chiefly as a source of agreeable sensations or mood; artificial spectacles and
entertainments - the theatre, the circus, the horse-race, the athletic field, the
music-hall - or even works of painting, sculpture, architecture and technology,
experienced as spectacles or objects of art; the artist himself and individuals
associated with him; his studio and his intimate objects, his model posing, the
fruit and flowers on his table, his window and the view from it; symbols of the
artist's activity, individuals practising other arts, rehearsing, or in their privacy;
instruments of art, especially of music, which suggest an abstract art and
improvisation; isolated intimate fields, like a table covered with private instru-
ments of idle sensation, drinking glasses, a pipe, playing cards, books, all objects
of manipulation, referring to an exclusive, private world in which the individual
is immobile, but free to enjoy his own moods and self stimulation. And finally,
there are pictures in which the elements of professional artistic discrimination,
present to some degree in all painting - the lines, spots of color, areas, textures,
modelling - are disengaged from things and juxtaposed as 'pure' aesthetic
Objects.

Thus elements drawn from the professional surroundings and activity of the
artist; situations in which we are consumers and spectators; objects which we
confront intimately, but passively or accidentally, or manipulate idly and in



508 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

isolation - these are typical subjects of modern painting. They recur with
surprising regularity in contemporary art.

Modern artists have not only eliminated the world of action from their
pictures, but they have interpreted past art as if the elements of experience in
it, the represented objects, were incidental things, pretexts of design or imposed
subjects, in spite of which, or in opposition to which, the artist realized his
supposedly pure aesthetic impulse. They are therefore unaware of their own
objects or regard them as merely incidental pretexts for form. But a little
observation will show that each school of modern artists has its characteristic
objects and that these derive from a context of experience which also operates
in their formal fantasy. The picture is not a rendering of external objects - that
is not even strictly true of realistic art - but the objects assembled in the picture
come from an experience and interests which affect the formal character. An
abstract art built up out of other objects, that is, out of other interests and
experience, would have another formal character.
* * #

A modern work, considered formally, is no more artistic than an older work.
The preponderance of objects drawn from a personal and artistic world does
not mean that pictures are now more pure than in the past, more completely
works of art. It means simply that the personal and aesthetic contexts of secular
life now condition the formal character of art, just as religious beliefs and
practices in the past conditioned the formal character of religious art. The
conception of art as purely aesthetic and individual can exist only where culture
has been detached from practical and collective interests and is supported by
individuals alone. But the mode of life of these individuals, their place in society,
determine in many ways this individual art. In its most advanced form, this
conception of art is typical of the rentier leisure class in modern capitalist society,
and is most intensely developed in centers, like Paris, which have a large rentier
group and considerable luxury industries. Here the individual is no longer
engaged in a struggle to attain wealth; he has no direct relation to work,
machinery, competition; he is simply a consumer, not a producer. He belongs
to a class which recognizes no higher group or authority. The older stable forms
of family life and sexual morality have been destroyed; there is no royal court
or church to impose a regulating pattern on his activity. For this individual the
world is a spectacle, a source of novel pleasant sensations, or a field in which
he may realize his 'individuality,' through art, through sexual intrigue and the
most varied, but non-productive, mobility [. . ,]

[...] It is the situation of painting in such a society, and the resulting
condition of the artist, which confer on the artist to-day certain common
tendencies and attitudes. Even the artist of lower middle-class or working-class
origin comes to create pictures congenial to the members of this upper class,
without having to identify himself directly with it. He builds, to begin with,
on the art of the last generation and is influenced by the success of recent
painters. The general purpose of art being aesthetic, he is already predisposed
to interests and attitudes, imaginatively related to those of the leisure class,
which values its pleasures as aesthetically refined, individual pursuits. He



IVd Modernism as Critique 509

competes in an open market and therefore is conscious of the novelty or
uniqueness of his work as a value. He creates out of his own head (having no
subject-matter imposed by a commission), works entirely by himself, and is
therefore concerned with his powers of fantasy, his touch, his improvised forms.
His sketches are sometimes more successful than his finished pictures, and the
latter often acquire the qualities of a sketch.

Cut off from the middle class at the very beginning of his career by poverty
and insecurity and by the non-practical character of his work, the artist often
repudiates its moral standards and responsibilities. He forms on the margin of
this inferior philistine world a free community of artists in which art, person-
alities and pleasure are the obsessing interests. The individual and the aesthetic
are idealized as things completely justified in themselves and worth the highest
sacrifices. The practical is despised except insofar as it produces attractive
mechanical spectacles and new means of enjoyment, or insofar as it is referred
abstractly to a process of inventive design, analogous to the painter's art. His
frequently asserted antagonism to organized society does not bring him into
conflict with his patrons, since they share his contempt for the 'public' and are
indifferent to practical social life. Besides, since he attributes his difficulties,
not to particular historical conditions, but to society and human nature as
such, he has only a vague idea that things might be different than they are;
his antagonism suggests to him no effective action, and he shuns the
common slogans of reform or revolution as possible halters on his personal
freedom.

Yet helpless as he is to act on the world, he shows in his art an astonishing
ingenuity and joy in transforming the shapes of familiar things. This plastic
freedom should not be considered in itself an evidence of the artist's positive
will to change society or a reflection of real transforming movements in the
every-day world. For it is essential in this anti-naturalistic art that just those
relations of visual experience which are most important for action are destroyed
by the modern artist. As in the fantasy of a passive spectator, colors and shapes
are disengaged from objects and can no longer serve as a means in knowing
them. The space within pictures becomes intraversable; its planes are shuffled
and disarrayed, and the whole is re-ordered in a fantastically intricate manner.
Where the human figure is preserved, it is a piece of picturesque still-life, a
richly pigmented, lumpy mass, individual, irritable and sensitive; or an accidental
plastic thing among others, subject to sunlight and the drastic distortions of a
design. If the modern artist values the body, it is no longer in the Renaissance
sense of a firm, clearly articulated, energetic structure, but as temperamental
and vehement flesh.

The passivity of the modern artist with regard to the human world is evident
*n a peculiar relation of his form and content. In his effort to create a thoroughly
animated, yet rigorous whole, he considers the interaction of color upon color,
line upon line, mass upon mass. Such pervasive interaction is for most modern
Painters the very essence of artistic reality. Yet in his choice of subjects he
rarely, if ever, seizes upon corresponding aspects in social life. He has no interest
ln  no awareness of, such interaction in the every-day world. On the contrary,



510 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

he has a special fondness for those objects which exist side by side without
affecting each other, and for situations in which the movements involve no real
interactions. The red of an apple may oppose the green of another apple, but
the apples do not oppose each other. The typical human situations are those
in which figures look at each other or at a landscape or are plunged in a
revery or simulate some kind of absorption. And where numerous compli-
cated things are brought together in apparent meaningful connection, this
connection is cryptic, bizarre, something we must solve as a conceit of the
artist's mind.

The social origins of such forms of modern art do not in themselves
permit one to judge this art as good or bad; they simply throw light upon some
aspects of their character and enable us to see more clearly that the ideas of
modern artists, far from describing eternal and necessary conditions of art, are
simply the results of recent history. In recognizing the dependence of his
situation and attitudes on the character of modern society, the artist acquires
the courage to change things, to act on his society and for himself in an effective
manner.

He acquires at the same time new artistic conceptions. Artists who are
concerned with the world around them in its action and conflict, who ask the
same questions that are asked by the impoverished masses and oppressed
minorities - these artists cannot permanently devote themselves to a painting
committed to the aesthetic moments of life, to spectacles designed for passive,
detached individuals, or to an art of the studio.

There are artists and writers for whom the apparent anarchy of modern culture
- as an individual affair in which each person seeks his own pleasure - is
historically progressive, since it makes possible for the first time the conception
of the human individual with his own needs and goals. But it is a conception
restricted to small groups who are able to achieve such freedom only because
of the oppression and misery of the masses. The artists who create under these
conditions are insecure and often wretched. Further, this freedom of a few
individuals is identified largely with consumption and enjoyment; it detaches
man from nature, history and society, and although, in doing so, it discovers
new qualities and possibilities of feeling and imagination, unknown to older
culture, it cannot realize those possibilities of individual development which
depend on common productive tasks, on responsibilities, on intelligence and
cooperation in dealing with the urgent social issues of the moment. The
individual is identified with the private (that is, the privation of other beings
and the world), with the passive rather than active, the fantastic rather than the
intelligent. Such an art cannot really be called free, because it is so exclusive
and private; there are too many things we value that it cannot embrace or even
confront. An individual art in a society where human beings do not feel
themselves to be most individual when they are inert, dreaming, passive,
tormented or uncontrolled, would be very different from modern art. And in a
society where all men can be free individuals, individuality must lose its
exclusiveness and its ruthless and perverse character.



IVd Modernism as Critique 511
5 Jan Mukafovsky (1891-1975) from Aesthetic Function

Mukafovsky was a member of the distinguished Prague School of linguists. His book
Aesthetic Function: Norm and Value as Social Facts was originally published in Prague
in 1934 or 1936. In arguing for the importance of aesthetic value in art, Mukafovsky
makes an important distinction between the 'disinterestedness' normally claimed for art
within the Modernist critical tradition and art's necessary self-sufficiency. He is then
able to claim that it is by virtue of its autonomy that art exerts a bearing upon reality.
The present brief extract is taken from the translation by Mark E. Suino, Ann Arbor,
1970, pp. 86-90.

[ . . . ] We have arrived at a point from which it is possible to survey the mutual
relationship between aesthetic value and the other values contained in a work
of art, and to explain the true nature of that relationship. Previously we confined
ourselves to the assertion that aesthetic value dominates all other values in a
work of art. This assertion follows with logical necessity from the basis of art
- that privileged region of aesthetic phenomena - which is, due to the dominance
of the aesthetic function and aesthetic value, distinct from the countless number
of other phenomena in which the aesthetic function is facultative and subordinate
to some other function. [. . .] If we assert that aesthetic function and value in
a work of art dominate over other functions and values, we are not offering a
postulate for a practical relation to art (in which, even today, for some
individuals and collectives, some other function is dominant). We are simply
drawing a theoretical conclusion from the position which art occupies in the
entire realm of aesthetic phenomena, assuming that differentiation of functions
has been accomplished.

Even these avowedly theoretical formulations have been criticized, due to a
misunderstanding, as espousing 'formalism' and art-for-art's-sake. The self-
sufficiency of the work of art, an aspect of the dominant position of aesthetic
function and value, is mistakenly confused with the Kantian 'disinterestedness'
of art. In order to correct this error it is necessary to look at the position and
character of aesthetic value in art from within artistic structure. That is, we
must proceed from extra-aesthetic values - distributed among individual ele-
ments of a work - toward aesthetic value which binds the work into a unity.
In so doing we discover something which is unique and unexpected. We said
earlier that all elements of a work of art, in form and content, possess
extra-aesthetic values which, within the work, enter into mutual relationships.
The work of art appears, in the final analysis, as an actual collection of
extra-aesthetic values and nothing else. The material components of the artistic
artifact, and the manner in which they are used as artistic means, assume the
r ole of mere conductors of energies introduced by extra-aesthetic values. If we
ask ourselves at this point what has happened to aesthetic value, it appears that
rt has dissolved into individual extra-aesthetic values, and is really nothing but
a general term for the dynamic totality of their mutual interrelationships. The
distinction between 'form' and 'content' as used in the investigation of an art
w ork is thus incorrect. The formalism of the Russian school of aesthetic and




512 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

literary theory was correct in maintaining that all elements of a work are, without
distinction, components of form. It must be added that all components are
equally the bearers of meaning and extra-aesthetic values, and thus components
of content. The analysis of 'form' must not be narrowed to a mere formal
analysis. On the other hand, however, it must be made clear that only the entire
construction of the work, and not just the part called 'content,' enters into an
active relation with the system of life values which govern human affairs.

The dominance of aesthetic value above all other values, a distinguishing
feature of art, is thus something other than a mere external superiority. The
influence of aesthetic value is not that it swallows up and represses all remaining
values, but that it releases every one of them from direct contact with a
corresponding life-value. It brings an entire assembly of values contained in the
work as a dynamic whole into contact with a total system of those values which
form the motive power of the life practice of the perceiving collective. What is
the nature and goal of this contact? Above all it must be borne in mind, as we
have already demonstrated, that this contact is rarely idyllically tranquil. As a
rule the values contained in the art work are somewhat different, both in their
mutual relationships and in the quality of individual values, from the complex
system of values which is valid for the collective. There thus arises a mutual
tension, and herein lies the particular meaning and effect of art. The constant
necessity for practical application of values determines the free movement of
the totality of values governing the life practice of the collective. The displace-
ment of individual members of the hierarchy (re-valuation of values) is very
difficult here, and is accompanied by strong shocks to the entire life practice
of the given collective (slowing of development, uncertainty of values, disinteg-
ration of the system, even revolutionary eruptions). On the other hand, values
in the art work - of which each by itself is free of actual dependency, but whose
totality has potential validity - can, without harm, regroup and transform
themselves. They can experimentally crystallize into a new configuration and
dissolve an old one, can adapt to the development of the social situation and
to new creative facts of reality, or at least seek the possibility of such adaptation.
Viewed in this light, the autonomy of the art work and the dominance of the
aesthetic function and value within it appear not as destroyers of all contact
between the work and reality - natural and social - but as constant stimuli
of such contact. Art is a vital agent of great importance, even in periods of
development and forms which stress self-orientation in art plus dominance of
aesthetic function and value. Sometimes it is during just such stages which
combine development and self-orientation that art may exert considerable in-
fluence on the relation of man to reality.



6 Walter Benjamin (1892-1940) 'The Work of Art in
the Age of Mechanical Reproduction'

Benjamin's major work during the years of his Parisian exile was the unfinished Arcades
project (the Passagenwerk), a study of the roots of modernity in Haussmannization,



W



iVd Modernism as Critique 513

and of Baudelaire's response to it. This embodied a wider interest in new cultural forms,
which Benjamin shared with other Weimar intellectuals. Albeit with roots in the nineteenth
century, the typical and central new forms of the twentieth century emerged through
technologies of mass reproduction: printing, in the first instance, but especially photo-
graphy and cinema. In the present essay Benjamin argues that the 'aura' of the original,
unique work of art is lost to reproducibility; but that this, far from being something to
mourn, opens up progressive possibilities. Originally published in the Frankfurt Institute
journal (by then operating in exile in the United States), Zeitschrift fur Sozialforschung,
V, no. 1, New York, 1936. The present version is taken from the English translation in
H. Arendt (ed.), Walter Benjamin, Illuminations, London, 1973, pp. 219-53.



I

[. . .] Around 1900 technical reproduction had reached a standard that not only
permitted it to reproduce all transmitted works of art and thus to cause the
most profound change in their impact upon the public; it also had captured a
place of its own among the artistic processes. For the study of this standard
nothing is more revealing than the nature of the repercussions that these two
different manifestations - the reproduction of works of art and the art of the
film - have had on art in its traditional form.

II

Even the most perfect reproduction of a work of art is lacking in one element:
its presence in time and space, its unique existence at the place where it happens
to be. This unique existence of the work of art determined the history to which
it was subject throughout the time of its existence. This includes the changes
which it may have suffered in physical condition over the years as well as the
various changes in its ownership. The traces of the first can be revealed only
by chemical or physical analyses which it is impossible to perform on a
reproduction; changes of ownership are subject to a tradition which must be
traced from the situation of the original.

The presence of the original is the prerequisite to the concept of authenticity.
Chemical analyses of the patina of a bronze can help to establish this, as does
the proof that a given manuscript of the Middle Ages stems from an archive
of the fifteenth century. The whole sphere of authenticity is outside technical
- and, of course, not only technical - reproducibility. Confronted with its manual
reproduction, which was usually branded as a forgery, the original preserved all
its authority; not so vis d vis technical reproduction. The reason is twofold.
First, process reproduction is more independent of the original than manual
reproduction. [. . .] Secondly, technical reproduction can put the copy of the
original into situations which would be out of reach for the original itself. Above
a U, it enables the original to meet the beholder halfway, be it in the form of a
photograph or a phonograph record. [. . .]

The situations into which the product of mechanical reproduction can be
brought may not touch the actual work of art, yet the quality of its presence
!S always depreciated. This holds not only for the art work but also, for instance,



514 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

for a landscape which passes in review before the spectator in a movie. In the
case of the art object, a most sensitive nucleus - namely, its authenticity - is
interfered with whereas no natural object is vulnerable on that score. The
authenticity of a thing is the essence of all that is transmissible from its
beginning, ranging from its substantive duration to its testimony to the history
which it has experienced. Since the historical testimony rests on the authenticity,
the former, too, is jeopardized by reproduction when substantive duration ceases
to matter. And what is really jeopardized when the historical testimony is
affected is the authority of the object.

One might subsume the eliminated element in the term 'aura' and go on to
say: that which withers in the age of mechanical reproduction is the aura of the
work of art. This is a symptomatic process whose significance points beyond
the realm of art. One might generalize by saying: the technique of reproduction
detaches the reproduced object from the domain of tradition. By making many
reproductions it substitutes a plurality of copies for a unique existence. And in
permitting the reproduction to meet the beholder or listener in his own
particular situation, it reactivates the object reproduced. These two processes
lead to a tremendous shattering of tradition which is the obverse of the
contemporary crisis and renewal of mankind. Both processes are intimately
connected with the contemporary mass movements. Their most powerful agent
is the film. Its social significance, particularly in its most positive form, is
inconceivable without its destructive, cathartic aspect, that is, the liquidation of
the traditional value of the cultural heritage. [. . .]



IV

The uniqueness of a work of art is inseparable from its being imbedded in the
fabric of tradition. [. . .] Originally the contextual integration of art in tradition
found its expression in the cult. We know that the earliest art works originated
in the service of a ritual - first the magical, then the religious kind. It is
significant that the existence of the work of art with reference to its aura is
never entirely separated from its ritual function. In other words, the unique
value of the 'authentic' work of art has its basis in ritual, the location of its
original use value. This ritualistic basis, however remote, is still recognizable as
secularized ritual even in the most profane forms of the cult of beauty. The
secular cult of beauty, developed during the Renaissance and prevailing for three
centuries, clearly showed that ritualistic basis in its decline and the first deep
crisis which befell it. With the advent of the first truly revolutionary means of
reproduction, photography, simultaneously with the rise of socialism, art sensed
the approaching crisis which has become evident a century later. At the time,
art reacted with the doctrine of Van pour Fart, that is, with a theology of art.
This gave rise to what might be called a negative theology in the form of the
idea of 'pure' art, which not only denied any social function of art but also any
categorizing by subject matter. . . .

An analysis of art in the age of mechanical reproduction must do justice to



IVd Modernism as Critique 515

these relationships, for they lead us to an all-important insight: for the first
time in world history, mechanical reproduction emancipates the work of art
from its parasitical dependence on ritual. To an ever greater degree the work
of art reproduced becomes the work of art designed for reproducibility. From
a photographic negative, for example, one can make any number of prints; to
ask for the 'authentic' print makes no sense. But the instant the criterion of
authenticity ceases to be applicable to artistic production, the total function of
art is reversed. Instead of being based on ritual, it begins to be based on another
practice - politics.
* * *



VII

The nineteenth-century dispute as to the artistic value of painting versus
photography today seems devious and confused. This does not diminish its
importance, however; if anything, it underlines it. The dispute was in fact the
symptom of a historical transformation the universal impact of which was not
realized by either of the rivals. When the age of mechanical reproduction
separated art from its basis in cult, the semblance of its autonomy disappeared
forever. The resulting change in the function of art transcended the perspective
of the century; for a long time it even escaped that of the twentieth century,
which experienced the development of the film.



XI

The shooting of a film, especially of a sound film, affords a spectacle unim-
aginable anywhere at any time before this. [ . . . ] In the theater one is well
aware of the place from which the play cannot immediately be detected as
illusionary. There is no such place for the movie scene that is being shot. Its
illusionary nature is that of the second degree, the result of cutting. That is to
say, in the studio the mechanical equipment has penetrated so deeply into reality
that its pure aspect freed from the foreign substance of equipment is the result
of a special procedure, namely, the shooting by the specially adjusted camera
and the mounting of the shot together with other similar ones. The equipment-
free aspect of reality here has become the height of artifice; the sight of
immediate reality has become an orchid in the land of technology.

Even more revealing is the comparison of these circumstances, which differ
so much from those of the theater, with the situation in painting. Here the
question is: How does the cameraman compare with the painter? To answer
this we take recourse to an analogy with a surgical operation. The surgeon
represents the polar opposite of the magician. The magician heals a sick person
by the laying on of hands; the surgeon cuts into the patient's body. The magician
maintains the natural distance between the patient and himself; though he
reduces it very slightly by the laying on of hands, he greatly increases it by
virtue of his authority. The surgeon does exactly the reverse; he greatly



516 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

diminishes the distance between himself and the patient by penetrating into the
patient's body, and increases it but little by the caution with which his hand
moves among the organs. In short, in contrast to the magician - who is still
hidden in the medical practitioner - the surgeon at the decisive moment abstains
from facing the patient man to man; rather, it is through the operation that he
penetrates into him.

Magician and surgeon compare to painter and cameraman. The painter
maintains in his work a natural distance from reality, the cameraman penetrates
deeply into its web. There is a tremendous difference between the pictures they
obtain. That of the painter is a total one, that of the cameraman consists of
multiple fragments which are assembled under a new law. Thus, for contem-
porary man the representation of reality by the film is incomparably more
significant than that of the painter, since it offers, precisely because of the
thoroughgoing permeation of reality with mechanical equipment, an aspect of
reality which is free of all equipment. And that is what one is entitled to ask
from a work of art.



XII

Mechanical reproduction of art changes the reaction of the masses toward art.
The reactionary attitude toward a Picasso painting changes into the progressive
reaction toward a Chaplin movie. The progressive reaction is characterized by
the direct, intimate fusion of visual and emotional enjoyment with the orientation
of the expert. Such fusion is of great social significance. The greater the decrease
in the social significance of an art form, the sharper the distinction between
criticism and enjoyment by the public. The conventional is uncritically enjoyed,
and the truly new is criticized with aversion. With regard to the screen, the
critical and the receptive attitudes of the public coincide. The decisive reason
for this is that individual reactions are predetermined by the mass audience
response they are about to produce, and this is nowhere more pronounced than
in the film. The moment these responses become manifest they control each
other. Again, the comparison with painting is fruitful. A painting has always
had an excellent chance to be viewed by one person or by a few. The
simultaneous contemplation of paintings by a large public, such as developed
in the nineteenth century, is an early symptom of the crisis of painting, a crisis
which was by no means occasioned exclusively by photography but rather in a
relatively independent manner by the appeal of art works to the masses.

Painting simply is in no position to present an object for simultaneous
collective experience, as it was possible for architecture at all times, for the epic
poem in the past, and for the movie today. Although this circumstance in itself
should not lead one to conclusions about the social role of painting, it does
constitute a serious threat as soon as painting, under special conditions and, as
it were, against its nature, is confronted directly by the masses. In the churches
and monasteries of the Middle Ages and at the princely courts up to the end
of the eighteenth century, a collective reception of paintings did not occur
simultaneously, but by graduated and hierarchized mediation. The change that



^?-



IVd Modernism as Critique 517

has come about is an expression of the particular conflict in which painting was
implicated by the mechanical reproducibility of paintings. Although paintings
began to be publicly exhibited in galleries and salons, there was no way for the
masses to organize and control themselves in their reception. Thus the same
public which responds in a progressive manner toward a grotesque film is bound
to respond in a reactionary manner to surrealism.
* * *

XIV

One of the foremost tasks of art has always been the creation of a demand which
could be fully satisfied only later. The history of every art form shows critical
epochs in which a certain art form aspires to effects which could be fully
obtained only with a changed technical standard, that is to say, in a new art
form. The extravagances and crudities of art which thus appear, particularly in
the so-called decadent epochs, actually arise from the nucleus of its richest
historical energies. In recent years, such barbarisms were abundant in Dadaism.
It is only now that its impulse becomes discernible: Dadaism attempted to create
by pictorial - and literary - means the effects which the public today seeks in
the film.

Every fundamentally new, pioneering creation of demands will carry beyond
its goal. Dadaism did so to the extent that it sacrificed the market values which
are so characteristic of the film in favor of higher ambitions - though of course
it was not conscious of such intentions as here described. The Dadaists attached
much less importance to the sales value of their work than to its uselessness
for contemplative immersion. The studied degradation of their material was not
the least of their means to achieve this uselessness. Their poems are 'word salad'
containing obscenities and every imaginable waste product of language. The
same is true of their paintings, on which they mounted buttons and tickets.
What they intended and achieved was a relentless destruction of the aura of
their creations, which they branded as reproductions with the very means of
production. Before a painting of Arp's or a poem by August Stramm it is
impossible to take time for contemplation and evaluation as one would before
a canvas of Derain's or a poem by Rilke. In the decline of middle-class society,
contemplation became a school for asocial behaviour; it was countered by
distraction as a variant of social conduct. Dadaistic activities actually assured a
rather vehement distraction by making works of art the center of scandal. One
requirement was foremost: to outrage the public.

From an alluring appearance or persuasive structure of sound the work of art of
the Dadaists became an instrument of ballistics. It hit the spectator like a bullet,
it happened to him, thus acquiring a tactile quality. It promoted a demand for the
film, the distracting element of which is also primarily tactile, being based on
changes of place and focus which periodically assail the spectator. Let us compare
the screen on which a film unfolds with the canvas of a painting. The painting
invites the spectator to contemplation; before it the spectator can abandon himself
to his associations. Before the movie frame he cannot do so. No sooner has his eye
grasped a scene than it is already changed. It cannot be arrested. Duhamel, who



518 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

detests the film and knows nothing of its significance, though something of its
structure, notes this circumstance as follows: 'I can no longer think what I want
to think. My thoughts have been replaced by moving images.' The spectator's
process of association in view of these images is indeed interrupted by their
constant, sudden change. This constitutes the shock effect of the film, which,
like all shocks, should be cushioned by heightened presence of mind. By means
of its technical structure, the film has taken the physical shock effect out of the
wrappers in which Dadaism had, as it were, kept it inside the moral shock effect.

XV

The mass is a matrix from which all traditional behavior toward works of art
issues today in a new form. Quantity has been transmuted into quality. The
greatly increased mass of participants has produced a change in the mode of
participation. The fact that the new mode of participation first appeared in a
disreputable form must not confuse the spectator. Yet some people have
launched spirited attacks against precisely this superficial aspect. Among these,
Duhamel has expressed himself in the most radical manner. What he objects to
most is the kind of participation which the movie elicits from the masses.
Duhamel calls the movie 'a pastime for helots, a diversion for uneducated,
wretched, worn-out creatures who are consumed by their worries . . . , a spec-
tacle which requires no concentration and presupposes no intelligence . . . ,
which kindles no light in the heart and awakens no hope other than the
ridiculous one of someday becoming a "star" in Los Angeles.' Clearly, this is
at bottom the same ancient lament that the masses seek distraction whereas art
demands concentration from the spectator. That is a commonplace. The question
remains whether it provides a platform for the analysis of the film. A closer
look is needed here. Distraction and concentration form polar opposites which
may be stated as follows: A man who concentrates before a work of art is
absorbed by it. He enters into this work of art the way legend tells of the
Chinese painter when he viewed his finished painting. In contrast, the distracted
mass absorbs the work of art. This is most obvious with regard to buildings.
Architecture has always represented the prototype of a work of art the reception
of which is consummated by a collectivity in a state of distraction. The laws of
its reception are most instructive.

Buildings have been man's companions since primeval times. Many art forms
have developed and perished. Tragedy begins with the Greeks, is extinguished
with them, and after centuries its 'rules' only are revived. The epic poem, which
had its origin in the youth of nations, expires in Europe at the end of the
Renaissance. Panel painting is a creation of the Middle Ages, and nothing
guarantees its uninterrupted existence. But the human need for shelter is lasting.
Architecture has never been idle. Its history is more ancient than that of any
other art, and its claim to being a living force has significance in every attempt
to comprehend the relationship of the masses to art. Buildings are appropriated
in a twofold manner: by use and by perception - or rather, by touch and sight.
Such appropriation cannot be understood in terms of the attentive concentration



IVd Modernism as Critique 519

of a tourist before a famous building. On the tactile side there is no counterpart
to contemplation on the optical side. Tactile appropriation is accomplished not
so much by attention as by habit. As regards architecture, habit determines to
a large extent even optical reception. The latter, too, occurs much less through
rapt attention than by noticing the object in incidental fashion. This mode of
appropriation, developed with reference to architecture, in certain circumstances
acquires canonical value. For the tasks which face the human apparatus of
perception at the turning points of history cannot be solved by optical means,
that is, by contemplation, alone. They are mastered gradually by habit, under
the guidance of tactile appropriation.

The distracted person, too, can form habits. More, the ability to master certain
tasks in a state of distraction proves that their solution has become a matter of
habit. Distraction as provided by art presents a covert control of the extent to
which new tasks have become soluble by apperception. Since, moreover, indi-
viduals are tempted to avoid such tasks, art will tackle the most difficult and
most important ones where it is able to mobilize the masses. Today it does so
in the film. Reception in a state of distraction, which is increasing noticeably
in all fields of art and is symptomatic of profound changes in apperception,
finds in the film its true means of exercise. The film with its shock effect meets
this mode of reception halfway. The film makes the cult value recede into the
background not only by putting the public in the position of the critic, but also
by the fact that at the movies this position requires no attention. The public
is an examiner, but an absent-minded one.

EPILOGUE

The growing proletarianization of modern man and the increasing formation of
masses are two aspects of the same process. Fascism attempts to organize the
newly created proletarian masses without affecting the property structure which
the masses strive to eliminate. Fascism sees its salvation in giving these masses
not their right, but instead a chance to express themselves. The masses have a
right to change property relations; Fascism seeks to give them an expression
while preserving property. The logical result of Fascism is the introduction of
aesthetics into political life. The violation of the masses, whom Fascism, with
its Fuhrer cult, forces to their knees, has its counterpart in the violation of an
apparatus which is pressed into the production of ritual values.

All efforts to render politics aesthetic culminate in one thing: war. War and
war only can set a goal for mass movements on the largest scale while respecting
the traditional property system. This is the political formula for the situation.
The technological formula may be stated as follows: Only war makes it possible
to mobilize all of today's technical resources while maintaining the property
system. [. . .]

[. . .] The destructiveness of war furnishes proof that society has not been
mature enough to incorporate technology as its organ, that technology has not
been sufficiently developed to cope with the elemental forces of society. The
horrible features of imperialistic warfare are attributable to the discrepancy



520 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

between the tremendous means of production and their inadequate utilization
in the process of production - in other words, to unemployment and the lack
of markets. Imperialistic war is a rebellion of technology which collects, in the
form of 'human material,' the claims to which society has denied its natural
material. Instead of draining rivers, society directs a human stream into a bed
of trenches; instead of dropping seeds from airplanes, it drops incendiary bombs
over cities; and through gas warfare the aura is abolished in a new way.

"Fiat ars - pereat mundus,' says Fascism, and as Marinetti admits, expects war
to supply the artistic gratification of a sense perception that has been changed
by technology. This is evidently the consummation of 7 'art pour Van? Mankind,
which in Homer's time was an object of contemplation for the Olympian gods,
now is one for itself. Its self-alienation has reached such a degree that it can
experience its own destruction as an aesthetic pleasure of the first order. This
is the situation of politics which Fascism is rendering aesthetic. Communism
responds by politicizing art.



7 Theodor Adorno (1903-1969) Letter to Benjamin

Music critic, sociologist and philosopher, Adorno, like Benjamin, was associated with
the 'Frankfurt School' (the Institute for Social Research, originally affiliated to the
University of Frankfurt in 1923), though he was not to become a permanent member
until 1938, when he followed the school into exile in New York. In this letter he
comments on a draft of Benjamin's The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Repro-
duction', on the one hand defending the critical function of the autonomous work of
art, on the other questioning whether technical change was really likely to result in a
progressive popular art. The letter was written in March 1936 and was first published
in Uber Walter Benjamin, Frankfurt, 1970. The present translation, by Harry Zohn, is
taken from Theodor Adorno, et al., Aesthetics and Politics, London, 1977, pp. 120-6.



London, 18 March 1936

Dear Herr Benjamin:

If today I prepare to convey to you some notes on your extraordinary study I

certainly have no intention of offering you criticism or even an adequate reponse.

Let me therefore confine myself to one main theme. My ardent interest and
my complete approval attach to that aspect of your study which appears to me
to carry out your original intention - the dialectical construction of the
relationship between myth and history - within the intellectual field of the
materialistic dialectic: namely, the dialectical self-dissolution of myth, which is
here viewed as the disenchantment of art. [ . . . ]

It is this accord which for me constitutes the criterion for the differences that
I must now state, with no other aim than to serve our 'general line', which is
now so clearly discernible. In doing so, perhaps I can start out by following
our old method of immanent criticism. In your earlier writings, of which your




IVd Modernism as Critique 521

present essay is a continuation, you differentiated the idea of the work of art
as a structure from the symbol of theology and from the taboo of magic. I now
find it disquieting - and here I see a sublimated remnant of certain Brechtian
motifs - that you now casually transfer the concept of magical aura to the
'autonomous work of art' and flatly assign to the latter a counter-revolutionary
function. I need not assure you that I am fully aware of the magical element
in the bourgeois work of art (particularly since I constantly attempt to expose
the bourgeois philosophy of idealism, which is associated with the concept of
aesthetic autonomy, as mythical in the fullest sense). However, it seems to me
that the centre of the autonomous work of art does not itself belong on the side
of myth - excuse my topic parlance - but is inherently dialectical; within itself
it juxtaposes the magical and the mark of freedom. If I remember correctly,
you once said something similar in connection with Mallarme, and I cannot
express to you my feeling about your entire essay more clearly than by telling
you that I constantly found myself wishing for a study of Mallarme as a
counterpoint to your essay, a study which, in my estimation, you owe us as an
important contribution to our knowledge. Dialectical though your essay may be,
it is not so in the case of the autonomous work of art itself; it disregards an
elementary experience which becomes more evident to me every day in my own
musical experience - that precisely the uttermost consistency in the pursuit of
the technical laws of autonomous art changes this art and instead of rendering
it into a taboo or fetish, brings it close to the state of freedom, of something
that can be consciously produced and made. I know of no better materialistic
programme than that statement by Mallarme in which he defines works of
literature as something not inspired but made out of words; and the greatest
figures of reaction, such as Valery and Borchardt (the latter with his essay about
villas which, despite an unspeakable comment about workers, could be taken
over in a materialistic sense in its entirety), have this explosive power in their
innermost cells. If you defend the kitsch film against the 'quality' film, no one
can be more in agreement with you than I am; but Van pour Van is just as
much in need of a defence, and the united front which exists against it and
which to my knowledge extends from Brecht to the Youth Movement, would
be encouragement enough to undertake a rescue.

[. . .] And at this point, to be sure, the debate turns political quickly enough.
For if you render rightly technicization and alienation dialectical, but not in
equal measure the world of objectified subjectivity, the political effect is to
credit the proletariat (as the cinema's subject) directly with an achievement
which, according to Lenin, it can realize only through a theory introduced by
intellectuals as dialectical subjects, who themselves belong to the sphere of works
of art which you have consigned to Hell.

Understand me correctly. I would not want to claim the autonomy of the
w ork of art as a prerogative, and I agree with you that the aural element of the
Work of art is declining - not only because of its technical reproducibility,
incidentally, but above all because of the fulfilment of its own 'autonomous'
formal laws . . . But the autonomy of the work of art, and therefore its material
form, is not identical with the magical element in it. The reification of a great



522 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

work of art is not just loss, any more than the reification of the cinema is all
loss. It would be bourgeois reaction to negate the reification of the cinema in
the name of the ego, and it would border on anarchism to revoke the reification
of a great work of art in the spirit of immediate use-values. 'Les extremes me
touchenf [Gide], just as they touch you - but only if the dialectic of the lowest
has the same value as the dialectic of the highest, rather than the latter simply
decaying. Both bear the stigmata of capitalism, both contain elements of change
(but never, of course, the middle-term between Schonberg and the American
film). Both are torn halves of an integral freedom, to which however they do
not add up. It would be romantic to sacrifice one to the other, either as the
bourgeois romanticism of the conservation of personality and all that stuff, or
as the anarchistic romanticism of blind confidence in the spontaneous power of
the proletariat in the historical process - a proletariat which is itself a product
of bourgeois society.

To a certain extent I must accuse your essay of this second romanticism. You
have swept art out of the corners of its taboos - but it is as though you feared
a consequent inrush of barbarism (who could share your fear more than I?) and
protected yourself by raising what you fear to a kind of inverse taboo. [. . .]

[. . .] Accordingly, what I would postulate is more dialectics. On the one
hand, dialectical penetration of the 'autonomous' work of art which is trans-
cended by its own technology into a planned work; on the other, an even
stronger dialecticization of utilitarian art in its negativity, which you certainly
do not fail to note but which you designate by relatively abstract categories like
'film capital', without tracking it down to its ultimate lair as immanent irrat-
ionality. When I spent a day in the studios of Neubabelsberg two years ago,
what impressed me most was how little montage and all the advanced techniques
that you emphasize are actually used; rather, reality is everywhere constructed
with an infantile mimetism and then 'photographed'. You under-estimate the
technicality of autonomous art and over-estimate that of dependent art; this, in
plain terms, would be my main objection. But this objection could only be given
effect as a dialectic between extremes which you tear apart. In my estimation,
this would involve nothing less than the complete liquidation of the Brechtian
motifs which have already undergone an extensive transformation in your study

- above all, the liquidation of any appeal to the immediacy of interconnected
aesthetic effects, however fashioned, and to the actual consciousness of actual
workers who have absolutely no advantage over the bourgeois except their
interest in the revolution, but otherwise bear all the marks of mutilation of the
typical bourgeois character. This prescribes our function for us clearly enough

- which I certainly do not mean in the sense of an activist conception of
'intellectuals'. But it cannot mean either that we may only escape the old taboos
by entering into new ones - 'tests', so to speak. The goal of the revolution is
the abolition of fear. Therefore we need have no fear of it, nor need we
ontologize our fear. It is not bourgeois idealism if, in full knowledge and without
mental prohibitions, we maintain our solidarity with the proletariat instead of
making of our own necessity a virtue of the proletariat, as we are always tempted
to do - the proletariat which itself experiences the same necessity and needs us




IVd Modernism as Critique 523

for knowledge as much as we need the proletariat to make the revolution. I am
convinced that the further development of the aesthetic debate which you have
so magnificently inaugurated, depends essentially on a true accounting of the
relationship of the intellectuals to the working-class.

* * *

I feel that our theoretical disagreement is not really a discord between us but

rather, that it is my task to hold your arm steady until the sun of Brecht has

once more sunk into exotic waters. Please understand my criticisms only in this

spirit.

Your old friend,
Teddie Wiesengrund



8 Ernst Bloch (1885-1977) 'Discussing Expressionism'

As a German intellectual in exile during the later 1930s, Bloch was engaged in dispute
with Lukacs over the nature of Expressionism, which at the time was seen as virtually
synonymous with artistic avant-gardism. Here he defends Expressionism against the
views expressed by Lukacs in The Greatness and Decline of Expressionism', published
in International Literature in 1934. (The 'USPD', to which reference is made, was the
Independent Social-Democratic Party, formed in 1916 as an anti-war secession
from the German Social Democratic Party.) Bloch's essay was originally published in
Moscow in 1938 in the expatriate German-language journal Das Wort {The Word). It was
reprinted in ErbschaftdieserZeit (Legacy of Today), Frankfurt, 1962, when Bloch added
the passage included here between square brackets. The present translation, by Rodney
Livingstone, is taken from Adorno, et al., op. cit, pp. 18-27.

What material does Lukacs . . . use to expound his view of the Expressionists?
He takes prefaces or postscripts to anthologies, 'introductions 1 . . . newspaper
articles . . . and other items of the same sort. So he does not get to the core of
the matter, the imaginative works which make a. concrete impression in time
and space, a reality which the observer may re-experience for himself. His
material is second-hand from the outset; it is literature on Expressionism, which
he then proceeds to use as a basis for literary, theoretical and critical judgements.
No doubt Lukacs's purpose is to explore 'the social base of the movement and
the ideological premisses arising from that base'. But it thereby suffers from
the methodological limitation that it produces only a concept of concepts, an
essay on essays and even lesser pieces. [. . .]

[. . .] none of this even touches the actual creative works of Expressionism,
which alone are of interest to us. [ . . . ] there is surely no need to labour the
point that in the emotional outbursts of the art of the period, with their
semi-archaic, semi-utopian hypostases, which remain today as enigmatic as they
were then, there is to be found far more than the 'USPD ideology' to which
Lukacs would like to reduce Expressionism. No doubt these emotional outbursts
were even more dubious than enigmatic when they had no object outside
themselves. But to describe them as the expression of 'the forlorn perplexity of
the petty-bourgeois 1 is scarcely adequate. Their substance was different; it was



524 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

composed partly of archaic images, but partly too of revolutionary fantasies
which were critical and often quite specific. Anyone who had ears to hear could
hardly have missed the revolutionary element their cries contained, even if i t
was undisciplined and uncontrolled, and 'dissipated' a considerable amount of
the 'classical heritage' - or what was then more accurately 'classical lumber 1 .
Permanent Neo-classicism, or the conviction that anything produced since
Homer and Goethe is not worth considering unless it is produced in their image
or as an abstraction from them, is no vantage-point from which to keep one's
eye on the last avant-garde movement but one, or to pass judgement on it.

Given such an attitude, what recent artistic experiments can possibly avoid
being censured? They must all be summarily condemned as aspects of the decay
of capitalism - not just in part, which might not be unreasonable, but wholesale,
one hundred per cent. The result is that there can be no such thing as an
avant-garde within late capitalist society; anticipatory movements in the super-
structure are disqualified from possessing any truth. That is the logic of an
approach which paints everything in black and white - one hardly likely to do
justice to reality, indeed even to answer the needs of propaganda. Almost all
forms of opposition to the ruling class which are not communist from the outset
are lumped together with the ruling class itself. This holds good even when, as
Lukacs illogically concedes in the case of Expressionism, the opposition was
subjectively well-intentioned and its adherents felt, painted and wrote as adver-
saries of the Fascism that was to come. In the age of the Popular Front, to
cling to such a black-and-white approach seems less appropriate than ever; it is
mechanical, not dialectical. All these recriminations and condemnations have
their source in the idea that ever since the philosophical line that descends from
Hegel through Feuerbach to Marx came to an end, the bourgeoisie has nothing
more to teach us, except in technology and perhaps the natural sciences;
everything else is at best of 'sociological' interest. It is this conception which
convicts such a singular and unprecedented phenomenon as Expressionism of
being pseudo-revolutionary from the very beginning. It allows, indeed forces,
the Expressionists to figure as forerunners of the Nazis. [. . .]

[ . . . ] This is not the occasion for a detailed discussion of an issue so crucial
that only the most thorough analysis can do it justice: for it involves all the
problems of the dialectical-materialist theory of reflection (Abbildlehre). I will
make only one point. Lukacs's thought takes for granted a closed and integrated
reality that does indeed exclude the subjectivity of idealism, but not the seamless
'totality' which has always thriven best in idealist systems, including those of
classical German philosophy. Whether such a totality in fact constitutes reality,
is open to question. If it does, then Expressionist experiments with disruptive
and interpolative techniques are but an empty jeu d 'esprit, as are the more recent
experiments with montage and other devices of discontinuity. But what if
Lukacs's reality - a coherent, infinitely mediated totality - is not so objective
after all? What if his conception of reality has failed to liberate itself completely
from Classical systems? What if authentic reality is also discontinuity? Since
Lukacs operates with a closed, objectivistic conception of reality, when he comes
to examine Expressionism he resolutely rejects any attempt on the part of artists




IVd Modernism as Critique 525

to shatter any image of the world, even that of capitalism. Any art which strives
to exploit the real fissures in surface inter-relations and to discover the new in
their crevices, appears in his eyes merely as a wilful act of destruction. He
thereby equates experiment in demolition with a condition of decadence.

At this point, even his ingenuity finally flags. It is undoubtedly the case that
the Expressionists utilized, and even exacerbated, the decadence of late bourgeois
civilization. Lukacs resents their 'collusion in the ideological decay of the
imperialist bourgeoisie, without offering either criticism or resistance, acting
indeed on occasion as its vanguard'. But in the first place there is very little
truth in the crude idea of 'collusion'; Lukacs himself acknowledges that Ex-
pressionism 'was ideologically a not insignificant component of the anti-war
movement'. Secondly, so far as 'collusion' in an active sense goes, the actual
furtherance of cultural decline, one must ask: are there not dialectical links
between growth and decay? Are confusion, immaturity and incomprehensibility
always and in every case to be categorized as bourgeois decadence? Might they
not equally - in contrast with this simplistic and surely unrevolutionary view -
be part of the transition from the old world to the new? Or at least be part of
the struggle leading to that transition? This is an issue which can only be
resolved by concrete examination of the works themselves; it cannot be settled
by omniscient parti-pris judgements. So the Expressionists were the 'vanguard'
of decadence. Should they instead have aspired to play doctor at the sick-bed
of capitalism? Should they have tried to plaster over the surface of reality, in
the spirit, say, of the Neo-classicists or the representatives of Neo-objectivity
[Neue Sachlichkeit], instead of persisting in their efforts of demolition? [. . .]

[ . . . ] No-one maintains that Expressionism should be taken as a model or
regarded as a 'precursor'. But neither is there any justification for refurbishing
interest in Neo-classicism by renewing outmoded battles with an Expressionism
long since devalued. Even if an artistic movement is not a 'precursor' of
anything, it may for that very reason seem closer to young artists than [a
third-hand classicism which calls itself 'socialist realism' and is administered as
such. Superimposed on the architecture, painting and writing of the Revolution,
it is stifling them.] [. . .]

[ . . . ] There is surely no denying that formalism was the least of the defects
of Expressionist art (which must not be confused with Cubism). On the contrary,
it suffered far more from a neglect of form, from a plethora of expressions
crudely, wildly or chaotically ejaculated; its stigma was amorphousness. It more
than made up for this, however, by its closeness to the people, its use of folklore.
[. . .] It is enough, of course, that fake art [kitsch] is itself popular, in the bad
sense. The countryman in the 19th century exchanged his painted wardrobe for
a factory-made display cabinet, his old, brightly-painted glass for a coloured
print and thought himself at the height of fashion. But it is unlikely that anyone
will be misled into confusing these poisoned fruits of capitalism with genuine
expressions of the people; they can be shown to have flowered in a very different
soil, one with which they will disappear.

Neo-classicism is, however, by no means such a sure antidote to kitsch; nor
does it contain an authentically popular element. It is itself much too 'highbrow'



526 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

and the pedestal on which it stands renders it far too artificial. By contrast, as
we have already noted, the Expressionists really did go back to popular art,
loved and respected folklore - indeed, so far as painting was concerned, were
the first to discover it. [ . . . ] The heritage of Expressionism has not yet ceased
to exist, because we have not yet even started to consider it.



9 Andre Breton (1896-1966), Diego Rivera
(1886-1957) and Leon Trotsky (1879-1940)
'Towards a Free Revolutionary Art'

In 1936 the Moscow show trials served to dramatize Stalin's treatment of political
opponents and independent intellectuals. Two years later Breton visited Mexico on a
lecture tour. While there he was introduced to the exiled Trotsky by the painter Diego
Rivera. The present text was a product of this meeting, and of a shared perception of
the repressive nature of both Fascism and Stalinism. Although the effective authors
were Breton and Trotsky, it was considered expedient by Trotsky that Rivera's name
should be substituted for his own. Nothing came of the Independent Federation which
the manifesto announced. Within two years Paris had fallen to the Nazis and Trotsky
had been assassinated by a Stalinist agent. The present translation by Dwight Mac-
Donald was first published in Partisan Review, IV, no. 1, New York, Fall 1938, pp.
49-53, and immediately after in the London Bulletin, December 1938-January 1939.

We can say without exaggeration that never has civilization been menaced so
seriously as today. The Vandals, with instruments which were barbarous, and
so comparatively ineffective, blotted out the culture of antiquity in one corner
of Europe. But today we see world civilization, united in its historic destiny,
reeling under the blows of reactionary forces armed with the entire arsenal of
modern technology. We are by no means thinking only of the world war that
draws near. Even in times of 'peace' the position of art and science has become
absolutely intolerable.

Insofar as it originates with an individual, insofar as it brings into play-
subjective talents to create something which brings about an objective enriching
of culture, any philosophical, sociological, scientific or artistic discovery seems
to be the fruit of a precious chance, that is to say, the manifestation, more or
less spontaneous, of necessity. Such creations cannot be slighted, whether from
the standpoint of general knowledge (which interprets the existing world), or
of revolutionary knowledge (which, the better to change the world, requires an
exact analysis of the laws which govern its movement). Specifically, we cannot
remain indifferent to the intellectual conditions under which creative activity
takes place, nor should we fail to pay all respect to those particular laws which
govern intellectual creation.

In the contemporary world we must recognize the ever more widespread
destruction of those conditions under which intellectual creation is possible.
From this follows of necessity an increasingly manifest degradation not only of
the work of art but also of the specifically 'artistic' personality. The regime of




IVd Modernism as Critique 527

Hitler, now that it has rid Germany of all those artists whose work expressed
the slightest sympathy for liberty, however superficial, has reduced those who
still consent to take up pen or brush to the status of domestic servants of the
regime, whose task it is to glorify it on order, according to the worst possible
aesthetic conventions. If reports may be believed, it is the same in the Soviet
Union, where Thermidorian reaction is now reaching its climax.

It goes without saying that we do not identify ourselves with the currently
fashionable catchword: 'Neither fascism nor communism!' a shibboleth which
suits the temperament of the philistine, conservative and frightened, clinging to
the tattered remnants of the 'democratic' past. True art, which is not content
to play variations on ready-made models but rather insists on expressing the
inner needs of man and of mankind in its time - true art is unable not to be
revolutionary, not to aspire to a complete and radical reconstruction of society.
This it must do, were it only to deliver intellectual creation from the chains
which bind it, and to allow all mankind to raise itself to those heights which
only isolated geniuses have achieved in the past. We recognize that only the
social revolution can sweep clean the path for a new culture. If, however, we
reject all solidarity with the bureaucracy now in control of the Soviet Union,
it is precisely because, in our eyes, it represents, not communism, but its most
treacherous and dangerous enemy.

The totalitarian regime of the USSR, working through the so-called cultural
organizations it controls in other countries, has spread over the entire world a
deep twilight hostile to every sort of spiritual value. A twilight of filth and
blood in which, disguised as intellectuals and artists, those men steep themselves
who have made of servility a career, of lying for pay a custom, and of the
palliation of crime a source of pleasure. The official art of Stalinism mirrors
with a blatancy unexampled in history their efforts to put a good face on their
mercenary profession.

The repugnance which this shameful negation of principles of art inspires in
the artistic world - a negation which even slave states have never dared to carry
so far - should give rise to an active, uncompromising condemnation. The
opposition of writers and artists is one of the forces which can usefully contribute
to the discrediting and overthrow of regimes which are destroying, along with
the right of the proletarian to aspire to a better world, every sentiment of
nobility and even of human dignity.

The communist revolution is not afraid of art. It realizes that the role of the
artist in a decadent capitalist society is determined by the conflict between the
individual and various social forms which are hostile to him. This fact alone,
insofar as he is conscious of it, makes the artist the natural ally of revolution.
The process of sublimation, which here comes into play and which psychoanalysis
has analyzed, tries to restore the broken equilibrium between the integral 'ego'
and the outside elements it rejects. This restoration works to the advantage of
the 'ideal of self,' which marshals against the unbearable present reality all
those powers of the interior world, of the 'self,' which are common to all men
*nd which are constantly flowering and developing. The need for emancipation
felt by the individual spirit has only to follow its natural course to be led to



528 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

mingle its stream with this primeval necessity - the need for the emancipation
of man.

The conception of the writer's function which the young Marx worked out
is worth recalling. 'The writer,' he declared, 'naturally must make money i n
order to live and write, but he should not under any circumstances live and
write in order to make money. . . . The writer by no means looks on his work
as a means. It is an end in itself and so little a means in the eyes of himself and
of others that if necessary he sacrifices his existence to the existence of his
work. . . .The first condition of the freedom of the press is that it is not a business
activity" It is more than ever fitting to use this statement against those who
would regiment intellectual activity in the direction of ends foreign to itself,
and prescribe, in the guise of so-called reasons of state, the themes of art. The
free choice of these themes and the absence of all restrictions on the range of
his exploitations - these are possessions which the artist has a right to claim as
inalienable. In the realm of artistic creation, the imagination must escape from
all constraint and must under no pretext allow itself to be placed under bonds.
To those who urge us, whether for today or for tomorrow, to consent that art
should submit to a discipline which we hold to be radically incompatible with
its nature, we give a fiat refusal and we repeat our deliberate intention of
standing by the formula complete freedom for art.

We recognize, of course, that the revolutionary state has the right to defend
itself against the counterattack of the bourgeoisie, even when this drapes itself
in the flag of science or art. But there is an abyss between these enforced and
temporary measures of revolutionary self-defense and the pretension to lay
commands on intellectual creation. If, for the better development of the forces
of material production, the revolution must build a socialist regime with cen-
tralized control, to develop intellectual creation an anarchist regime of individual
liberty should from the first be established. No authority, no dictation, not the
least trace of orders from above! Only on a base of friendly cooperation, without
constraint from outside, will it be possible for scholars and artists to carry out
their tasks, which will be more far-reaching than ever before in history.

It should be clear by now that in defending freedom of thought we have no
intention of justifying political indifference, and that it is far from our wish to
revive a so-called pure art which generally serves the extremely impure ends of
reaction. No, our conception of the role of art is too high to refuse it an influence
on the fate of society. We believe that the supreme task of art in our epoch is
to take part actively and consciously in the preparation of the revolution. But
the artist cannot serve the struggle for freedom unless he subjectively assimilates
its social content, unless he feels in his very nerves its meaning and drama and
freely seeks to give his own inner world incarnation in his art.

In the present period of the death agony of capitalism, democratic as well as
fascist, the artist sees himself threatened with the loss of his right to live and
continue working. He sees all avenues of communication choked with the debris
of capitalist collapse. Only naturally, he turns to the Stalinist organizations which
hold out the possibility of escaping from his isolation. But if he is to avoid
complete demoralization, he cannot remain there, because of the impossibility





IVd Modernism as Critique 529

of delivering his own message and the degrading servility which these organiz-
ations exact from him in exchange for certain material advantages. He must
understand that his place is elsewhere, not among those who betray the cause
of the revolution and mankind, but among those who with unshaken fidelity
bear witness to the revolution, among those who, for this reason, are alone able
to bring it to fruition, and along with it the ultimate free expression of all forms
of human genius.

The aim of this appeal is to find a common ground on which may be reunited
all revolutionary writers and artists, the better to serve the revolution by their
art and to defend the liberty of that art itself against the usurpers of the
revolution. We believe that aesthetic, philosophical and political tendencies of
the most varied sort can find here a common ground. Marxists can march here
hand in hand with anarchists, provided both parties uncompromisingly reject
the reactionary police patrol spirit represented by Joseph Stalin and by his
henchman Garcia Oliver.

We know very well that thousands on thousands of isolated thinkers and
artists are today scattered throughout the world, their voices drowned out by
the loud choruses of well-disciplined liars. Hundreds of small local magazines
are trying to gather youthful forces about them, seeking new paths and not
subsidies. Every progressive tendency in art is destroyed by fascism as 'degener-
ate. 1 Every free creation is called 'fascist' by the Stalinists. Independent revol-
utionary art must now gather its forces for the struggle against reactionary-
persecution. It must proclaim aloud the right to exist. Such a union of forces
is the aim of the International Federation of Independent Revolutionary Art which
we believe it is now necessary to form.

We by no means insist on every idea put forth in this manifesto, which we
ourselves consider only a first step in the new direction. We urge every friend
and defender of art, who cannot but realize the necessity for this appeal, to
make himself heard at once. We address the same appeal to all those publications
of the left wing which are ready to participate in the creation of the International
Federation and to consider its task and its methods of action.

When a preliminary international contact has been established through the
press and by correspondence, we will proceed to the organization of local and
national congresses on a modest scale. The final step will be the assembly of a
world congress which will officially mark the foundation of the International
Federation.

Our aims:

The independence of art - for the revolution.

The revolution - for the complete liberation of art!



10 Clement Greenberg (b. 1909) 'Avant-Garde and
Kitsch 1

With this essay Greenberg imported some specific concerns of the German intellectual
Left into the American forum of the then Trotskyist Partisan Review, where a debate



530 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

about the political role of art and literature had been going on for the previous three
years/ (In particular, Greenberg's text shows signs of acquaintance with Bloch's 'Dis-
cussing Expressionism'.) His analysis of the avant-garde unites a social-historical form
of explanation with an interest in the qualitative distinctness of advanced art. In Green-
berg's 1939 formulation, the avant-garde is that historical agency which functions to
keep culture alive in the face of capitalism. (In a 1972 reprint of the article Greenberg
corrected his mistaken identification of Repin as a painter of pseudo-realistic battle
scenes.) First published in Partisan Review, VI, no. 5, New York, Fall 1939, pp. 34-49.

One and the same civilization produces simultaneously two such different things
as a poem by T. S. Eliot and a Tin Pan Alley song, or a painting by Braque
and a Saturday Evening Post cover. All four are on the order of culture, and
ostensibly, parts of the same culture and products of the same society. Here,
however, their connection seems to end. A poem by Eliot and a poem by Eddie
Guest - what perspective of culture is large enough to enable us to situate them
in an enlightening relation to each other? Does the fact that a disparity such as
this within the frame of a single cultural tradition, which is and has been taken
for granted - does this fact indicate that the disparity is a part of the natural
order of things? Or is it something entirely new, and particular to our age?

The answer involves more than an investigation in aesthetics. It appears to
me that it is necessary to examine more closely and with more originality than
hitherto the relationship between aesthetic experience as met by the specific -
not the generalized - individual, and the social and historical contexts in which
that experience takes place. What is brought to light will answer, in addition
to the question posed above, other and perhaps more important questions.



I

A society, as it becomes less and less able, in the course of its development, to
justify the inevitability of its particular forms, breaks up the accepted notions
upon which artists and writers must depend in large part for communication
with their audiences. It becomes difficult to assume anything. All the verities
involved by religion, authority, tradition, style, are thrown into question, and
the writer or artist is no longer able to estimate the response of his audience
to the symbols and references with which he works. In the past such a state of
affairs has usually resolved itself into a motionless Alexandrianism, an academ-
icism in which the really important issues are left untouched because they
involve controversy, and in which creative activity dwindles to virtuosity in the
small details of form, all larger questions being decided by the precedent of the
old masters. The same themes are mechanically varied in a hundred different
works, and yet nothing new is produced: Statius, mandarin verse, Roman
sculpture, Beaux-Arts painting, neo-republican architecture.

It is among the hopeful signs in the midst of the decay of our present society
that we - some of us - have been unwilling to accept this last phase for our
own culture. In seeking to go beyond Alexandrianism, a part of Western
bourgeois society has produced something unheard of heretofore: - avant-garde




IVd Modernism as Critique 531

culture. A superior consciousness of history - more precisely, the appearance
of a new kind of criticism of society, an historical criticism - made this possible.
This criticism has not confronted our present society with timeless Utopias, but
has soberly examined in the terms of history and of cause and effect the
antecedents, justifications and functions of the forms that lie at the heart of
every society. Thus our present bourgeois social order was shown to be, not an
eternal, 'natural' condition of life, but simply the latest term in a succession of
social orders. New perspectives of this kind, becoming a part of the advanced
intellectual conscience of the fifth and sixth decades of the nineteenth century,
soon were absorbed by artists and poets, even if unconsciously for the most
part. It was no accident, therefore that the birth of the avant-garde coincided
chronologically - and geographically, too - with the first bold development of
scientific revolutionary thought in Europe.

True, the first settlers of bohemia - which was then identical with the
avant-garde - turned out soon to be demonstratively uninterested in politics.
Nevertheless, without the circulation of revolutionary ideas in the air about
them, they would never have been able to isolate their concept of the 'bourgeois 1
in order to define what they were not. Nor, without the moral aid of revol-
utionary political attitudes would they have had the courage to assert themselves
as aggressively as they did against the prevailing standards of society. Courage
indeed was needed for this, because the avant-garde's emigration from bourgeois
society to bohemia meant also an emigration from the markets of capitalism,
upon which artists and writers had been thrown by the falling away of
aristocratic patronage. (Ostensibly, at least, it meant this - meant starving in a
garret - although, as we will be shown later, the avant-garde remained attached
to bourgeois society precisely because it needed its money.)

Yet it is true that once the avant-garde had succeeded in 'detaching' itself
from society, it proceeded to turn around and repudiate revolutionary as well
as bourgeois politics. The revolution was left inside society, a part of that welter
of ideological struggle which art and poetry find so unpropitious as soon as it
begins to involve those 'precious' axiomatic beliefs upon which culture thus far
has had to rest. Hence it developed that the true and most important function
of the avant-garde was not to 'experiment,' but to find a path along which it
would be possible to keep culture moving in the midst of ideological confusion
and violence. Retiring from public altogether, the avant-garde poet or artist
sought to maintain the high level of his art by both narrowing and raising it to
the expression of an absolute in which all relativities and contradictions would
be either resolved or beside the point. 'Art for art's sake' and 'pure poetry'
appear, and subject matter or content becomes something to be avoided like a
Plague.

It has been in search of the absolute that the avant-garde has arrived at
'abstract' or 'nonobjective' art - and poetry, too. The avant-garde poet or artist
tries in effect to imitate God by creating something valid solely on its own
terms, in the way nature itself is valid, in the way a landscape - not its picture
~* is aesthetically valid; something given, increate, independent of meanings,
similars or originals. Content is to be dissolved so completely into form that



532 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

the work of art or literature cannot be reduced in whole or in part to anything
not itself.

But the absolute is absolute, and the poet or artist, being what he is, cherishes
certain relative values more than others. The very values in the name of which
he invokes the absolute are relative values, the values of aesthetics. And so he
turns out to be imitating, not God - and here I use 'imitate' in its Aristotelian
sense - but the disciplines and processes of art and literature themselves. This
is the genesis of the 'abstract. 1 In turning his attention away from subject matter
of common experience, the poet or artist turns it in upon the medium of his
own craft. The nonrepresentational or 'abstract,' if it is to have aesthetic validity,
cannot be arbitrary and accidental, but must stem from obedience to some
worthy constraint or original. This constraint, once the world of common,
extroverted experience has been renounced, can only be found in the very
processes or disciplines by which art and literature have already imitated the
former. These themselves become the subject matter of art and literature. If,
to continue with Aristotle, all art and literature are imitation, then what we
have here is the imitation of imitating. To quote Yeats:

Nor is there singing school but studying
Monuments of its own magnificence.

Picasso, Braque, Mondrian, Miro, Kandinsky, Brancusi, even Klee, Matisse
and Cezanne derive their chief inspiration from the medium they work in. 1 The
excitement of their art seems to lie most of all in its pure preoccupation with
the invention and arrangement of spaces, surfaces, shapes, colors, etc., to the
exclusion of whatever is not necessarily implicated in these factors. The attention
of poets like Rimbaud, Mallarme, Valery, Eluard, Pound, Hart Crane, Stevens,
even Rilke and Yeats, appears to be centered on the effort to create poetry and
on the 'moments' themselves of poetic conversion, rather than on experience to
be converted into poetry. Of course, this cannot exclude other preoccupations
in their work, for poetry must deal with words, and words must communicate.
Certain poets, such as Mallarme and Valery, are more radical in this respect
than others - leaving aside those poets who have tried to compose poetry in
pure sound alone. However, if it were easier to define poetry, modern poetry
would be much more 'pure' and 'abstract.' As for the other fields of literature
- the definition of avant-garde aesthetics advanced here is no Procrustean bed.
But aside from the fact that most of our best contemporary novelists have gone
to school with the avant-garde, it is significant that Gide's most ambitious book
is a novel about the writing of a novel, and that Joyce's Ulysses and Finnegans
Wake seem to be, above all, as one French critic says, the reduction of experience
to expression for the sake of expression, the expression mattering more than
what is being expressed.

That avant-garde culture is the imitation of imitating - the fact itself - calls
for neither approval nor disapproval. It is true that this culture contains within
itself some of the very Alexandrianism it seeks to overcome. The lines quoted
from Yeats referred to Byzantium, which is very close to Alexandria; and in a
sense this imitation of imitating is a superior sort of Alexandrianism. But there




IVd Modernism as Critique 533

is one most important difference: the avant-garde moves, while Alexandrianism
stands still. And this, precisely, is what justifies the avant-garde's methods and
makes them necessary. The necessity lies in the fact that by no other means is
it possible today to create art and literature of a high order. To quarrel with
necessity by throwing about terms like 'formalism,' 'purism,' 'ivory tower' and
so forth is either dull or dishonest. This is not to say, however, that it is to
the social advantage of the avant-garde that it is what it is. Quite the opposite.

The avant-garde's specialization of itself, the fact that its best artists are
artists' artists, its best poets, poets' poets, has estranged a great many of those
who were capable formerly of enjoying and appreciating ambitious art and
literature, but who are now unwilling or unable to acquire an initiation into-
their craft secrets. The masses have always remained more or less indifferent
to culture in the process of development. But today such culture is being
abandoned by those to whom it actually belongs - our ruling class. For it is to
the latter that the avant-garde belongs. No culture can develop without a social
basis, without a source of stable income. And in the case of the avant-garde,
this was provided by an elite among the ruling class of that society from which
it assumed itself to be cut off, but to which it has always remained attached by
an umbilical cord of gold. The paradox is real. And now this elite is rapidly
shrinking. Since the avant-garde forms the only living culture we now have, the
survival in the near future of culture in general is thus threatened.

We must not be deceived by superficial phenomena and local successes.
Picasso's shows still draw crowds, and T. S. Eliot is taught in the universities;
the dealers in modernist art are still in business, and the publishers still publish
some 'difficult' poetry. But the avant-garde itself, already sensing the danger,
is becoming more and more timid every day that passes. Academicism and
commercialism are appearing in the strangest places. This can mean only one
thing: that the avant-garde is becoming unsure of the audience it depends on

- the rich and the cultivated.

Is it the nature itself of avant-garde culture that is alone responsible for the
danger it finds itself in? Or is that only a dangerous liability? Are there other,
and perhaps more important, factors involved?

II

Where there is an avant-garde, generally we also find a rearguard. True enough

- simultaneously with the entrance of the avant-garde, a second new cultural
phenomenon appeared in the industrial West: that thing to which the Germans
give the wonderful name of Kitsch: popular, commercial art and literature with
their chromeotypes, magazine covers, illustrations, ads, slick and pulp fiction,
comics, Tin Pan Alley music, tap dancing, Hollywood movies, etc., etc. For
some reason this gigantic apparition has always been taken for granted. It is
time we looked into its whys and wherefores.

Kitsch is a product of the industrial revolution which urbanized the masses
of Western Europe and America and established what is called universal
Hteracv.



534 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

Prior to this the only market for formal culture, as distinguished from folk
culture, had been among those who, in addition to being able to read and write,
could command the leisure and comfort that always goes hand in hand with
cultivation of some sort. This until then had been inextricably associated with
literacy. But with the introduction of universal literacy, the ability to read and
write became almost a minor skill like driving a car, and it no longer served to
distinguish an individual's cultural inclinations, since it was no longer the
exclusive concomitant of refined tastes.

The peasants who settled in the cities as proletariat and petty bourgeois
learned to read and write for the sake of efficiency, but they did not win the
leisure and comfort necessary for the enjoyment of the city's traditional culture.
Losing, nevertheless, their taste for the folk culture whose background was the
countryside, and discovering a new capacity for boredom at the same time, the
new urban masses set up a pressure on society to provide them with a kind of
culture fit for their own consumption. To fill the demand of the new market,
a new commodity was devised: ersatz culture, kitsch, destined for those who,
insensible to the values of genuine culture, are hungry nevertheless for the
diversion that only culture of some sort can provide.

Kitsch, using for raw material the debased and academicized simulacra of
genuine culture, welcomes and cultivates this insensibility. It is the source of
its profits. Kitsch is mechanical and operates by formulas. Kitsch is vicarious
experience and faked sensations. Kitsch changes according to style, but remains
always the same. Kitsch is the epitome of all that is spurious in the life of our
times. Kitsch pretends to demand nothing of its customers except their money
- not even their time. *

The precondition for kitsch, a condition without which kitsch would be
impossible, is the availability close at hand of a fully matured cultural tradition,
whose discoveries, acquisitions, and perfected self-consciousness kitsch can take
advantage of for its own ends. It borrows from it devices, tricks, stratagems,
rules of thumb, themes, converts them into a system, and discards the rest. It
draws its life blood, so to speak, from this reservoir of accumulated experience.
This is what is really meant when it is said that the popular art and literature
of today were once the daring, esoteric art and literature of yesterday. Of course,
no such thing is true. What is meant is that when enough time has elapsed the
new is looted for new 'twists/ which are then watered down and served up as
kitsch. Self-evidently, all kitsch is academic; and conversely, all that's academic
is kitsch. For what is called the academic as such no longer has an independent
existence, but has become the stuffed-shirt 'front' for kitsch. The methods of
industrialism displace the handicrafts.

Because it can be turned out mechanically, kitsch has become an integral part
of our productive system in a way in which true culture could never be, except
accidentally. It has been capitalized at a tremendous investment which must
show commensurate returns; it is compelled to extend as well as to k^ep its
markets. While it is essentially its own salesman, a great sales apparatus has
nevertheless been created for it, which brings pressure to bear on every member
of society. Traps are laid even in those areas, so to speak, that are the preserves



IVd Modernism as Critique 535

of genuine culture. It is not enough today, in a country like ours, to have an
inclination towards the latter; one must have a true passion for it that will give
him the power to resist the faked article that surrounds and presses in on him
from the moment he is old enough to look at the funny papers. Kitsch is
deceptive. It has many different levels, and some of them are high enough to
be dangerous to the naive seeker of true light. A magazine like the New Yorker,
which is fundamentally high-class kitsch for the luxury trade, converts and
waters down a great deal of avant-garde material for its own uses. Nor is every
single item of kitsch altogether worthless. Now and then it produces something
of merit, something that has an authentic folk flavor; and these accidental and
isolated instances have fooled people who should know better.

Kitsch's enormous profits are a source of temptation to the avant-garde itself,
and its members have not always resisted this temptation. Ambitious writers
and artists will modify their work under the pressure of kitsch, if they do not
succumb to it entirely. And then those puzzling borderline cases appear, such
as the popular novelist, Simenon, in France, and Steinbeck in this country. The
net result is always to the detriment of true culture in any case.

Kitsch has not been confined to the cities in which it was born, but has
flowed out over the countryside, wiping out folk culture. Nor has it shown any
regard for geographical and national-cultural boundaries. Another mass product
of Western industrialism, it has gone on a triumphal tour of the world, crowding
out and defacing native cultures in one colonial country after another, so that
it is now by way of becoming a universal culture, the first universal culture
ever beheld. Today the native of China, no less than the South American Indian,
the Hindu, no less than the Polynesian, have come to prefer to the products of
their native art, magazine covers, rotogravure sections and calendar girls. How
is this virulence of kitsch, this irresistible attractiveness, to be explained?
Naturally, machine-made kitsch can undersell the native handmade article, and
the prestige of the West also helps; but why is kitsch a so much more profitable
export article than Rembrandt? One, after all, can be reproduced as cheaply as
the other.

In his last article on the Soviet cinema in the Partisan Review, Dwight
Macdonald points out that kitsch has in the last ten years become the dominant
culture in Soviet Russia. For this he blames the political regime - not only for
the fact that kitsch is the official culture, but also that it is actually the dominant,
most popular culture, and he quotes the following from Kurt London's The
Seven Soviet Arts: "... the attitude of the masses both to the old and new art
styles probably remains essentially dependent on the nature of the education
afforded them by their respective states.' Macdonald goes on to say: 'W 7 hy after
all should ignorant peasants prefer Repin (a leading exponent of Russian
academic kitsch in painting) to Picasso, whose abstract technique is at least as
relevant to their own primitive folk art as is the former's realistic style? No, if
the masses crowd into the Tretyakov (Moscow's museum of contemporary-
Russian art: kitsch), it is largely because they have been conditioned to shun
"formalism' 1 and to admire "socialist realism." '

In the first place it is not a question of a choice between merely the old and



536 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

merely the new, as London seems to think - but of a choice between the bad,
up-to-date old and the genuinely new. The alternative to Picasso is not
Michelangelo, but kitsch. In the second place, neither in backward Russia nor
in the advanced West do the masses prefer kitsch simply because their govern-
ments condition them toward it. Where state educational systems take the
trouble to mention art, we are told to respect the old masters, not kitsch; and
yet we go and hang Maxfield Parrish or his equivalent on our walls, instead of
Rembrandt and Michelangelo. Moreover, as Macdonald himself points out,
around 1925 when the Soviet regime was encouraging avant-garde cinema, the
Russian masses continued to prefer Hollywood movies. No, 'conditioning' does
not explain the potency of kitsch.

All values are human values, relative values, in art as well as elsewhere. Yet
there does seem to have been more or less of a general agreement among the
cultivated of mankind over the ages as to what is good art and what bad. Taste
has varied, but not beyond certain limits; contemporary connoisseurs agree with
the eighteenth-century Japanese that Hokusai was one of the greatest artists of
his time; we even agree with the ancient Egyptians that Third and Fourth
Dynasty art was the most worthy of being selected as their paragon by those
who came after. We may have come to prefer Giotto to Raphael, but we still
do not deny that Raphael was one of the best painters of his time. There has
been an agreement then, and this agreement rests, I believe, on a fairly constant
distinction made between those values only to be found in art and the values
which can be found elsewhere. Kitsch, by virtue of a rationalized technique that
draws on science and industry, has erased this distinction in practice.

Let us see, for example, what happens when an ignorant Russian peasant sifch
as Macdonald mentions stands with hypothetical freedom of choice before two
paintings, one by Picasso, the other by Repin. In the first he sees, let us say,
a play of lines, colors and spaces that represent a woman. The abstract technique
- to accept Macdonald's supposition, which I am inclined to doubt - reminds
him somewhat of the icons he has left behind him in the village, and he feels
the attraction of the familiar. We will even suppose that he faintly surmises
some of the great art values the cultivated find in Picasso. He turns next to
Repin's picture and sees a battle scene. The technique is not so familiar - as
technique. But that weighs very little with the peasant, for he suddenly discovers
values in Repin's picture that seem far superior to the values he has been
accustomed to find in icon art; and the unfamiliar itself is one of the sources
of those values: the values of the vividly recognizable, the miraculous and the
sympathetic. In Repin's picture the peasant recognizes and sees things in the
way in which he recognizes and sees things outside of pictures - there is no
discontinuity between art and life, no need to accept a convention and say to
oneself, that icon represents Jesus because it intends to represent Jesus, even if
it does not remind me very much of a man. That Repin can paint so realistically
that identifications are self-evident immediately and without any effort on| the
part of the spectator - that is miraculous. The peasant is also pleased by the
wealth of self-evident meanings which he finds in the picture: 'it tells a stqry.'
Picasso and the icons are so austere and barren in comparison. What is more,




IVd Modernism as Critique 537

Repin heightens reality and makes it dramatic: sunset, exploding shells, running
and falling men. There is no longer any question of Picasso or icons. Repin is
what the peasant wants, and nothing else but Repin. It is lucky, however, for
Repin that the peasant is protected from the products of American capitalism,
for he would not stand a chance next to a Saturday Evening Post cover by
Gorman Rockwell.

Ultimately, it can be said that the cultivated spectator derives the same values
from Picasso that the peasant gets from Repin, since what the latter enjoys in
Repin is somehow r art too, on however low a scale, and he is sent to look at
pictures by the same instincts that send the cultivated spectator. JBut the ultimate
values w hich the cultivated spectator derives from Picasso are derived at a second
remove, as the result of reflection upon the immediate impression left by the
plastic values. It is only then that the recognizable, the miraculous and the
sympathetic enter. They are not immediately or externally present in Picasso's
painting, but must be projected into it by the spectator sensitive enough to
react sufficiently to plastic qualities. They belong to the 'reflected' effect. In
Repin, on the other hand, the 'reflected' effect has already been included in the
picture, ready for the spectator's unreflective enjoyment. Where Picasso paints
cause, Repin paints effect, Repin predigests art for the spectator and spares him
effort, provides him with a short cut to the pleasure of art that detours what
is necessarily difficult in genuine art. Repin, or kitsch, is synthetic art.

The same point can be made with respect to kitsch literature: it provides
vicarious experience for the insensitive with far greater immediacy than serious
fiction can hope to do. And Eddie Guest and the Indian Love Lyrics are more
poetic than T. S. Eliot and Shakespeare.

HI

If the avant-garde imitates the processes of art, kitsch, we now see, imitates its
effects. The neatness of this antithesis is more than contrived; it corresponds
to and defines the tremendous interval that separates from each other two such
simultaneous cultural phenomena as the avant-garde and kitsch. This interval,
too great to be closed by all the infinite gradations of popularized 'modernism'
and 'modernistic' kitsch, corresponds in turn to a social interval, a social interval
that has always existed in formal culture, as elsewhere in civilized society, and
whose two termini converge and diverge in fixed relation to the increasing or
decreasing stability of the given society. There has always been on one side the
minority of the powerful - and therefore the cultivated - and on the other the
great mass of the exploited and poor - and therefore the ignorant. Formal
culture has always belonged to the first, while the last have had to content
themselves with folk or rudimentary culture, or kitsch.

In a stable society that functions well enough to hold in solution the
contradictions between its classes, the cultural dichotomy becomes somewhat
blurred. The axioms of the few are shared by the many; the latter believe
*Uperstitiously what the former believe soberly. And at such moments in history
f he masses are able to feel wonder and admiration for the culture, on no matter



538 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

how high a plane, of its masters. This applies at least to plastic culture, which
is accessible to all.

In the Middle Ages the plastic artist paid lip service at least to the lowest
common denominators of experience. This even remained true to some extent
until the seventeenth century. There was available for imitation a universally
valid conceptual reality, whose order the artist could not tamper with. The
subject matter of art was prescribed by those who commissioned works of art,
which were not created, as in bourgeois society, on speculation. Precisely because
his content was determined in advance, the artist was free to concentrate on his
medium. He needed not to be philosopher, or visionary, but simply artificer.
As long as there was general agreement as to what were the worthiest subjects
for art, the artist was relieved of the necessity to be original and inventive in
his 'matter' and could devote all his energy to formal problems. For him the
medium became, privately, professionally, the content of his art, even as his
medium is today the public content of the abstract painter's art - with that
difference, however, that the medieval artist had to suppress his professional
preoccupation in public - had always to suppress and subordinate the personal
and professional in the finished, official work of art. If, as an ordinary member
of the Christian community, he felt some personal emotion about his subject matter,
this only contributed to the enrichment of the work's public meaning. Only with
the Renaissance do the inflections of the personal become legitimate, still to be
kept, however, within the limits of the simply and universally recognizable. And
only with Rembrandt do 'lonely' artists begin to appear, lonely in their art.

But even during the Renaissance, and as long as Western art was endeavoring
to perfect its technique, victories in this realm could only be signalized by
success in realistic imitation, since there was no other objective criterion at hand.
Thus the masses could still find in the art of their masters objects of admiration
and wonder. Even the bird that pecked at the fruit in Zeuxis' picture could applaud.

It is a platitude that art becomes caviar to the general when the reality it
imitates no longer corresponds even roughly to the reality recognized by the
general. Even then, however, the resentment the common man may feel is
silenced by the awe in which he stands of the patrons of this art. Only when
he becomes dissatisfied with the social order they administer does he begin to
criticize their culture. Then the plebian finds courage for the first time to voice
his opinions openly. Every man, from the Tammany alderman to the Austrian
house-painter, finds that he is entitled to his opinion. Most often this resentment
toward culture is to be found where the dissatisfaction with society is a
reactionary dissatisfaction which expresses itself in revivalism and puritanism,
and latest of all, in fascism. Here revolvers and torches begin to be mentioned
in the same breath as culture. In the name of godliness or the blood's health,
in the name of simple ways and solid virtues, the statue-smashing commences.

IV '

Returning to our Russian peasant for the moment, let us suppose that after he
has chosen Repin in preference to Picasso, the state's educational apparatus



IVd Modernism as Critique 539

comes along and tells him that he is wrong, that he should have chosen Picasso
^ and shows him why. It is quite possible for the Soviet state do do this. But
things being as they are in Russia - and everywhere else - the peasant soon
gnds the necessity of working hard all day for his living and the rude,
jincom fort able circumstances in which he lives do not allow him enough leisure,
energy and comfort to train for the enjoyment of Picasso. This needs, after all,
a considerable amount of 'conditioning.' Superior culture is one of the most
artificial of all human creations, and the peasant finds no 'natural' urgency
within himself that will drive him toward Picasso in spite of all difficulties. In
the end the peasant will go back to kitsch when he feels like looking at pictures,
for he can enjoy kitsch without effort. The state is helpless in this matter and
remains so as long as the problems of production have not been solved in a
socialist sense. The same holds true, of course, for capitalist countries and makes
all talk of art for the masses there nothing but demagogy. 2

Where today a political regime establishes an official cultural policy, it is for
the sake of demagogy. If kitsch is the official tendency of culture in Germany,
Italy and Russia, it is not because their respective governments are controlled
by philistines, but because kitsch is the culture of the masses in these countries,
as it is everywhere else. The encouragement of kitsch is merely another of the
inexpensive ways in which totalitarian regimes seek to ingratiate themselves with
their subjects. Since these regimes cannot raise the cultural level of the masses
- even if they wanted to - by anything short of a surrender to international
socialism, they will flatter the masses by bringing all culture down to their level.
It is for this reason that the avant-garde is outlawed, and not so much because
a superior culture is inherently a more critical culture. (Whether or not the
avant-garde could possibly flourish under a totalitarian regime is not pertinent
to the question at this point.) As a matter of fact, the main trouble with
avant-garde art and literature, from the point of view of fascists and Stalinists,
is not that they are too critical, but that they are too 'innocent, 1 that it is too
difficult to inject effective propaganda into them, that kitsch is more pliable to
this end. Kitsch keeps a dictator in closer contact with the 'soul' of the people.
Should the official culture be one superior to the general mass-level, there would
be a danger of isolation.

Nevertheless, if the masses were conceivably to ask for avant-garde art and
literature, Hitler, Mussolini and Stalin would not hesitate long in attempting
to satisfy such a demand. Hitler is a bitter enemy of the avant-garde, both on
doctrinal and personal grounds, yet this did not prevent Goebbels in 1932-1933
from strenuously courting avant-garde artists and writers. When Gottfried Benn,
an Expressionist poet, came over to the Nazis he was welcomed with a great
fanfare, although at that very moment Hitler was denouncing Expressionism as
Kulturbohchewismus. This was at a time when the Nazis felt that the prestige
which the avant-garde enjoyed among the cultivated German public could be
f advantage to them, and practical considerations of this nature, the Nazis
eing skillful politicians, have always taken precedence over Hitler's personal
inclinations. Later the Nazis realized that it was more practical to accede to the
wishes of the masses in matters of culture than to those of their paymasters;



540 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

the latter, when it came to a question of preserving power, were as willing t
sacrifice their culture as they were their moral principles; while the former
precisely because power was being withheld from them, had to be cozened in
every other way possible. It was necessary to promote on a much more grandiose
style than in the democracies the illusion that the masses actually rule. The
literature and art they enjoy and understand were to be proclaimed the only
true art and literature and any other kind was to be suppressed. Under these
circumstances people like Gottfried Benn, no matter how ardently they support
Hitler, become a liability; and we hear no more of them in Nazi Germany.

We can see then that although from one point of view the personal philistinism
of Hitler and Stalin is not accidental to the roles they play, from another point
of view it is only an incidentally contributory factor in determining the cultural
policies of their respective regimes. Their personal philistinism simply adds
brutality and double-darkness to policies they would be forced to support
anyhow by the pressure of all their other policies - even were they, personally,
devotees of avant-garde culture. What the acceptance of the isolation of the
Russian Revolution forces Stalin to do, Hitler is compelled to do by his
acceptance of the contradictions of capitalism and his efforts to freeze them. As
for Mussolini - his case is a perfect example of the disponibilite of a realist in
these matters. For years he bent a benevolent eye on the Futurists and built
modernistic railroad stations and government-owned apartment houses. One can
still see in the suburbs of Rome more modernistic apartments than almost
anywhere else in the world. Perhaps Fascism wanted to show its up-to-dateness,
to conceal the fact that it was a retrogression; perhaps it wanted to conform to
the tastes of the wealthy elite it served. At any rate Mussolini seems to have
realized lately that it would be more useful to him to please the cultural tastes
of the Italian masses than those of their masters. The masses must be provided
with objects of admiration and wonder; the latter can dispense with them. And
so we find Mussolini announcing a 'new Imperial style.' Marinetti, Chirico, et
at., are sent into the outer darkness, and the new railroad station in Rome will
not be modernistic. That Mussolini was late in coming to this only illustrates
again the relative hesitance with which Italian Fascism has drawn the necessary
implications of its role.

Capitalism in decline finds that whatever of quality it is still capable of
producing becomes almost invariably a threat to its own existence. Advances in
culture, no less than advances in science and industry, corrode the very society
under whose aegis they are made possible. Here, as in every other question
today, it becomes necessary to quote Marx word for word. Today we no longelr
look toward socialism for a new culture - as inevitably as one will appear, once
we do have socialism. Todays we look to ^socialism simply for the preservation
of whatever living culture we have right now .

/

I owe this formulation to a remark made by Hans Hofmann, the art teacher, in one of his lectures.
From the point of view of this formulation, Surrealism in plastic art is a reactionary tendency
which is attempting to restore 'outside' subject matter. The chief concern of a painter like Dah
is to represent the processes and concepts of his consciousness, not the processes of his medium-




IVd Modernism as Critique 541

2 It will be objected that such art for the masses as folk art was developed under rudimentary
conditions of production - and that a good deal of folk art is on a high level. Yes it is - but
folk art is not Athene, and it's Athene whom we want: formal culture with its infinity of aspects,
its luxuriance, its large comprehension. Besides, we are now told that most of what we consider
good in folk culture is the static survival of dead formal, aristocratic, cultures. Our old English
ballads, for instance, were not created by the 'folk,' but by the post-feudal squirearchy of the
English countryside, to survive in the mouths of the folk long after those for whom the ballads
were composed had gone on to other forms of literature. Unfortunately, until the machine age,
culture was the exclusive prerogative of a society that lived by the labor of serfs or slaves. They
were the real symbols of culture. For one man to spend time and energy creating or listening to
poetry meant that another man had to produce enough to keep himself alive and the former in
comfort. In Africa today we find that the culture of slave-owning tribes is generally much superior
to that of the tribes that possess no slaves.



11 Harold Rosenberg (1906-1978) 'The Fall of Paris'

Poet and art critic, Rosenberg here celebrates the international character of Modernism
and of Paris as its early twentieth-century capital. He is also concerned, however, to
point to the manifest vulnerability of a merely cultural Modernism in face of the actual
political divisions of the modern world. His conclusion anticipates the establishment of
New York as the new metropolitan centre of Modernist culture during the 1940s. First
published in Partisan Review in 1940. Slightly revised text printed in Harold Rosenberg,
Tradition of the New, London and New York, 1962, pp. 209-20, from which the present
version is taken.



The Style of Today

The laboratory of the twentieth century has been shut down. Let us admit,
though, the rapping of the soldier's fist did not interrupt the creation of fresh
wonders. For more than a decade there had been a steady deflation of that
intellectual exuberance which had sent out over the earth the waves of cubism,
futurism, vorticism - and later, dadaism, the Russian Ballet, surrealism. Yet up
to the day of the occupation, Paris had been the Holy Place of our time. The
only one. Not because of its affirmative genius alone, but perhaps, on the
contrary, through its passivity, which allowed it to be possessed by the searchers
of every nation. By Picasso and Juan Gris, Spaniards; by Modigliani, Boccioni
and Severini, Italians; by Brancusi, Roumanian; by Joyce, Irishman; by Mon-
drian, Dutchman; by Lipchitz, Polish Lithuanian; by Archipenko, Kandinsky,
Diaghilev, Larionov, Russians; by Calder, Pound, Gertrude Stein, Man Ray,
Americans; by Kupka, Czechoslovak; Lehmbruck and Max Ernst, Germans; by
Wyndham Lewis and T. E. Hulme, Englishmen ... by all artists, students,
refugees.

The hospitality of this cultural Klondike might be explained as the result of
a tense balance of historical forces, preventing any one class from imposing
upon the city its own restricted forms and aims. Here life seemed to be forever
straining towards a new quality. Since it might be the sign of what was to come,
each fresh gesture took on an immediate importance. Twentieth-century Paris



542 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

was to the intellectual pioneer what nineteenth-century America had been to
the economic one. Here, the world beat a pathway to the door of the inventor
- not of mouse traps but of perspectives.

Thus Paris was the only spot where necessary blendings could be made and
mellowed, where it was possible to shake up such 'modern' doses as Viennese
psychology, African sculpture, American detective stones, Russian music, neo-
Catholicism, German technique, Italian desperation.

Paris represented the International of culture. To it, the city contributed
something of its own physiognomy, a pleasant gift of sidewalk cafes, evening
streets, shop signs, postmen's uniforms, argot, discursive female janitors. But
despite this surface local color, twentieth-century art in Paris was not Parisian;
in many ways it was more suited to New York or Shanghai than to this city
of eighteenth-century parks and alleys. What was done in Paris demonstrated
clearly and for all time that such a thing as international culture could exist.
Moreover, that this culture had a definite style: the Modern.

A whole epoch in the history of art had come into being without regard to
national values. The significance of this fact is just now becoming apparent.
Ten years ago, no one would have questioned the possibility of a communication
above the national, nor consequently, of the presence of above-national elements
even in the most national of art forms. Today, however, 'sanity movements'
everywhere are striving to line up art at the chauvinist soup kitchens. And to
accomplish this, they attack the value and even the reality of Modernism and 'the
Paris style.' National life alone is put forward as the source of all inspiration. But
the Modern in literature, painting, architecture, drama, design, remains, in defiance
of government bureaus or patriotic streetcleaners, as solid evidence that a creative
communion sweeping across all boundaries is not out of the reach of our time.

In all his acts contemporary man seems narrow and poor. Yet there are moments
when he seems to leap towards the marvellous in ways more varied and
whole-hearted than any of the generations of the past. In the 'School of Paris,'
belonging to no one country, but world-wide and world-timed and pertinent
everywhere, the mind of the twentieth century projected itself into possibilities
that will occupy mankind during many cycles of social adventure to come.
Released in this aged and bottomless metropolis from national folklore, national
politics, national careers; detached from the family and the corporate taste; the
lone individual, stripped, yet supported on every side by the vitality of other
outcasts with whom it was necessary to form no permanent ties, could experi-
ment with everything that man today has within him of health or monstrousness:
with pure intellect, revelling in the tension of a perfectly adjusted line; with
the ferocious trance of the unmotivated act; with the quiverings of mood and
memory left by unmixed paints; with arbitrary disciplines and the catharsis they
produce; with the nonsense of the street and the classics; with the moody pulps
and absolute lyrics of paranoiac dreams. [. . .]

True, the Paris Modern did not represent all the claims of present-day life.
Any more than its 'Internationalism' meant the actual getting together of the



IVd Modernism as Critique 543

peoples of different countries. It was an inverted mental image, this Modern,
with all the transitoriness and freedom from necessity of imagined things. A
dream living-in-the-present and a dream world citizenship - resting not upon
a real triumph, but upon a willingness to go as far as was necessary into
nothingness in order to shake off what was dead in the real. A negation of the
negative.

Perhaps the wrenching of Western culture that had produced this style had
been too severe, resulting in a kind of 'Leftism' in the field of thought, an
over-defiance of the powers of the past. Science and philosophy had crossed
national boundaries in earlier centuries; abstract ideas had shown that they could
drop from the skies without regard to time or place; but life itself, manners,
ways of speaking, of acting, of composing images, of planning the future, had
always been imprisoned by the gravitation of the community site, where the
grip of the dead was most unrelaxing. . . .

Then, suddenly, almost in the span of a single generation, everything buried
underground had been brought to the surface. The perspective of the immediate
had been established - or rather, a multiple perspective, in which time no longer
reared up like a gravestone or flourished like a tree but threw up a shower of
wonders at the will of the onlooker.

The urge toward a free life, in a society that every year tangled him deeper
and deeper in the web of the systematic, had carried the individual too far.

So the Modern became, not a progressive historical movement, striving to
bury the dead deeper, but a new sentiment of eternity and of eternal life. The
cultures of the jungle, the cave, the northern ice fields, of Egypt, primitive
Greece, antique China, medieval Europe, industrial America - all were given
equal due.

Strange vision of an eternity that consists of sheets of time and space picked
from history like cards from a pack and constantly shuffled, arranged, scattered,
regrouped, rubbed smooth, re-faced, spread in design, brushed off to the floor.
An absolute of the relative, to be re-created in compositions of bits of newspaper,
horse-hair, classic prints, the buttocks of a South Sea Islander, petroglyphs,
arbitrary shapes suggested by the intoxication of the moment.

Thus the Paris Modern, resting on the deeply felt assumption that history
could be entirely controlled by the mind, produced a No-Time, and the Paris
'International' a No-Place. And this is as far as mankind has gone toward freeing
itself from its past. [ . . . ]

But note: processes less spectacular than those of the Paris studios had also
been steadily loosening the cultural reefs of the past. Paris has been synonymous
with Modernism in the sense of the special style and tempo of our consciousness.
But it is a mistake to see this city also as central to the modern in the larger
sense, the sense in which we think of the contemporary as beginning in 1789.
This larger and more fundamental span has not belonged to Paris alone. It has
embraced equally the United States, South America, industrial and revolutionary
China, Japan, Russia, the whole of Europe, every spot in the world touched by
contemporary civilization. Despite the fall of Paris, the social, economic, and
cultural workings which define the modern epoch are active everywhere. Even



544 Freedom, Responsibility and Power

the style has not vanished with the elimination of its capital: having been driven
from the realm of art, it now reappears in new military and propaganda
techniques. If there is a break between our lives and the kind of life existing
before 1789, the current debasement of the Paris of the past 150 years does not
imply a break of similar magnitude with the future. The world take its shape
from the modern, with consciousness or without it.



The Intellectual Form of Defeat

The cultural International had a capital: Paris. In the 1920s the political
International, too, had a capital: Moscow. It is a tragic irony of our epoch that
these world centers were not brought together until the signing of the Franco-
Soviet pact, when both were already dead. Then the two cadavers of hope
embraced farcically, with mutual suspicion and under the mutually exclusive
provincial slogans: DEFENSE OF THE USSR and FRANCE FOR FRENCHMEN.

The intellectuals turned out in full dress - the 'proletarians,' of course, with
red rosettes and suggestive smirks - to the wedding of their pair of radical
ghosts. And offered themselves as anxious godfathers to its earthly issue, the
Popular Front. From that time on it became bad luck even to recall the graves
of international culture and international socialism.
# * *

A few courageous men - Gide, Breton, Victor Serge, a few others - strove
to uphold the tradition of French criticism. But what 'higher need' had paralyzed
the conscience of non-conformist Paris?

The higher need was Antifascism. [. . .]
[. . .] Wearing armbands supplied by Moscow, the Paris Left adopted the
style of the conventional, the sententious, the undaring, the morally lax - in
the name of social duty and the 'Defense of Culture.' Feasible Fronts were
formed in which all the participants were forced to give up their power of action
- perhaps a profound desire for this renunciation was the main reason for the
coalitions.

Antifascist unity became everything; programs, insight, spirit, truth, nothing.

[ . . . ] To defend Paris, men and slogans long discredited were restored to
power. The Communists claimed the 'Marseillaise' as their own and former
surrealist poets acclaimed Romain Rolland.

In this milieu, inquiry soon became not merely a matter of taste but of bad
taste. Another blow by Fascist radicalism and it became treachery.

Meanwhile, modern formulae perfected both by Paris and Moscow in the
hour of their inspiration, and now discarded, had been eagerly seized upon by
Germany and adapted to its peculiar aims. In that country politics became a
'pure (i.e., inhuman)' art, independent of everything but the laws of its medium.
The subject matter of this "avant-garde" politics was, like that of earlier art
movements of Paris, the weakness, meanness, incoherence and intoxication of
modern man. Against this advanced technique, which in itself has nothing to do
with revolutionary change, the Paris of Popular Front compromise was helpless.



nP;- '



IVd Modernism as Critique 545

* * *

So that, at last, when the crisis is ripe, a fast-moving explosive force finds
nothing in its path but a pile of decomposed scrapings.

The Academy had failed to halt modern art, and Fascism was not to be
stopped by cliches.

In the Fascist political and military adventures, modernist mysticism, dream-
ing of an absolute power to rearrange life according to any pattern of its choice,
submits itself to trial. Against this experiment is opposed, not conservation, but
other forms of contemporary consciousness, another Modernism.

No one can predict the center of this new phase. For it is not by its own
genius alone that a capital of culture arises. Current flowing throughout the
world lifted Paris above the countryside that surrounds it and kept it suspended
like a magic island. And its decline, too, was the result not of some inner
weakness - not of 'sensuality' or 'softness,' as its former friends and present
enemies declare - but of a general ebb. For a decade, the whole of civilization
has been sinking down, lowering Paris steadily towards the soil of France. Until
its restoration as the capital of a nation was completed by the tanks of the
Germans.



Part V

The Individual and the
Social



k



v

Introduction



The Third Reich was intended to last for a thousand years. The fact that it
failed to achieve that goal was the result of massive collective effort and sacrifice.
Forces were unleashed which even a few decades previously would have been
beyond the powers of imagination. The capacity for human cruelty has doubtless
remained relatively constant. But its exercise on an industrial scale has been a
twentieth-century prerogative. When we talk of art being required to express,
or represent, the modern condition, we do well to remember what is being asked
of it.

One direct consequence of the gathering of those forces which precipitated a
Second World War was the destruction of the greater part of the avant-garde's
social basis in Western Europe. Refugees from the dictatorships had made their
way to Paris in the 1930s. Some had proceeded to London. Now, with the fall
of Paris, for many radical artists and intellectuals that journey continued across
the Atlantic. The physical presence of so many major avant-garde artists in New
York was a contributory factor in the emergence of an indigenous American
artistic avant-garde. To say that this new avant-garde transcended European
precedent is not of course to say that it did not depart from European examples.
It is, however, to say that something significantly new and un-European was
made of them. Some aspects of the European constellation were built upon,
while others were discarded. For reasons which were undoubtedly connected to
the wider exercise of American power, American artists seem to have been
emboldened to take what they needed in order to make an adequately modern
art which they felt appropriate to their own conditions (Va9). And yet as the
American experience itself became quintessentially 'modern', the art that re-
sulted had few of the trappings of the narrowly national and was able to aspire,
both with some success and some legitimacy, to international standing. The
relations of the provincial and the cosmopolitan are clearly fraught, and their
resolution will be bound up with social and political priorities, not least in
respect of the implication of the aesthetic in the social. Be that as it may, such
a perception seems to have animated the ambition of the artists themselves (see
VA2 and 12).

From the perspective of the Americans, the least useful aspect of the European
avant-garde seems to have been its commitment to Utopian rationalism. Ameri-
cans appear to have had little time for that European idealism which had proved



550 The Individual and the Social

so singularly inadequate to the challenge of Fascism, or for the geometric
abstraction in which such rationalism characteristically issued. They remained
interested in the Cubism from which that art was technically descended; but
principally, it seems, as a constraint which needed to be loosened. The problem
of how to achieve this was more than a simply technical matter. In so far as
painting had a form of philosophical credibility, it was largely secured by Cubism.

In the prevailing conditions, the upshot was that once again Expressionism
beckoned. The impulse to expression seems to have become muted, or even
conventionalized, in the European avant-garde, at least since the defeat of the
German revolution. It subsided as it were into the middle ground of the Modern
Movement, while the leading edge of avant-garde practice was formed by
abstraction on the one hand and on the other by the Surrealist preoccupation
with the automatic transcription of the unconscious. Yet as the events of history
had once again become so overwhelming, and the force of state control so total
(due to the prosecution of the war in the democracies as well as in the
dictatorships), avant-garde artists appear once again to have been thrust back
into themselves. At its most basic, this internal exile was a way of avoiding
subservience to, and of maintaining some independence from, the dominant
culture. An additional factor here was that the avenue of collective redress, that
is to say, the socialist tradition, was also widely identified as form of closure,
both in its major political and artistic forms - respectively Soviet Communism
and Socialist Realism. It appeared that sceptical artists had few places left to
go. On their own testimony they were driven into themselves (see Va4 and 10),

On this trek out of an unbearable history, the artist's companion was myth
(see Va3 and 7). In fact the inner and the mythical were made to coincide as
expressive resources with which to face a modern world otherwise beyond
description. As they had to a previous generation overwhelmed by the force of
the modern world, the archaic and the unconscious offered themselves as
lifeboats for the avant-garde. Within the European tradition Surrealism fur-
nished the principal reference for both. Breton had articulated Freud's theories
of dreams and the unconscious to Marx's programme of collective social
emancipation. American artists seem to have been less concerned to change
history than to survive it. Perhaps for this reason it was Jung's theory of the
unconscious, with its emphasis on the primitive and on shared archetypes deeply
embedded in the human psyche, that proved most congenial to Pollock and
other artists.

In their drive towards this supposed bedrock of experience American artists
forced through an emphatic conjunction between expression and abstraction.
Abstraction was definitively prised apart from its association with a dubious
social utopianism and rendered newly vigorous through its connection to a robust
and hard-won sense of self (Va12). Art, as Clyfford Still put it, became 'an
unqualified act' (Va13 and 15). Without exception, those American artists who
attempted to articulate their project at this time spoke of myth and transcend-
ence, the roots of art in the unconscious, and of art itself as a solitary act; in
the same breath they would characteristically speak of the hostility of the* age,
and the traps of any sense of community and security. Something else they



V Introduction 551

shared, something subsequently often overlooked in attacks upon American
Modernism, was a refusal of the journalistic distinction between representational
and abstract art. For them, their archetypal, myth-based abstraction stood or
fell according to its content. They saw their work as representative of a true
response, in an age so hostile as to disqualify conventional depiction. The works
themselves were held to embody moods and emotions, and through the achieve-
ment of independence from traditional constraints of depiction, to have acceded
to something very like human character. There is of course no small irony in
the fact that the most adventurous art produced by artists living in the most
technically sophisticated nation on earth should consist in a kind of homage to
primitive people and a refusal of the operations of the conscious mind. None-
theless, in Gottlieb's words, such work was the only valid response to 'the
neurosis which is our reality'. As such, it was not abstraction at all, but 'the
realism of our time' (Va5).

The experience of 'neurosis' in the face of the Holocaust and the atom bomb
was not of course peculiar to Americans. In fact whereas American artists had
at least been physically protected from the effects of Nazism, Paris, hitherto
the centre of avant-garde culture, had been an occupied city. After the war,
belief in human goodness was no doubt subject to at least as great a strain there
as it was in New York.

Art in Paris accordingly shares many properties with the work of the new-
American avant-garde, particularly in respect of an informal, 'expressive' paint
application and an evocation of the primitive. It is hard, however, to escape a
sense that it remains more circumscribed by tradition than its transatlantic
counterpart. Two main factors qualify the post-war European experience. First,
the European Left was strong, especially the Communist Party, its prestige
enhanced by the leading role it had played in the Resistance (Vc5 and 13).
There was no comparable pole of attraction in Cold War America. Second,
whereas America was now rich, richer by far than in the Depression years of
the 1930s, Europe was devastated.

One result of this combination of circumstances was that whereas in America
individualism rapidly tended towards a form of depoliticization, in Europe it
remained part of a determinedly anti-bourgeois stance. The angst which was for
so long a feature of the European post-war condition had less to breed on in
the United States. The complex interface between this anti-bourgeois individ-
ualism on the one hand and Communism on the other was largely absent in
America, the more so following the systematic delegitimization of the left during
the McCarthy years. Before the war, sections of the emergent avant-garde had
been informed by left-wing anti-Stalinism in its anarchist or Trotskyist form.
As the Cold War was launched in the post-war world it proved a small step
from anti-Stalinism to a generalized anti-Communism in which the distinct
features of former positions were lost to view. No doubt American avant-garde
artists remained individually distanced from the dominant values of an increas-
J ngly consumer-oriented capitalism. That, in a way, was the point: individualism
was the ideology of that culture. In Europe, individualism retained a philo-
sophical and political thrust which rendered it still largely oppositional: to



Jfc



552 The Individual and the Social

bourgeois values on the one side and no less to the dogma of Socialist Realism
on the other; but also, in addition to these, to the increasing pace of Ameri-
canization. The Marshall Plan brought more than food, machines and money
to Europe: it also brought values. And while these proved enormously attractive
in terms of popular culture, there was apprehension in the avant-garde, and
particularly in left-wing circles, over what was perceived as the philistinism and
conformity of American life.

Jean-Paul Sartre made an ambitious attempt to open a dialogue between
Existentialism, predicated upon the individual exercise of free will, and the
Communist Party ideology of 'humanism' (VBl). Yet for all his efforts the
Communists' somewhat manufactured optimism stood in stark contrast to a mood
of uncertainty and despair (see Vb4, 6 and 9). The characteristic avant-garde
emphasis upon the primitive, the direct and the unschooled was given sharp
focus in the French situation by Dubuffet's 'Art Brut'. This was initially a form
of celebration of the vitality and truth to be found in graffiti, in the art of
children and of the insane. In turn, Dubuffet and others pursued this vitality
and authenticity in their own art. The implication of this work was that the
human and the civilized were at opposite poles - a conclusion which must have
seemed to be supported by the experience of the war.

The legacy of Surrealism retained in Europe a diversity not so apparent in
America. Antonin Artaud mingled his Surrealist origins with the signs of his
own instability in a form of single-handed resistance to a world perceived as
insane (Vb 4). The psychoanalyst Jacques Lacan mediated the Freudian theory
of the unconscious through his pre-war involvement with the Surrealist group
to produce an account of the development of the human individual which
considerably privileged the act of looking (Vb7): few ideas have proved more
fruitful for later representations of human subjectivity than his 'mirror phase'.
The political aspect of Surrealism survived in the group Cobra, not least as a
form of left-wing resistance to orthodox Communism and to its rigid doctrine
of Realism in the arts (see Vb8 and Veil and 12).

Whatever happened in the United States, much European art still remained
provincial with respect to France. In some places the mood of isolation and loss
persisted well after the overcoming of those socio-economic conditions which
had initially fuelled it (VB12 and 13). Post-war angst, it seems, was capable of
hardening into a rhetoric of the human condition per se. Whereas for Sartre,
Existentialism led to the Left, for many others the prospect of a Left dominated
by Soviet Communism led to the rejection of all explicitly political alignment
(see VBlO). For Europeans as for American Abstract Expressionists, however,
such resolute individualism proved susceptible to manipulation by Cold War
strategists. Individualism was made to signify more powerfully as a pawn in the
ideological struggle with 'totalitarianism' than in terms of the freedom of the
individual within the emergent post-war commodity-capitalisms of the West. As
a result much of its libertarian force was weakened, and the organized I^eft
remained suspicious of many of the forms taken by avant-garde art.

In brief, individualism was a social ideology. This is not to say that certain
freedoms were not real. But at the same time, whose freedom, and in what it



V Introduction 553

was held to consist, let alone where its limits lay, were questions which the
broader ideological conflicts of the time often simply subsumed. Predictably,
the practice of art provided a sphere where these alternatives could clash. Equally
predictably, these clashes were for the most part conducted from behind the
ramparts of ideological certitude. The division of the world into two competing
superpower blocs produced a mutually hostile political rhetoric between the two
leaderships. It was a telling irony that they shared the same conservative tastes
in art (Vc9 and 14). In the debate about the social place of art, the possibility
of complexity lay elsewhere.

The centre ground was appropriated by liberal democracy. On the one side
distinct from conservatism, on the other from a conveniently over-simplified
'totalitarianism', liberalism set the characteristic tone (see Vcl5, 16, 18 and 19).
More tensioned positions were possible, however. As remarked above, there
remained islands of the anti-Stalinist Left (see Veil and 12); a position which
was not entirely snuffed out even in America (Va14 and VClO). In somewhat
more orthodox but ultimately no more secure vein, both Picasso and Leger
joined the ranks of the French Communist Party. There were no more auth-
oritative figures in the avant-garde tradition, but from the point of view of the
Party their work remained a scandalous deviation from the 'Realism' which it
was held to be the business of Communists to propagate (see VC5-7 and 13).
Conversely David Siqueiros used his prestige to warn Soviet artists of the
ossification of Socialist Realism - the prestige of a Communist artist of long
standing who had even been implicated in an assassination attempt upon
Trotsky. One of the most powerful criticisms of Modernism in the arts was
made by the philosopher-critic Georg Lukacs. He also steered a course away
from dogmatic Socialist Realism, in an argument tellingly framed at the moment
when Hungary attempted to break from Russian domination (Vc21).

Artistic debate was many-sided in the decade or so after the end of the Second
World War. Among those who encountered the new American art in Europe in
the 1950s few doubted that it had established the paradigm for ambitious work
in the immediate future. On the other hand, its aesthetic prominence appeared
to have been bought at a high cost: the cost of abandoning many of the
commitments which had made the European avant-garde a powerful social force
since its inception in the nineteenth century. Many have lamented that the
European and American avant-gardes - which they see as far from distinct,
technically or philosophically - were not brought into dialogue, so that the more
complex political radicalism of the former might have come to fertilize the latter.
The challenging, even disturbing possibility, however, is that it was its very
refusal to become embroiled in the morass of post-war European debate that
enabled American art to achieve what it did, and to achieve it as art.



;







Va

The American Avant-Garde



Clement Greenberg (b.
Laocoon'



1909) 'Towards a Newer



The title refers both to Gotthold Lessing's Laocoon: An Essay upon the Limits of Poetry
and Painting, of 1766, and to Irving Babbitt's The New iaokoon: An Essay on the
Confusion of the Arts, of 1910. Greenberg thus clearly signals his concern with a
longstanding question in aesthetics: is the existence of limits serving to distinguish
between the various arts also a condition of the possibility of value within them?
According to Greenberg's argument, it is a historical characteristic of the modern arts
that each has had to define itself in terms of the limitations of its proper medium. At
a time when vociferous claims were being made for the 'Realism' of various forms of
figurative art, his aim was at one and the same time to establish the quality of certain
abstract art and to justify abstraction as the fulfilment of an inexorable historical
tendency. (The issues here raised by Greenberg were to be revived and reformulated
twenty-seven years later by Michael Fried in his 'Art and Objecthood', VIIa6.) Originally
published in Partisan Review, VII, no. 4, New York, July-August 1940, pp. 296-310.

The dogmatism and intransigence of the 'non-objective' or 'abstract' purists of
painting today cannot be dismissed as symptoms merely of a cultist attitude
towards art. Purists make extravagant claims for art, because usually they value
it much more than any one else does. For the same reason they are much more
solicitous about it. A great deal of purism is the translation of an extreme
solicitude, an anxiousness as to the fate of art, a concern for its identity. We
must respect this. When the purist insists upon excluding 'literature' and subject
matter from plastic art, now and in the future, the most we can charge him
with off-hand is an unhistorical attitude. It is quite easy to show that abstract
art like every other cultural phenomenon reflects the social and other circum-
stances of the age in which its creators live, and that there is nothing inside
art itself, disconnected from history, which compels it to go in one direction
or another. But it is not so easy to reject the purist's assertion that the best of
contemporary plastic art is abstract. Here the purist does not have to support
his position with metaphysical pretentions. And when he insists on doing so,
those of us who admit the merits of abstract art without accepting its claims in
full must offer our own explanation for its present supremacy.



Va The American Avant-Garde 555

Discussion as to purity in art and, bound up with it, the attempts to establish
the differences between the various arts are not idle. There has been, is, and
will be, such a thing as a confusion of the arts. From the point of view of the
artist engrossed in the problems of his medium and indifferent to the efforts
of theorists to explain abstract art completely, purism is the terminus of a salutary
reaction against the mistakes of painting and sculpture in the past several
centuries which were due to such a confusion.

I

There can be, I believe, such a thing as a dominant art form; this was what
literature had become in Europe by the 17th century. [. . .]

Now, when it happens that a single art is given the dominant role, it becomes
the prototype of all art: the others try to shed their proper characters and imitate
its effects. The dominant art in turn tries itself to absorb the functions of the
others. A confusion of the arts results, by which the subservient ones are
perverted and distorted; they are forced to deny their own nature in an effort
to attain the effects of the dominant art. However, the subservient arts can only
be mishandled in this way when they have reached such a degree of technical
facility as to enable them to pretend to conceal their mediums. In other words,
the artist must have gained such power over his material as to annihilate it
seemingly in favor of illusion. Music was saved from the fate of the pictorial
arts in the 17th and 18th centuries by its comparatively rudimentary technique
and the relative shortness of its development as a formal art. Aside from the
fact that in its nature it is the art furthest removed from imitation, the
possibilities of music had not been explored sufficiently to enable it to strive
for illusionist effects.

But painting and sculpture, the arts of illusion par excellence, had by that
time achieved such facility as to make them infinitely susceptible to the
temptation to emulate the effects, not only of illusion, but of other arts. Not
only could painting imitate sculpture, and sculpture, painting, but both could
attempt to reproduce the effects of literature. And it was for the effects of
literature that 17th and 18th century painting strained most of all. Literature,
for a number of reasons, had won the upper hand, and the plastic arts -
especially in the form of easel painting and statuary - tried to win admission
to its domain. Although this does not account completely for the decline of
those arts during this period, it seems to have been the form of that decline.
Decline it was, compared to what had taken place in Italy, Flanders, Spain and
Germany the century before. Good artists, it is true, continue to appear - I do
not have to exaggerate the depression to make my point - but not good schools
of art, not good followers. The circumstances surrounding the appearance of the
individual great artists seem to make them almost all exceptions; we think of
them as great artists 'in spite of.' There is a scarcity of distinguished small talents.
And the very level of greatness sinks by comparison to the work of the past.

In general, painting and sculpture in the hands of the lesser talents - and
this is what tells the story - become nothing more than ghosts and 'stooges' of



556 The individual and the Social

literature. All emphasis is taken away from the medium and transferred to
subject matter. It is no longer a question even of realistic imitation, since that
is taken for granted, but of the artist's ability to interpret subject matter for
poetic effects and so forth.



Ill

Romanticism was the last great tendency following directly from bourgeois
society that was able to inspire and stimulate the profoundly responsible artist
- the artist conscious of certain inflexible obligations to the standards of his
craft. By 1848 Romanticism had exhausted itself. After that the impulse,
although indeed it had to originate in bourgeois society, could only come in the
guise of a denial of that society, as a turning away from it. It was not to be an
about-face towards a new society, but an emigration to a Bohemia which was
to be art's sanctuary from capitalism. It was to be the task of the avant-garde
to perform in opposition to bourgeois society the function of finding new and
adequate cultural forms for the expression of that same society, without at the
same time succumbing to its ideological divisions and its refusal to permit the
arts to be their own justification. The avant-garde, both child and negation of
Romanticism, becomes the embodiment of art's instinct of self-preservation. It
is interested in, and feels itself responsible to, only the values of art; and, given
society as it is, has an organic sense of what is good and what is bad for art.
As the first and most important item upon its agenda, the avant-garde saw
the necessity of an escape from ideas, which were infecting the arts with the
ideological struggles of society. Ideas came to mean subject matter in general.
(Subject matter as distinguished from content: in the sense that every work of
art must have content, but that subject matter is something the artist does or
does not have in mind when he is actually at work.) This meant a new and
greater emphasis upon form, and it also involved the assertion of the arts as
independent vocations, disciplines and crafts, absolutely autonomous, and en-
titled to respect for their own sakes, and not merely as vessels of communication.
It was the signal for a revolt against the dominance of literature, which was
subject matter at its most oppressive.



IV

The second variant of the avant-garde's development is concurrent in time with
the first. It is easy to recognize this variant, but rather difficult to expose its
motivation. Tendencies go in opposite directions, and cross-purposes meet. But
tying everything together is the fact that in the end cross-purposes indeed do
meet. There is a common effort in each of the arts to expand the expressive
resources of the medium, not in order to express ideas and notions, but to
express with greater immediacy sensations, the irreducible elements of experi-
ence. Along this path it seemed as though the avant-garde in its attempt to



Va The American Avant-Garde 557

escape from 'literature' had set out to treble the confusion of the arts by having
them imitate every other art except literature. (By this time literature had had
its opprobrious sense expanded to include everything the avant-garde objected
to in official bourgeois culture.) Each art would demonstrate its powers by
capturing the effects of its sister arts or by taking a sister art for its subject.
Since art was the only validity left, what better subject was there for each art
than the procedures and effects of some other art? Impressionist painting, with
its progressions and rhythmic suffusions of color, with its moods and atmos-
pheres, was arriving at effects to which the Impressionists themselves gave the
terms of Romantic music. [. . .]

Aside from what was going on inside music, music as an art in itself began
at this time to occupy a very important position in relation to the other arts.
Because of its 'absolute' nature, its remoteness from imitation, its almost
complete absorption in the very physical quality of its medium, as well as
because of its resources of suggestion, music had come to replace poetry as the
paragon art. It was the art which the other avant-garde arts envied most, and
whose effects they tried hardest to imitate. [. . .]

But only when the avant-garde's interest in music led it to consider music as
a method of art rather than as a kind of effect did the avant-garde find what it
was looking for. It was when it was discovered that the advantage of music lay
chiefly in the fact that it was an 'abstract' art, an art of 'pure form.' It was
such because it was incapable, objectively, of communicating anything else than
a sensation, and because this sensation could not be conceived in any other
terms than those of the sense through which it entered the consciousness. An
imitative painting can be described in terms of non-visual identities, a piece of
music cannot, whether it attempts to imitate or not. The effects of music are
the effects, essentially, of pure form; those of painting and poetry are too often
accidental to the formal natures of these arts. Only by accepting the example
of music and defining each of the other arts solely in the terms of the sense or
faculty which perceived its effect and by excluding from each art whatever is
intelligible in the terms of any other sense or faculty would the non-musical
arts attain the 'purity' and self-sufficiency which they desired; which they
desired, that is, in so far as they were avant-garde arts. The emphasis, therefore,
was to be on the physical, the sensorial. 'Literature's' corrupting influence is
only felt when the senses are neglected. The latest confusion of the arts was
the result of a mistaken conception of music as the only immediately sensuous
art. But the other arts can also be sensuous, if only they will look to music,
not to ape its effects but to borrow its principles as a 'pure' art, as an art which
is abstract because it is almost nothing else except sensuous.



Guiding themselves, whether consciously or unconsciously, by a notion of purity
derived from the example of music, the avant-garde arts have in the last fifty
years achieved a purity and a radical delimitation of their fields of activity for
which there is no previous example in the history of culture. The arts lie safe



558 The Individual and the Social

now, each within its legitimate' boundaries, and free trade has been replaced
by autarchy. Purity in art consists in the acceptance, willing acceptance, of the
limitations of the medium of the specific art. To prove that their concept of
purity is something more than a bias in taste, painters point to Oriental,
primitive and children's art as instances of the universality and naturalness and
objectivity of their ideal of purity. [ . . .] The issue is, of course, focused most
sharply in the plastic arts, for they, in their non-decorative function, have been
the most closely associated with imitation, and it is in their case that the ideal
of the pure and the abstract has met the most resistance.

The arts, then, have been hunted back to their mediums, and there they have
been isolated, concentrated and defined. It is by virtue of its medium that each
art is unique and strictly itself. To restore the identity of an art the opacity of
its medium must be emphasized. For the visual arts the medium is discovered
to be physical; hence pure painting and pure sculpture seek above all else to
affect the spectator physically. [. . .]

[. . .] The purely plastic or abstract qualities of the work of art are the only
ones that count. Emphasize the medium and its difficulties, and at once the
purely plastic, the proper, values of visual art come to the fore. Overpower
the medium to the point where all sense of its resistance disappears, and the
adventitious uses of art become more important.

The history of avant-garde painting is that of a progressive surrender to the
resistance of its medium; which resistance consists chiefly in the flat picture
plane's denial of efforts to 'hole through' it for realistic perspectival space. In
making this surrender, painting not only got rid of imitation - and with it,
'literature' - but also of realistic imitation's corollary confusion between painting
and sculpture. (Sculpture, on its side, emphasizes the resistance of its material
to the efforts of the artist to ply it into shapes uncharacteristic of stone, metal,
wood, etc.) Painting abandons chiaroscuro and shaded modelling. Brush strokes
are often defined for their own sake. The motto of the Renaissance artist, Ars
est artem celare, is exchanged for yirs est mem demonstrare. Primary colors, the
'instinctive,' easy colors, replace tones and tonality. Line, which is one of
the most abstract elements in painting since it is never found in nature as the
definition of contour, returns to oil painting as the third color between two
other color areas. Under the influence of the square shape of the canvas, forms
tend to become geometrical - and simplified, because simplification is also a
part of the instinctive accommodation to the medium. But most important of
all, the picture plane itself grows shallower and shallower, flattening out and
pressing together the fictive planes of depth until they meet as one upon the
real and material plane which is the actual surface of the canvas; where they
lie side by side or interlocked or transparently imposed upon each other. Where
the painter still tries to indicate real objects their shapes flatten and spread in
the dense, two-dimensional atmosphere. A vibrating tension is set up as the
objects struggle to maintain their volume against the tendency of the real picture
plane to re-assert its material flatness and crush them to silhouettes. In a further
stage realistic space cracks and splinters into flat planes which come forward,
parallel to the plane surface. [. . . ]




Va The American Avant-Garde 559

The destruction of realistic pictorial space, and with it, that of the object,
was accomplished by means of the travesty that was cubism. The cubist painter
eliminated color because, consciously or unconsciously, he was parodying, in
order to destroy, the academic methods of achieving volume and depth, which
are shading and perspective, and as such have little to do with color in the
common sense of the word. The cubist used these same methods to break the
canvas into a multiplicity of subtle recessive planes, which seem to shift and
fade into infinite depths and yet insist on returning to the surface of the canvas.
As we gaze at a cubist painting of the last phase we witness the birth and death
of three-dimensional pictorial space.

And as in painting the pristine flatness of the stretched canvas constantly
struggles to overcome every other element, so in sculpture the stone figure
appears to be on the point of relapsing into the original monolith, and the cast
seems to narrow and smooth itself back to the original molten stream from
which it was poured, or tries to remember the texture and plasticity of the clay
in which it was first worked out.

Sculpture hovers finally on the verge of 'pure' architecture, and painting,
having been pushed up from fictive depths, is forced through the surface of the
canvas to emerge on the other side in the form of paper, cloth, cement and
actual objects of wood and other materials pasted, glued or nailed to what was
originally the transparent picture plane, which the painter no longer dares to
puncture - or if he does, it is only to dare. Artists like Hans Arp, who begin
as painters, escape eventually from the prison of the single plane by painting
on wood or plaster and using molds or carpentry to raise and lower planes.
They go, in other words, from painting to colored bas-relief, and finally - so
far must they fly in order to return to three-dimensionality without at the same
time risking the illusion - they become sculptors and create objects in the round,
through which they can free their feelings for movement and direction from
the increasing ascetic geometry of pure painting. (Except in the case of Arp and
one or two others, the sculpture of most of these metamorphosed painters is
rather unsculptural, stemming as it does from the discipline of painting. It uses
color, fragile and intricate shapes and a variety of materials. It is construction,
fabrication.) [. . .]

VI

I find that I have offered no other explanation for the present superiority of
abstract art than its historical justification. So what I have written has turned
out to be an historical apology for abstract art. To argue from any other basis
would require more space than is at my disposal, and would involve an entrance
into the politics of taste - to use Venturi's phrase - from which there is no
exit - on paper. My own experience of art has forced me to accept most of the
standards of taste from which abstract art has derived, but I do not maintain
that they are the only valid standards through eternity. I find them simply the
inost valid ones at this given moment. I have no doubt that they will be replaced
in the future by other standards, which will be perhaps more inclusive than any



560 The Individual and the Social

possible now. And even now they do not exclude all other possible criteria. I
am still able to enjoy a Rembrandt more for its expressive qualities than for its
achievement of abstract values - as rich as it may be in them.

It suffices to say that there is nothing in the nature of abstract art which
compels it to be so. The imperative comes from history, from the age in
conjunction with a particular moment reached in a particular tradition of art.
This conjunction holds the artist in a vise from which at the present moment
he can escape only by surrendering his ambition and returning to a stale past.
This is the difficulty for those who are dissatisfied with abstract art, feeling
that it is too decorative or too arid and 'inhuman, 1 and who desire a return to
representation and literature in plastic art. Abstract art cannot be disposed of
by a simple-minded evasion. Or by negation. We can only dispose of abstract
art by assimilating it, by fighting our way through it. Where to? I do not know.
Yet it seems to me that the wish to return to the imitation of nature in art has
been given no more justification than the desire of certain partisans of abstract
art to legislate it into permanency.



2 Jackson Pollock (1912-1956) Answers to a
Questionnaire

Pollock's first one-man exhibition was held in November 1943 at the Art of This Century
Gallery in New York, where many of the European Surrealists were shown during the
war. In this statement, published three months later, he establishes a position for himself
in relation to his American origins on the one hand and the concerns of the European
avant-garde on the other. The questions were written by Pollock himself with assistance
from a representative of the gallery. Originally printed in Arts and Architecture, LXl, New
York, February 1944.

Where were you born?
JP: Cody, Wyoming, in January, 1912. My ancestors were Scotch and Irish.

Have you traveled any?
JP: I've knocked around some in California, some in Arizona. Never been to
Europe.

Would you like to go abroad?
JP: No. I don't see why the problems of modern painting can't be solved as
well here as elsewhere.
Where did you study?
JP: At the Art Students' League, here in New York. I began when I was
seventeen. Studied with Benton, at the League, for two years.

How did your study with Thomas Benton affect your work, which differs so
radically from his?
JP: My work with Benton was important as something against which to react
very strongly, later on; in this, it was better to have worked with him than
with a less resistant personality who would have provided a much less strong
opposition. At the same time, Benton introduced me to Renaissance art.




Va The American Avant-Garde 561

Why do you prefer living here in New York to your native West?

jP: Living is keener, more demanding, more intense and expansive in New
York than in the West; the stimulating influences are more numerous and
rewarding. At the same time, I have a definite feeling for the West: the vast
horizontally of the land, for instance; here only the Atlantic Ocean gives you
that.
Has being a Westerner affected your work?

JP: I have always been very impressed with the plastic qualities of American
Indian art. The Indians have the true painter's approach in their capacity to
get hold of appropriate images, and in their understanding of what constitutes
painterly subject matter. Their color is essentially Western, their vision has
the basic universality of all real art. Some people find references to American
Indian art and calligraphy in parts of my pictures. That wasn't intentional;
probably was the result of early memories and enthusiasms.
Do you consider technique to be important in art?

JP: Yes and no. Craftsmanship is essential to the artist. He needs it just as he
needs brushes, pigments, and a surface to paint on.

Do you find it important that many famous modern European artists are living
in this country?

JP: Yes. I accept the fact that the important painting of the last hundred years
was done in France. American painters have generally missed the point of
modern painting from beginning to end. (The only American master who
interests me is Ryder.) Thus the fact that good European moderns are now-
here is very important, for they bring with them an understanding of the
problems of modern painting. I am particularly impressed with their concept
of the source of art being the unconscious. This idea interests me more than
these specific painters do, for the two artists I admire most, Picasso and Miro,
are still abroad.
Do you think there can be a purely American art?

JP: The idea of an isolated American painting, so popular in this country during
the thirties, seems absurd to me, just as the idea of creating a purely American
mathematics or physics would seem absurd. . . . And in another sense, the
problem doesn't exist at all; or, if it did, would solve itself: An American is
an American and his painting would naturally be qualified by that fact,
whether he wills it or not. But the basic problems of contemporary painting
are independent of any one country.



3 Adolph Gottlieb (1903-1974) and Mark Rothko
(1903-1970) with Barnett Newman (1905-1970)
Statement

|n a review of the Federation of Modern Painters and Sculptors' exhibition in New York
in June 1943 the critic Edward Alden Jewell expressed his 'befuddlement' at paintings
by Gottlieb and Rothko, offering the hospitality of his column should the artists be willing
to explain their work. Though the resulting statement was signed by Gottlieb and Rothko,



y



562 The Individual and the Social

Newman assisted in its composition. The statement stands as a virtual manifesto for
the form of American painting which these three jointly represented in the early- to
mid-1940s, and in particular for their neo-Expressionist interest in the intrinsic signific-
ance of persistent themes and myths. Originally published in Jewell's column in the New
York Times, 13 June 1943.

To the artist the workings of the critical mind is one of life's mysteries. That
is why, we suppose, the artist's complaint that he is misunderstood, especially
by the critic, has become a noisy commonplace. It is therefore an event when
the worm turns and the critic quietly, yet publicly, confesses his 'befuddlement,'
that he is 'nonplused' before our pictures at the federation show. We salute this
honest, we might say cordial, reaction toward our 'obscure' paintings, for in
other critical quarters we seem to have created a bedlam of hysteria. And we
appreciate the gracious opportunity that is being offered us to present our views.

We do not intend to defend our pictures. They make their own defense. We
consider them clear statements. Your failure to dismiss or disparage them is
prima facie evidence that they carry some communicative power. We refuse to
defend them not because we cannot. It is an easy matter to explain to the
befuddled that The Rape of Persephone is a poetic expression of the essence of
the myth; the presentation of the concept of seed and its earth with all the
brutal implications; the impact of elemental truth. Would you have us present
this abstract concept, with all its complicated feelings, by means of a boy and
girl lightly tripping?

It is just as easy to explain The Syrian Bull as a new interpretation of an
archaic image, involving unprecedented distortions. Since art is timeless, the
significant rendition of a symbol, no matter how archaic, has as full validity
today as the archaic symbol had then. Or is the one 3000 years old truer? . . .
easy program notes can help only the simple-minded.

No possible set of notes can explain our paintings. Their explanation must
come out of a consummated experience between picture and onlooker. The point
at issue, it seems to us, is not an 'explanation' of the paintings, but whether
the intrinsic ideas carried within the frames of these pictures have significance.
We feel that our pictures demonstrate our aesthetic beliefs, some of which we,
therefore, list:

1 To us art is an adventure into an unknown world, which can be explored
only by those willing to take the risks.

2 This world of the imagination is fancy-free and violently opposed to common
sense.

3 It is our function as artists to make the spectator see the world our way -
not his way.

4 We favor the simple expression of the complex thought. We are for the large
shape because it has the impact of the unequivocal. We wish to reassert the
picture plane. We are for flat forms because they destroy illusion and reveal
truth. 

5 It is a widely accepted notion among painters that it does not matter what
one paints as long as it is well painted. This is the essence of academism.



Va The American Avant-Garde 563

There is no such thing as good painting about nothing. We assert that the
subject is crucial and only that subject-matter is valid which is tragic and
timeless. That is why we profess spiritual kinship with primitive and archaic
art.

Consequently, if our work embodies these beliefs it must insult any one who
is spiritually attuned to interior decoration; pictures for the home; pictures for
over the mantel; pictures of the American scene; social pictures; purity in art;
prize-winning potboilers; the National Academy, the Whitney Academy, the
Corn Belt Academy; buckeyes; trite tripe, etc.



4 Mark Rothko (1903-1970) 'The Romantics were
Prompted . . . '

Rothko here offers a modern revision of Romanticism, conceiving art as a form of
transcendent experience in face of the ordinariness and hostility of the everyday world.
Originally published in Possibilities, I, New York, 1947, p. 84.

The romantics were prompted to seek exotic subjects and to travel to far off
places. They failed to realize that, though the transcendental must involve the
strange and unfamiliar, not everything strange or unfamiliar is transcendental.

The unfriendliness of society to his activity is difficult for the artist to accept.
Yet this very hostility can act as a lever for true liberation. Freed from a false
sense of security and community, the artist can abandon his plastic bank-book,
just as he has abandoned other forms of security. Both the sense of community
and of security depend on the familiar. Free of them, transcendental experiences
become possible.

I think of my pictures as dramas; the shapes in the pictures are the performers.
They have been created from the need for a group of actors who are able
to move dramatically without embarrassment and execute gestures without
shame.

Neither the action nor the actors can be anticipated, or described in advance.
They begin as an unknown adventure in an unknown space. It is at the moment
of completion that in a flash of recognition, they are seen to have the quantity
and function which was intended. Ideas and plans that existed in the mind at
the start were simply the doorway through which one left the world in which
they occur.

The great cubist pictures thus transcend and belie the implications of the
cubist program.

The most important tool the artist fashions through constant practice is faith
in his ability to produce miracles when they are needed. Pictures must be
miraculous: the instant one is completed, the intimacy between the creation and
the creator is ended. He is an outsider. The picture must be for him, as for
anyone experiencing it later, a revelation, an unexpected and unprecedented
resolution of an eternally familiar need.



564 The Individual and the Social
On shapes:

 They are unique elements in a unique situation.

 They are organisms with volition and a passion for self-assertion.

 They move with internal freedom, and without need to conform with or to
violate what is probable in the familiar world,

 They have no direct association with any particular visible experience, but
in them one recognizes the principle and passion of organisms.

The presentation of this drama in the familiar world was never possible,
unless everyday acts belonged to a ritual accepted as referring to a transcendent
realm.

Even the archaic artist, who had an uncanny virtuosity, found it necessary to
create a group of intermediaries, monsters, hybrids, gods, and demigods. The
difference is that, since the archaic artist was living in a more practical society
than ours, the urgency for transcendent experience was understood, and given
an official status. As a consequence, the human figure and other elements from
the familiar world could be combined with, or participate as a whole in the
enactment of the excesses which characterize this improbable hierarchy. With
us the disguise must be complete. The familiar identity of things has to be
pulverized in order to destroy the finite associations with which our society
increasingly enshrouds every aspect of our environment.

Without monsters and gods, art cannot enact our drama: art's most profound
moments express this frustration. When they were abandoned as untenable
superstitions, art sank into melancholy. It became fond of the dark, and
enveloped its objects in the nostalgic intimations of a half-lit world. For me the
great achievements of the centuries in which the artist accepted the probable
and familiar as his subjects were the pictures of the single human figure - alone
in a moment of utter immobility.

But the solitary figure could not raise its limbs in a single gesture that might
indicate its concern with the fact of mortality and an insatiable appetite for
ubiquitous experience in face of this fact. Nor could the solitude be overcome.
It could gather on beaches and streets and in parks only through coincidence,
and, with its companions, form a tableau vivant of human incommunicability.

I do not believe that there was ever a question of being abstract or repre-
sentational. It is really a matter of ending this silence and solitude, of breathing
and stretching one's arms again.



5 Adolph Gottlieb (1903-1974) Statement

In similar vein to Rothko, Gottlieb here offers what was to become a widespread
justification for the abstraction of the New York School: that the artist was effectively
forced out of traditional forms of pictorial realism by the unsocial nature of the times.
Originally published in the short-lived avant-garde periodical Tiger's Eye, New York, vol.
1, no. 2, December 1947, p. 43.




Va The American Avant-Garde 565

Certain people always say we should go back to nature. I notice they never say
we should go forward to nature. It seems to me they are more concerned that
we should go back, than about nature.

If the models we use are the apparitions seen in a dream, or the recollection
of our pre-historic past, is this less part of nature or realism, than a cow in a
field? I think not.

The role of the artist, of course, has always been that of image-maker.
Different times require different images. Today when our aspirations have been
reduced to a desperate attempt to escape from evil, and times are out of joint,
our obsessive, subterranean and pictographic images are the expression of the
neurosis which is our reality. To my mind certain so-called abstraction is not
abstraction at all. On the contrary, it is the realism of our time.



6 Mark Rothko (1903-1970) Statement

It was a common assumption among the American avant-garde painters of the 1940s
and 1950s that a painting could be a kind of equivalent for an individual person, at
least in the sense that it invited the spectator into a form of one-to-one relationship.
Also published in Tiger's Eye, December 1947, vol. 1, no. 2, p. 44.

A picture lives by companionship, expanding and quickening in the eyes of the
sensitive observer. It dies by the same token. It is therefore a risky and unfeeling
act to send it out into the world. How often it must be permanently impaired
by the eyes of the vulgar and the cruelty of the impotent who would extend
their affliction universally!



7 Barnett Newman (1905-1970) 'The Ideographic
Picture'

Written for the catalogue of an exhibition of the same title at the Betty Parsons Gallery,
New York, 20 January - 8 February, 1947. Besides Newman, exhibitors were Hans
Hofmann, Pietro Lazzari, Boris Margo, Ad Reinhardt, Mark Rothko, Theodoros Stamos
and Clyfford Still. Newman aims to distance his own work and that of his fellow
exhibitors from the prevailing assumption that to be an abstract painter is to be
disinterested in ideas. He deploys the concept of the 'ideograph' to this end. In the
following year he was to be associated with Rothko, William Baziotes and Robert
Motherwell in the founding of a school under the name 'Subjects of the Artist'.

Ideograph - A character, symbol, or figure which suggests the idea without
expressing its name.

Ideographic - Representing ideas directly and not through the medium of
their names; applies specifically to that mode of writing which by means
of symbols, figures, or hieroglyphics suggests the idea of an object without
expressing its name.

- The Century Dictionary



566 The Individual and the Social

Ideograph - A symbol or character painted, written, or inscribed,
representing ideas.

- The Encyclopaedia Bntanntca

The Kwakiutl artist painting on a hide did not concern himself with the
inconsequentials that made up the opulent social rivalries of the Northwest Coast
Indian scene, nor did he, in the name of a higher purity, renounce the living
world for the meaningless materialism of design. The abstract shape he used,
his entire plastic language, was directed by a ritualistic will towards metaphysical
understanding. The everyday realities he left to the toymakers; the pleasant play
of non-objective pattern to the women basket weavers. To him a shape was a
living thing, a vehicle for an abstract thought-complex, a carrier of the awesome
feelings he felt before the terror of the unknowable. The abstract shape was,
therefore, real rather than a formal 'abstraction' of a visual fact, with its overtone
of an already-known nature. Nor was it a purist illusion with its overload of
pseudo-scientific truths.

The basis of an aesthetic act is the pure idea. But the pure idea is, of necessity,
an aesthetic act. Here then is the epistemological paradox that is the artist's
problem. Not space cutting nor space building, not construction nor fauvist
destruction; not the pure line, straight and narrow, nor the tortured line,
distorted and humiliating; not the accurate eye, all fingers, nor the wild eye of
dream, winking; but the idea-complex that makes contact with mystery - of life,
of men, of nature, of the hard, black chaos that is death, or the grayer, softer
chaos that is tragedy. For it is only the pure idea that has meaning. Everything
else has everything else.

Spontaneous, and emerging from several points, there has arisen during the
war years a new force in American painting that is the modern counterpart of
the primitive art impulse. As early as 1942, Mr Edward Alden Jewell was the
first publicly to report it. Since then, various critics and dealers have tried to
label it, to describe it. It is now time for the artist himself, by showing the
dictionary, to make clear the community of intention that motivates him and
his colleagues. For here is a group of artists who are not abstract painters,
although working in what is known as the abstract style. [ . . . ]

8 Barnett Newman (1905-1970) The First Man Was
an Artist'

In asserting the priority of the aesthetic over the social, Newman echoes both the
primitivism of the earlier Expressionists and the disdain in which scientific and utilitarian
thought was characteristically held by the Surrealists. His contemporary paintings
betray the same preoccupation with the concept and mythology of creation that
characterizes this essay. Originally published in Tiger's Eye (of which Newman was
associate editor), vol. 1, no. 1, October 1947, pp. 57-60.

A scientist has just caught the tail of another metaphor. Out of the Chinese
dragon's teeth, piled high in harvest on the shelves of Shanghai's drugstores




Va The American Avant-Garde 567

and deep in the Java mud, a half million years old, he has constructed

I Meganthropus palaeojavanicus, 'man the great,' the giant, who, the paleonto-

|- logists now tell us, was our human ancestor. And for many, he has become

 more real than Cyclops, than the Giant of the Beanstalk. Those unconvinced

by the poetic dream, who reject the child's fable, are now sure of a truth found

today 500,000 years old. Shall we artists quarrel with those who need to wait

for the weights of scientific proof to believe in poetry? Or shall we let them

enjoy their high adventure laid out in mud and in drugstore teeth? For truth

is for them at last the Truth.

Quarrel we must, for there is the implication in this paleontological find of
another attempt to claim possession of the poetic gesture; that the scientist
rather than the artist discovered the Giant. It is not enough for the artist to
announce with arrogance his invincible position: that the job of the artist is not
to discover truth, but to fashion it, that the artist's work was done long ago.
This position, superior as it may be, separates the artist from everyone else,
declares his role against that of all. The quarrel here must include a critique
of paleontology, an examination of the new sciences.

In the last sixty years, we have seen mushroom a vast cloud of 'sciences' in
the fields of culture, history, philosophy, psychology, economics, politics, aes-
thetics, in an ambitious attempt to claim the non-material world. Why the
invasion? Is it out of fear that its materialistic interpretation of physical
phenomena, its narrow realm of physics and chemistry, may give science a minor
historical position if, in the larger attempt to resolve the metaphysical mysteries,
the physical world may take only a small place? Has science, in its attempt to
dominate all realms of thought, been driven willy nilly to act politically so that,
by denying any place to the metaphysical world, it could give its own base of
operations a sense of security? Like any state or church, science found the drive
to conquer necessary to protect the security of its own state of physics. To
accomplish this expansion, the scientist abandoned the revolutionary scientific
act for a theological way of life.

The domination of science over the mind of modern man has been accom-
plished by the simple tactic of ignoring the prime scientific quest; the concern
with its original question what? When it was found that the use of this question
to explore all knowledge was Utopian, the scientist switched from an insistence
on it to a roving position of using any question. It was easy for him to do so
because he could thrive on the grip mathematical discipline had, as a romantic
symbol of purity and perfection, on the mind of man. So intense is the reverence
for this symbol, scientific method, that it has become the new theology. And
the mechanics of this theology, so brilliant is the rhythm of its logic-rite, its
identification of truth with proof, that it has overwhelmed the original ecstacy
of scientific quest, scientific inquiry.

For there is a difference between method and inquiry. Scientific inquiry, from
its beginnings, has perpetually asked a single and specific question, what? What
is the rainbow, what is an atom, what a star? In the pursuit of this question,
the physical sciences have built a realm of thought that has validity because the
question is basic for the attainment of descriptive knowledge and permits a



k



568 The Individual and the Social

proper integration between its quest, the question what constantly maintained,
and its tool, mathematics or logic, for the discovery of its answer. Scientific
method, however, is free of the question. It can function on any question, or,
as in mathematics, without a question. But the choice of quest, the kind of
question, is the basis of the scientific act. That is why it is so pathetic to watch
the scientist, so proud of his critical acumen, delude himself by the splendor
of the ritual of method which, concerned only with its own relentless ceremonial
dance, casts its spell not only over the lay observer but also over the participating
scientist, with its incessant drumbeat of proof.

Original man, what does it matter who he was, giant or pygmy? What was
he? That is the question for a science of paleontology that would have meaning
for us today. For if we knew what original man was, we could declare what
today's man is not. Paleontology, by building a sentimental science around the
question who (who was your great-grandfather), cannot be excused for substi-
tuting this question for the real one, because, according to the articles of faith
that make up scientific method, there is not nor can there ever be sufficient
proof for positive answer. After all, paleontology, like the other non-material
sciences, has entered a realm where the only questions worth discussing are the
questions that cannot be proved. We cannot excuse the abdication of its primal
scientific responsibility because paleontology substituted the sentimental ques-
tion who for the scientific what. Who cares who he was? What was the first
man, was he a hunter, a toolmaker, a farmer, a worker, a priest, or a politician?
Undoubtedly the first man was an artist.

A science of paleontology that sets forth this proposition can be written if it
builds on the postulate that the aesthetic act always precedes the social one.
The totemic act of wonder in front of the tiger-ancestor came before the act
of murder. It is important to keep in mind that the necessity for dream
is stronger than any utilitarian need. In the language of science, the necessity
for understanding the unknowable comes before any desire to discover the
unknown.

Man's first expression, like his first dream, was an aesthetic one. Speech was
a poetic outcry rather than a demand for communication. Original man, shouting
his consonants, did so in yells of awe and anger at his tragic state, at his own
self-awareness and at his own helplessness before the void. Philologists and
semioticians are beginning to accept the concept that, if language is to be defined
as the ability to communicate by means of signs, be they sounds or gestures,
then language is an animal power. Anyone who has watched the common pigeon
circle his female knows that she knows what he wants.

The human in language is literature, not communication. Man's first cry was
a song. Man's first address to a neighbor was a cry of power and solemn
weakness, not a request for a drink of water. Even the animal makes a futile
attempt at poetry. Ornithologists explain the cock's crow as an ecstatic outburst
of his power. The loon gliding lonesome over the lake, with whom is he
communicating? The dog, alone, howls at the moon. Are we to say that the
first man called the sun and the stars God as an act of communication and only
after he had finished his dav's labor? The mvth came before the hunt. The




Va The American Avant-Garde 569

purpose of man's first speech was an address to the unknowable. His behaviour
had its origin in his artistic nature.

Just as man's first speech was poetic before it became utilitarian, so man first
built an idol of mud before he fashioned an axe. Man's hand traced the stick
through the mud to make a line before he learned to throw the stick as a javelin.
Archeologists tell us that the ax-head suggested the ax-head idol. Both are found
in the same strata so they must have been contemporaneous. True, perhaps,
that the ax-head idol of stone could not have been carved without axe instru-
ments, but this is a division in metier, not in time, since the mud figure
anticipated both the stone figure and the axe. (A figure can be made out of
mud but an axe cannot.) The God image, not pottery, was the first manual act.
It is the materialistic corruption of present-day anthropology that has tried to
make men believe that original man fashioned pottery before he made sculpture.
Pottery is the product of civilization. The artistic act is man's personal birth-
right.

The earliest written history of human desires proves that the meaning of the
world cannot be found in the social act. An examination of the first chapter of
Genesis offers a better key to the human dream. It was inconceivable to the
archaic writer that original man, that Adam, was put on earth to be a toiler, to
be a social animal. The writer's creative impulses told him that man's origin
was that of an artist and he set him up in a Garden of Eden close to the Tree
of Knowledge, of right and wrong, in the highest sense of divine revelation.
The fall of man was understood by the writer and his audience not as a fall
from Utopia to struggle, as the sociologicians would have it, nor, as the
religionists would have us believe, as a fall from Grace to Sin, but rather that
Adam, by eating from the Tree of Knowledge, sought the creative life to be,
like God, 'a creator of worlds,' to use Rashi's phrase, and was reduced to the
life of toil only as a result of a jealous punishment.

In our inability to live the life of a creator can be found the meaning of the
fall of man. It was a fall from the good, rather than from the abundant, life.
And it is precisely here that the artist today is striving for a closer approach
to the truth concerning original man than can be claimed by the paleontologist,
for it is the poet and the artist who are concerned with the function of original
man and who are trying to arrive at his creative state. What is the raison d'etre,
what is the explanation of the seemingly insane drive of man to be painter and
poet if it is not an act of defiance against man's fall and an assertion that he
return to the Adam of the Garden of Eden? For the artists are the first men.



Clement Greenberg (b.
Cubism'



1909) The Decline of



From the perspective of America in the 1940s, the Second World War was symptomatic
of a modern decline in the vitality and authority of European culture. In his post-war
deliberations on the School of Paris, Greenberg associates this decline on the one hand
with loss of faith in the notion of social and scientific progress and on the other with



570 The Individual and the Social

a moment of opportunity in American artistic culture. Originally published in Partisan
Review, New York, March 1948.

As more and more of the recent work of the masters of the School of Paris
reaches this country after the six years' interruption between 1939 and 1945,
any remaining doubt vanishes as to the continuing fact of the decline of art that
set in in Paris in the early thirties. [. . .]

The problem for criticism is to explain why the cubist generation and its
immediate successors have, contrary to artists' precedent, fallen off in middle
and old age, and why belated impressionists like Bonnard and Vuillard could
maintain a higher consistency of performance during the last fifteen years; why
even the German expressionist, Max Beckmann, so inferior to Picasso in native
gifts, should paint better today than he does. And why, finally, Matisse, with
his magnificent but transitional style, which does not compare with cubism for
historical importance, is able to rest so securely in his position as the greatest
master of the twentieth century, a position Picasso is further than ever from
threatening.

At first glance we realize that we are faced with the debacle of the age of
'experiment/ of the Apollinairian and cubist mission and its hope, coincident
with that of Marxism and the whole matured tradition of Enlightenment, of
humanizing the world. In the plastic arts cubism, and nothing else, is the age
of 'experiment.' Whatever feats fauvism in the hands of Matisse, and late
impressionism in those of Bonnard and Vuillard, have been capable of, cubism
remains the great phenomenon, the epoch-making feat of twentieth-century art,
a style that has changed and determined the complexion of Western art as
radically as Renaissance naturalism once did. And the main factor in the recent
decline of art in Europe is the disorientation of cubist style, which is involved
in a crisis that - by a seeming quirk - spares the surviving members of the
generation of artists preceding it in point of historical development.

Yet it does not matter who is exempted from this crisis, so long as cubism
is not. For cubism is still the only vital style of our time, the one best able to
convey contemporary feeling, and the only one capable of supporting a tradition
which will survive into the future and form new artists. The surviving masters
of impressionism, fauvism, and expressionism can still deliver splendid perfor-
mances, and they can influence young artists fruitfully - but they cannot form
them. Cubism is now the only school. But why, then, if cubism is the only
style adequate to contemporary feeling, should it have shown itself, in the
persons of its masters, less able to withstand the tests of the last twenty years?
The answer is subtle but not far-fetched.

The great art style of any period is that which relates itself to the true insights
of its time. But an age may repudiate its real insights, retreat to the insights
of the past - which, though not its own, seem safer to act upon - and accept
only an art that corresponds to this repudiation; in which case the age will go
without great art, to which truth of feeling is essential. In a time of disasters
the less radical artists, like the less radical politicians, will perform better since,
being familiar with the expected consequences of what they do, they need less




Va The American Avant-Garde 571

nerve to keep to their course. But the more radical artists, like the more radical
politicians, become demoralized because they need so much more nerve than
the conservatives in order to keep to a course that, guided by the real insights
of the age, leads into unknown territory. Yet if the radical artist's loss of nerve
becomes permanent, then art declines as a whole, for the conservative artist
rides only on momentum and eventually loses touch with the insights of his
time - by which all genuine artists are nourished. Or else society may refuse
to have any new insights, refuse to make new responses - but in that case it
would be better not to talk about art at all.

Cubism originated not only from the art that preceded it, but also from a
complex of attitudes that embodied the optimism, boldness, and self-confidence
of the highest stage of industrial capitalism, of a period in which the scientific
outlook had at last won a confirmation that only some literary men quarreled
with seriously, and in which society seemed to have demonstrated its complete
capacity to solve its most serious internal as well as environmental problems.
Cubism . . . expressed the positivist or empirical state of mind with its refusal
to refer to anything outside the concrete experience of the particular discipline,
field, or medium in which one worked; and it also expressed the empiricist's
faith in the supreme reality of concrete experience. Along with this . . . went an
all-pervasive conviction that the world would inevitably go on improving, so
that no matter what chances one took with the new, the unknown, or the
unforeseeable, there was no risk of getting anything inferior or more dangerous
than what one already had.

Cubism reached its height during the First World War and, though the
optimism on which it unconsciously floated was draining away fast, during the
twenties it was still capable, not only of masterpieces from the hands of Picasso,
Braque, Leger, but also of sending forth such bold innovators as Arp, Mondrian,
and Giacometti, not to mention Miro. But in the early thirties, by which time
both Picasso's and Braque's art had entered upon a crisis from which neither
artist has since shown any signs of recovering, the social, emotional, and
intellectual substructure of cubism began crumbling fast. Even Klee fell off after
1930. Surrealism and neo-romanticism, with their rejuvenated academicism,
sprang up to compete for attention, and Bonnard, painting better and better
within a discipline and frame of mind established as long ago as 1905 and for
that reason, apparently, more impervious to the prevalent malaise, began to be
talked about as the greatest French painter of his time, notwithstanding the
presence of Matisse to whom Bonnard himself owed so much.

After 1939 the cubist heritage entered what would seem the final stage of its
decline in Europe. True, Dubuffet, a cubist at heart, has appeared since then,
and the best of the younger generation of French artist^ - Tal Coat, Kermadec,
Manessier, Le Moal, Pignon, Tailleux, etc., etc. - work within cubism; but so
far they have added nothing but refinements. None of them, except Dubuffet,
is truly original. It is no wonder that the death of abstract art, which, even in
its Kandinsky and Klee variants, is still essentially cubist, has been announced
so often during the last ten years. In a world filled with nostalgia and too
profoundly frightened by what has just happened to dare hope that the future



572 The Individual and the Social

contains anything better than the past, how can art be expected to hold on to
advanced positions? The masters of cubism, formed by the insights of a more
progressive age, had advanced too far, and when history began going backwards
they had to retreat, in confusion, from positions that were more exposed because
they were more advanced. The metaphor, I feel, is exact.

Obviously, the present situation of art contains many paradoxes and contra-
dictions that only time will resolve. Prominent among them is the situation of
art in this country. If artists as great as Picasso, Braque, and Leger have declined
so grievously, it can only be because the general social premises that used to
guarantee their functioning have disappeared in Europe. And when one sees,
on the other hand, how much the level of American Art has risen in the last
five years, with the emergence of new talents so full of energy and content as
Arshile Gorky, Jackson Pollock, David Smith - and also when one realizes how
consistently John Marin has maintained a high standard, whatever the narrow-
ness of his art - then the conclusion forces itself, much to our own surprise,
that the main premises of Western art have at last migrated to the United
States, along with the center of gravity of industrial production and political
power.

Not all the premises have reached this shore - not by a long shot; but enough
of them are here and enough of them have abandoned Paris to permit us to
abandon our chronic, and hitherto justified, pessimism about the prospects of
American art, and hope for much more than we dared hope for in the past. It
is not beyond possibility that the cubist tradition may enjoy a new efflorescence
in this country. Meanwhile the fact remains that it is in decline at the moment.



10 Barnett Newman (1905-1970) 'The Sublime Is Now'

Newman here echoes the conclusion of the previous text. His essay is symptomatic of
the American painters' desire to distinguish their work from European forms of abstract
art. For all their apparent social marginality, the American avant-garde artists saw
themselves as historically and geographically situated in such a manner that the initiative
for the development of modern art now lay with them. Originally published in Tiger's
Eye, vol. 1, no. 6 r December 1948, pp. 51-3.

The invention of beauty by the Greeks, that is, their postulate of beauty as an
ideal, has been the bugbear of European art and European aesthetic philosophies.
Man's natural desire in the arts to express his relation to the Absolute became
identified and confused with the absolutisms of perfect creations - with the
fetish of quality - so that the European artist has been continually involved in
the moral struggle between notions of beauty and the desire for sublimity.

The confusion can be seen sharply in Longinus, who despite his knowledge
of non-Grecian art, could not extricate himself from his platonic attitudes
concerning beauty, from the problem of value, so that to him the feeling of
exaltation became synonymous with the perfect statement - an objective rhetoric.
But the confusion continued on in Kant, with his theorv of transcendent



Va The American Avant-Garde 573

perception, that the phenomenon is more than phenomenon; and with Hegel,
who built a theory of beauty, in which the sublime is at the bottom of a structure
of kinds of beauty, thus creating a range of hierarchies in a set of relationships
to reality that is completely formal. (Only Edmund Burke insisted on a
separation. Even though it is an unsophisticated and primitive one, it is a clear
one and it would be interesting to know how closely the Surrealists were
influenced by it. To me Burke reads like a Surrealist manual.)

The confusion in philosophy is but the reflection of the struggle that makes
up the history of the plastic arts. To us today there is no doubt that Greek art
is an insistence that the sense of exaltation is to be found in perfect form, that
exaltation is the same as ideal sensibility, in contrast, for example, with the
Gothic or Baroque, in which the sublime consists of a desire to destroy form;
where form can be formless.

The climax in this struggle between beauty and the sublime can best be
examined inside the Renaissance and the reaction later against the Renaissance
that is known as modern art. In the Renaissance the revival of the ideals of
Greek beauty set the artists the task of rephrasing an accepted Christ legend in
terms of absolute beauty as against the original Gothic ecstacy over the legend's
evocation of the Absolute. And the Renaissance artists dressed up the traditional
ecstacy in an even older tradition - that of eloquent nudity or rich velvet. It
was no idle quip that moved Michelangelo to call himself a sculptor rather than
a painter, for he knew that only in his sculpture could the desire for the grand
statement of Christian sublimity be reached. He could despise with good reason
the beauty-cults who felt the Christ drama on a stage of rich velvets and brocades
and beautifully textured flesh tints. Michelangelo knew that the meaning of the
Greek humanities for his time involved making Christ - the man, into Christ
- who is God; that his plastic problem was neither the medieval one, to make
a cathedral, nor the Greek one, to make a man like a god, but to make a
cathedral out of man. In doing so he set a standard for sublimity that the
painting of his time could not reach. Instead, painting continued on its merry
quest for a voluptuous art until in modern times, the Impressionists, disgusted
with its inadequacy, began the movement to destroy the established rhetoric of
beauty by the Impressionist insistence on a surface of ugly strokes.

The impulse of modern art was this desire to destroy beauty. However, in
discarding Renaissance notions of beauty, and without an adequate substitute
for a sublime message, the Impressionists were compelled to preoccupy them-
selves, in their struggle, with the culture values of their plastic history so that
instead of evoking a new way of experiencing life they were able only to make
a transfer of values. By glorifying their own way of living, they were caught in
the problem of what is really beautiful and could only make a restatement of
their position on the general question of beauty; just as later the Cubists, by
their Dada gestures of substituting a sheet of newspaper and sandpaper for both
the velvet surfaces of the Renaissance and the Impressionists, made a similar
transfer of values instead of creating a new vision, and succeeded only in
elevating the sheet of paper. So strong is the grip of the rhetoric of exaltation
as an attitude in the large context of the European culture pattern that the



574 The Individual and the Social

elements of sublimity in the revolution we know as modern art, exist in its
effort and energy to escape the pattern rather than in the realization of a new
experience. Picasso's effort may be sublime but there is no doubt that his work
is a preoccupation with the question of what is the nature of beauty. Even
Mondrian, in his attempt to destroy the Renaissance picture by his insistence
on pure subject matter, succeeded only in raising the white plane and the right
angle into a realm of sublimity, where the sublime paradoxically becomes an
absolute of perfect sensations. The geometry (perfection) swallowed up his
metaphysics (his exaltation).

The failure of European art to achieve the sublime is due to this blind desire
to exist inside the reality of sensation (the objective world, whether distorted
or pure) and to build an art within a framework of pure plasticity (the Greek
ideal of beauty, whether that plasticity be a romantic active surface, or a classic
stable one). In other words, modern art, caught without a sublime content, was
incapable of creating a new sublime image, and unable to move away from the
Renaissance imagery of figures and objects except by distortion or by denying
it completely for an empty world of geometric formalisms - a pure rhetoric of
abstract mathematical relationships, became enmeshed in a struggle over the
nature of beauty; whether beauty was in nature or could be found without
nature.

I believe that here in America, some of us, free from the weight of European
culture, are finding the answer, by completely denying that art has any concern
with the problem of beauty and where to find it. The question that now arises
is how, if we are living in a time without a legend or mythos that can be called
sublime, if we refuse to admit any exaltation in pure relations, if we refuse to
live in the abstract, how can we be creating a sublime art?

We are reasserting man's natural desire for the exalted, for a concern with
our relationship to the absolute emotions. We do not need the obsolete props
of an outmoded and antiquated legend. We are creating images whose reality is
self-evident and which are devoid of the props and crutches that evoke associ-
ations with outmoded images, both sublime and beautiful. We are freeing
ourselves of the impediments of memory, association, nostalgia, legend, myth,
or what have you, that have been the devices of Western European painting.
Instead of making cathedrals out of Christ, man, or iife,' we are making it out
of ourselves, out of our own feelings. The image we produce is the self-evident
one of revelation, real and concrete, that can be understood by anyone who will
look at it without the nostalgic glasses of history.



11 Jackson Pollock (1912-1956) Interview with
William Wright

Taped in the summer of 1950 by William Wright for the Sag Harbor radio station, but
not broadcast. Pollock's most successful show of all-over abstract paintings was held
later in the same year. Transcript published in F. V. O'Connor, Jackson Pollock, New
York (Museum of Modern Art), 1967, pp. 79-81.




Va The American Avant-Garde 575

Mr Pollock, in your opinion, what is the meaning of modern art}
jp: Modern art to me is nothing more than the expression of contemporary
aims of the age that we're living in.
Did the classical artists have any means of expressing their age}
jp: Yes, they did it very well. All cultures have had means and techniques of
expressing their immediate aims - the Chinese, the Renaissance, all cultures.
The thing that interests me is that today painters do not have to go to a
subject matter outside of themselves. Most modern painters work from a
different source. They work from within.

Would you say that the modern artist has more or less isolated the quality which
made the classical works of art valuable, that he's isolated it and uses it in a
purer form}
JP: Ah - the good ones have, yes.

Mr Pollock, there's been a good deal of controversy and a great many comments
have been made regarding your method of painting. Is there something you'd like
to tell us about that}
JP: My opinion is that new needs need new techniques. And the modern artists
have found new ways and new means of making their statements. It seems
to me that the modern painter cannot express this age, the airplane, the atom
bomb, the radio, in the old forms of the Renaissance or of any other past
culture. Each age finds its own technique.

Which would also mean that the layman and the critic would have to develop
their ability to interpret the new techniques.
JP: Yes - that always somehow follows. I mean, the strangeness will wear off
and I think we will discover the deeper meanings in modern art.

/ suppose every time you are approached by a layman they ask you how they
should look at a Pollock painting, or any other modern painting - what they look
for - how do they learn to appreciate modern art}
JP: I think they should not look for, but look passively - and try to receive
what the painting has to offer and not bring a subject matter or preconceived
idea of what they are to be looking for.

Would it be true to say that the artist is painting from the unconscious, and the

- canvas must act as the unconscious of the person who views it}

JP: The unconscious is a very important side of modern art and I think the
unconscious drives do mean a lot in looking at paintings.

Then deliberately looking for any known meaning or object in an abstract
painting would distract you immediately from ever appreciating it as you should}

JP: I think it should be enjoyed just as music is enjoyed - after a while you
may like it or you may not. But - it doesn't seem to be too serious. I like
some flowers and others, other flowers I don't like. I think at least it gives

- I think at least give it a chance.

Well, I think you have to give anything that sort of chance. A person isn't born
to like good music, they have to listen to it and gradually develop an understanding
of it or liking for it. If modern painting works the same way - a person would have
to subject himself to it over a period of time in order to be able to appreciate it.
JP: I think that might help, certainly.



576 The Individual and the Social

Mr Pollock, the classical artists had a world to express and they did so by
representing the objects in that world. Why doesn't the modern artist do the same
thing?

JP: H'm - the modern artist is living in a mechanical age and we have a
mechanical means of representing objects in nature such as the camera and
photograph. The modern artist, it seems to me, is working and expressing
an inner world - in other words - expressing the energy, the motion, and
other inner forces.

Would it be possible to say that the classical artist expressed his world by
representing the objects, whereas the modern artist expresses his world by repre-
senting the effects the objects have upon him}

JP: Yes, the modern artist is working with space and time, and expressing his
feelings rather than illustrating.
Well, Mr Pollock, can you tell us how modern art came into being}

JP: It didn't drop out of the blue; it's a part of a long tradition dating back
with Cezanne, up through the cubists, the post-cubists, to the painting being
done today.

Then, it's definitely a product of evolution}

JP: Yes.

Shall we go back to this method question that so many people today think is
important? Can you tell us how you developed your method of painting, and why
you paint as you do}

JP: Well, method is, it seems to me, a natural growth out of a need, and from
a need the modern artist has found new ways of expressing the world about
him. I happen to find ways that are different from the usual techniques of
painting, which seems a little strange at the moment, but I don't think there's
anything very different about it. I paint on the floor and this isn't unusual

- the Orientals did that.

How do you go about getting the paint on the canvas? I understand you don't
use brushes or anything of that sort, do you}
JP: Most of the paint I use is a liquid, flowing kind of paint. The brushes I
use are used more as sticks rather than brushes - the brush doesn't touch
the surface of the canvas, it's just above.

Would it be possible for you to explain the advantage of using a stick with paint

- liquid paint rather than a brush on canvas}

JP: Well, I'm able to be more free and to have greater freedom and move about

the canvas, with greater ease.

Well, isn V it more difficult to control than a brush? I mean, isn V there more a

possibility of getting too much paint or splattering or any number of things? Using

a brush, you put the paint right where you want it and you know exactly what

it's going to look like.
JP: No, I don't think so. I don't - ah - with experience - it seems to be

possible to control the flow of the paint, to a great extent, and I don't use

- I don't use the accident - cause I deny the accident.

/ believe it was Freud who said there's no such thing as an accident. Is that
what you mean}



Va The American Avant-Garde 577

jp: I suppose that's generally what I mean.

Then, you don't actually have a preconceived image of a canvas in your
mind ?
JP: Well, not exactly - no - because it hasn't been created, you see. Something
new - it's quite different from working, say, from a still life where you set
up objects and work directly from them. I do have a general notion of what
I'm about and what the results will be.

That does away, entirely, with all preliminary sketches}
JP: Yes, I approach painting in the same sense as one approaches drawing; that
is, it's direct. I don't work from drawings, I don't make sketches and drawings
and color sketches into a final painting. Painting, I think today - the more
immediate, the more direct - the greater the possibilities of making a direct
- of making a statement.

Well, actually every one of your paintings, your finished canvases, is an absolute
original.
JP: Well - yes - they're all direct painting. There is only one.

Well, now, Mr Pollock, would you care to comment on modern painting as a
whole? What is your feeling about your contemporaries}
JP: Well, painting today certainly seems very vibrant, very alive, very exciting.
Five or six of my contemporaries around New York are doing very vital work,
and the direction that painting seems to be taking here - is - away from the
easel - into some sort, some kind of wall - wall painting.
/ believe some of your canvases are of very unusual dimensions, isn't that true}
JP: Well, yes, they're an impractical size - 9 x 18 feet. But I enjoy working
big and - whenever I have a chance, I do it whether it's practical or not.

Can you explain why you enjoy working on a large canvas more than on a
small one}
JP: Well, not really. I'm just more at ease in a big area than I am on something
2 x 2; I feel more at home in a big area.

You say 'in a big area.' Are you actually on the canvas while you're painting}
JP: Very little. I do step into the canvas occasionally /- that is, working from
the four sides I don't have to get into the canvas too much.

/ notice over in the corner you have something done on plate glass. Can you
tell us something about that}
JP: Well, that's something new for me. That's the first thing I've done on glass
and I find it very exciting. I think the possibilities of using painting on glass
in modern architecture - in modern construction - terrific.

Well, does the one on glass differ in any other way from your usual technique}
JP: It's pretty generally the same. In this particular piece I've used colored
glass sheets and plaster slabs and beach stones and odds and ends of that
sort. Generally it's pretty much the same as all of my paintings.

Well, in the event that you do more of these for modem buildings, would you
continue to use various objects}
JP: I think so, yes. The possibilities, it seems to me are endless, what one can
do with glass. It seems to me a medium that's very much related to
contemporary painting.



578 The Individual and the Social

Mr Pollock, isn't it true that your method of painting, your technique, is
important and interesting only because of what you accomplish by it?
JP: I hope so. Naturally, the result is the thing - and - it doesn't make much
difference how the paint is put on as long as something has been said.
Technique is just a means of arriving at a statement.



12 David Smith (1906-1965) 'Aesthetics, the Artist
and the Audience'

Smith was the foremost American sculptor of his generation. He made his first welded-
iron work in 1933 and continued to pursue open and constructed forms of sculpture
until his death. Like his contemporaries among the painters, he expresses a marked
confidence in the vitality of modern American art. This is the text of a speech given at
Deerfield, Massachusetts, on 24 September 1952. Printed in Garnett McCoy (ed,),
David Smith, New York and London, 1973, pp. 88-107.

I wish to present my conclusions first and start my presentation backward.

Time is a new dimension in sculpture, and since I don't accent bulkmass and
prefer open delineation and transparent form - so that the front views through
to the back - the same method by statement may work as well.

To the creative artist, in the making of art it is doubtful whether aesthetics
have any value to him.

The truly creative artist deals with vulgarity.

Nobody understands art but the artist.

Affection for art is the sole property of the artist. The majority approach art
with hostility.

The artist deserves to be belligerent to the majority.

The artist is a product of his time, and his belligerence is a defense and not
a preference.

There is no such thing as a layman. The layman is either an art lover or an
art rejector.

The viewer of art, the art lover, has the privilege of accepting or rejecting.
But there is no such thing as a layman. He is either a pretender or the verbalizer.

Masterpieces are made today.

Aesthetics are written conclusions or directives. The creative artist should not
be impressed by verbal directives. His aesthetics are primarily unconscious and
of a visual recording. No words or summations are involved. The artist does
not deny aesthetics or the history of art. The myth in art, the history of art,
are both enjoyed and used, but they are utilized by the memory of vision which
is the only language in which the artist who made the work of art intended it
to be understood.

I have spoken of the artist's use of the vulgar. But this term I use because,
to the professional aesthetician, it is a vulgarity in his code of beauty, because
he has not recognized it as yet or made rules for its acceptance. To the creative
artist it is his beauty, but to the audience, who will wait for the aesthetician's




Va The American Avant-Garde 579

explanation, it is too new and has not yet hammered its way into acceptance.
It will not conform to the past, it is beyond the pale. Art aestheticians can only
make conclusions or discourse after the work of art is made. The birth of the
idea, the concept, is the important act in the work of art.

Nobody understands art but the artist because nobody is as interested in art,
its pursuit, its making, as the artist. This need eliminate no one from enjoying
any art - if they do not limit it with preconceived notions of what art should
be or demand confinement in which it should stay. The true way to understand
the work of art is to travel the path by visual response, similar to the method
the artist used in arriving at the work.

Does the onlooker realize the amount of affection which goes into a work of
art - the intense affection - belligerent vitality - and total conviction? To the
artist it must be total to provide satisfaction. Does the critic, the audience, the
philosopher even possess the intensity of affection for the work which its creator
possessed? Can they project or understand this belligerent vitality and affection
which contemporary art possesses? Or do they deal in the quality at all? Is this
emotion too highly keyed - is it outside their lives? Or are they too skeptical?
Or do they need written confirmation and general acceptance before they will
let their own natural response be admitted to themselves?

All the artists I know find survival and the right to work by means other
than the sale of their work. Their work speaks solely by their own conviction.
They are not beholden to tradition or directives other than their own. Any artist
must meet the world with his work. When he meets the world, what is his aim?
Is there a need for aim, if the inner convictions and drive are so great that he
will not settle for anything short of the fact that being an artist - and to exercise
his mode of expression - is the most important pursuit in the world?

Since the artist cannot exist outside his time, certain social pressure has
affected him, certain critical opinion has directed him. He feels the majority
rejection, so for whom does he make art? For himself first, for the opinion of
other artists next, and specifically those artists in his own mores and in his own
aesthetic realm. But his world and his realm is the same world that all others
inhabit. He has no secret code or key, no special foresight, environment,
brilliance, erudition. He exercises the right of vision - projection - by his own
choice. His preference is to be a working and recognized member of his culture,
and to have his work accepted. [. . .]

Yes, masterpieces are made today. Masterpieces are only works of art that
people especially like. The twentieth century has produced very many. Present-
day, contemporary America is producing masterpieces - a virile, aggressive,
increasing number of painters and sculptors not before produced here. [. . .]

The aesthetics of contemporary American art have not been written. The
forward movement does not have a name. Its heritage is certainly post-Fauvist,
Post-Cubist, post-Expressionist, post-purist, post-Constructivist. But there are
certain outstanding elements involved. One of the forces is freedom, and a
belligerent freedom, to reject the established tradition of the verbal aestheticians,
philosophers, and critics; instead to express emotionally and directly with the
ar tist himself as subject, without concession to the classic routine, still life, sex,



580 The Individual and the Social

mono-object and the other historic forms. Possibly this is too free, too defiant,
to accept that the soul of man's total belief can be the subject of art. No subject
is taboo in art. Why cannot the nature of man himself be the subject? There
is no order but the order of man. Yet this is great order. There is not even
form, as we traditionally know it. There is no chiaroscuro of solid bodies; now
space becomes solid, and solids become transparent. Why should we worry that
sculpture isn't chiaroscurally solid? Concept is more important than chiaroscuro.
Nothing is really unsolid. Mass is energy, space is energy, space is mass.
Whether such things are scientific facts is very, very unimportant. Art is poetic.
It is poetically irrational. The irrational is the major force in man's nature. And
as such the artist still deals with nature. Neither artist nor audience can deal
with concepts that are not nature.



13 Clyfford Still (1904-1980) Statement

Still worked and taught in California from 1946 to 1950 and moved to New York in
1951. This statement was written to accompany the work included in an exhibition at
the Museum of Modern Art, New York, the following year. As the tenor of Still's writing
indicates, there are connections to be made between the concerns of the American
avant-garde and the contemporary concerns of European Existentialism (VbI and 10).
Published in Dorothy C. Miller (ed.), J 5 Americans, New York, 1952, pp. 21-2,

That pigment on canvas has a way of initiating conventional reactions for most
people needs no reminder. Behind these reactions is a body of history matured
into dogma, authority, tradition. The totalitarian hegemony of this tradition I
despise, its presumptions I reject. Its security is an illusion, banal, and without
courage. Its substance is but dust and filing cabinets. The homage paid to it is
a celebration of death. We all bear the burden of this tradition on our backs
but I cannot hold it a privilege to be a pallbearer of my spirit in its name.

From the most ancient times the artist has been expected to perpetuate the
values of his contemporaries. The record is mainly one of frustration, sadism,
superstition, and the will to power. What greatness of life crept into the story
came from sources not yet fully understood, and the temples of art which burden
the landscape of nearly every city are a tribute to the attempt to seize this
elusive quality and stamp it out.

The anxious men find comfort in the confusion of those artists who would
walk beside them. The values involved, however, permit no peace, and mutual
resentment is deep when it is discovered that salvation cannot be bought.

We are now committed to an unqualified act, not illustrating outworn myths
or contemporary alibis. One must accept total responsibility for what he
executes. And the measure of his greatness will be in the depth of his insight
and his courage in realizing his own vision.

Demands for communication are both presumptuous and irrelevant. The
observer usually will see what his fears and hopes and learning teach him to
see. But if he can escape these demands that hold up a mirror to himself, then



w



Va The American Avant-Garde 581

perhaps some of the implications of the work may be felt. But whatever is seen
or felt it should be remembered that for me these paintings had to be something
else. It is the price one has to pay for clarity when one's means are honoured
only as an instrument of seduction or assault.



14 Harold Rosenberg (1906-1978) from The
American Action Painters'

In the critical representation of Abstract Expressionism, Rosenberg and Greenberg were
responsible for the two dominant modes, the former emphasizing existential drama and
commitment where the latter concentrated upon formal and technical innovation. 'Action
Painting' was the designation under which the new informal abstract art of the 1940s
and 1950s first became widely known in English-language criticism, to be gradually
supplanted by the now more widespread 'Abstract Expressionism' - a term which tends
specifically to identify the work of American painters rather than their comparable
European contemporaries. In fact Rosenberg may originally have intended his title to
carry a connotation of political commitment which has largely been ignored (i.e. to read
as 'American-Action Painters' rather than as 'American Action-Painters'). Echoing a
theme from his earlier fall of Paris' (IVoll), he identifies America as the new locus of
the International of Culture', and 'Action Painting' as the advanced form of that culture,
in which the possibility of revolution is kept alive at least in imagination. Originally
published in Art News, LI, New York, December 1952, pp. 22ff. Reprinted in Rosenberg,
The Tradition of the New, New York, 1959. The present extract is taken from the first
half of the essay.



Getting Inside the Canvas

At a certain moment the canvas began to appear to one American painter after
another as an arena in which to act - rather than as a space in which to
reproduce, redesign, analyse or 'express' an object, actual or imagined. What
was to go on the canvas was not a picture but an event.

The painter no longer approached his easel with an image in his mind; he
went up to it with material in his hand to do something to that other piece of
material in front of him. The image would be the result of this encounter.
* * *

Call this painting 'abstract' or 'Expressionist' or 'Abstract-Expressionist', what
counts is its special motive for extinguishing the object, which is not the same
as in other abstract or Expressionist phases of modern art.

The new xAmerican painting is not 'pure' art, since the extrusion of the object
was not for the sake of the aesthetic. The apples weren't brushed off the table
in order to make room for perfect relations of space and colour. They had to
go so that nothing would get in the way of the act of painting. In this gesturing
with materials the aesthetic, too, has been subordinated. Form, colour, compo-
sition, drawing, are auxiliaries, any one of which - or practically all, as has been
attempted logically, with unpainted canvases - can be dispensed with. What
matters alwavs is the revelation contained in the act. It is to be taken for granted



582 The Individual and the Social

that in the final effect, the image, whatever be or be not in it, will be a
tension.



Dramas Of As If

A painting that is an act is inseparable from the biography of the artist. The
painting itself is a 'moment' in the adulterated mixture of his life - whether
'moment' means the actual minutes taken up with spotting the canvas or the
entire duration of a lucid drama conducted in sign language. The act-painting
is of the same metaphysical substance as the artist's existence. The new painting
has broken down every distinction between art and life.

It follows that anything is relevant to it. Anything that has to do with action
- psychology, philosophy, history, mythology, hero worship. Anything but art
criticism. The painter gets away from art through his act of painting; the critic
can't get away from it. The critic who goes on judging in terms of schools,
styles, form - as if the painter were still concerned with producing a certain
kind of object (the work of art), instead of living on the canvas - is bound to
seem a stranger. [. . .]

Art - relation of the painting to the works of the past, rightness of colour,
texture, balance, etc. - comes back into painting by way of psychology. As
Stevens says of poetry, 'it is a process of the personality of the poet'. But the
psychology is the psychology of creation. Not that of the so-called psychological
criticism that wants to 'read' a painting for clues to the artist's sexual preferences
or debilities. The work, the act, translates the psychologically given into the
intentional, into a 'world' - and thus transcends it.

With traditional aesthetic references discarded as irrelevant, what gives the
canvas its meaning is not psychological data but role, the way the artist organizes
his emotional and intellectual energy as if he were in a living situation. The
interest lies in the kind of act taking place in the four-sided arena, a dramatic
interest.

Criticism must begin by recognizing in the painting the assumptions inherent
in its mode of creation. Since the painter has become an actor, the spectator
has to think in a vocabulary of action: its inception, duration, direction - psychic
state, concentration and relaxation of the will, passivity, alert waiting. He must
become a connoisseur of the gradations between the automatic, the spontaneous,
the evoked.

'It's Not That, It's Not That, It's Not That'

With a few important exceptions, most of the artists of this vanguard found
their way to their present work by being cut in two. Their type is not a young
painter but a re-born one. The man may be over forty, the painter around seven.
The diagonal of a grand crisis separates him from his personal and artistic past.

Many of the painters were 'Marxists' (WPA unions, artists' congresses); they
had been trying to paint Society. Others had been trying to paint Art (Cubism,
Post-Impressionism) - it amounts to the same thing.



Va The American Avant-Garde 583

The big moment came when it was decided to paint . . , just TO PAINT. The
gesture on the canvas was a gesture of liberation, from Value - political,
aesthetic, moral.

If the war and the decline of radicalism in America had anything to do with
this sudden impatience, there is no evidence of it. About the effects of large
issues upon their emotions, Americans tend to be either reticent or unconscious.
The French artist thinks of himself as a battlegound of history; here one hears
only of private Dark Nights. Yet it is strange how many segregated individuals
came to a dead stop within the past ten years and abandoned, even physically
destroyed, the work they had been doing. A far-off watcher unable to realize
that these events were taking place in silence might have assumed they were
being directed by a single voice.

At its centre the movement was away from, rather than towards. The Great
Works of the Past and the Good Life of the Future became equally nil.

The refusal of values did not take the form of condemnation or defiance of
society, as it did after the First World War. It was diffident. The lone artist
did not want the world to be different, he wanted his canvas to be a world.
Liberation from the object meant liberation from the 'nature', society and art
already there. It was a movement to leave behind the self that wished to choose
bis future and to nullify its promissory notes to the past.

With the American, heir of the pioneer and the immigrant, the foundering
of Art and Society was not experienced as a loss. On the contrary, the end of
Art marked the beginning of an optimism regarding himself as an artist.

The American vanguard painter took to the white expanse of the canvas as
Melville's Ishmael took to the sea.

On the one hand, a desperate recognition of moral and intellectual exhaustion;
on the other, the exhilaration of an adventure over depths in which he might
find reflected the true image of his identity.

Painting could now be reduced to that equipment which the artist needed for
an activity that would be an alternative to both utility and idleness. Guided by
visual and somatic memories of paintings he had seen or made - memories
which he did his best to keep from intruding into his consciousness - he
gesticulated upon the canvas and watched for what each novelty would declare
him and his art to be.

Based on the phenomenon of conversion the new movement is, with the majority
of the painters, essentially a religious movement. In almost every case, however,
the conversion has been experienced in secular terms. The result has been the
creation of private myths.

The tension of the private myth is the content of every painting of this
vanguard. The act on the canvas springs from an attempt to resurrect the saving
moment in his 'story' when the painter first felt himself released from Value -
myth of past self-recognition. Or it attempts to initiate a new moment in which
the painter will realize his total personality - myth of future self-recognition.

Some formulate their myth verbally and connect individual works with its episodes.
With others, usually deeper, the painting itself is the exclusive formulation, a Sign.



584 The Individual and the Social

The revolution against the given, in the self and in the world, which since
Hegel has provided European vanguard art with theories of a New Reality, has
re-entered America in the form of personal revolts. Art as action rests on the
enormous assumption that the artist accepts as real only that which he is in the
process of creating. 'Except the soul has divested itself of the love of created
things . . . ' The artist works in a condition of open possibility, risking, to follow
Kierkegaard, the anguish of the aesthetic, which accompanies possibility lacking
in reality. To maintain the force to refrain from settling anything, he must
exercise in himself a constant No. [ . . . ]



15 Clyfford Still (1904-1980) Letter to Gordon Smith

Written for the catalogue of a collection of Still's work held at the Buffalo Fine Arts
Academy, Albright-Knox Art Gallery, of which Smith was director. The collection was
exhibited from 5 November to 13 December 1959, and the catalogue Paintings by
Clyfford Still was published on that occasion. The letter is dated January 1, 1959.

Your suggestion that I write a few notes for the catalog of this collection of
paintings raises the same interest and the same qualifications that were present
when the exhibition itself was first considered. The paradox manifest by the
appearance of this work in an institution whose meaning and function must
point in a direction opposite to that implied in the paintings - and my own life
- was accepted. I believe it will not be resolved, but instead will be sharpened
and clarified. For it was never a problem of aesthetics, or public or private
acceptance, that determined my responsibility to the completed work. Rather,
it was the hope to make clear its conceptual germination of idea and vision,
without which all art becomes but an exercise in conformity with shifting
fashions or tribal ethics. Perhaps a brief review is in order -.

In the few directions we were able to look during the 1920s, whether to past
cultures or the scientific, aesthetic, and social myths of our own, it was amply
evident that in them lay few answers valid for insight or imagination.

The fog had been thickened, not lifted, by those who, out of weakness or for
positions of power, looked back to the Old World for means to extend their
authority in this newer land. Already mired by moralists and utilitarians in the
swamps of folkways and synthetic traditions, we were especially vulnerable to
the mechanistic interpretations of motive and meaning. There followed a deluge
of total confusion.

Self-appointed spokesmen and self-styled intellectuals with the lust of imma-
turity for leadership invoked all the gods of Apology and hung them around
our necks with compulsive and sadistic fervor. Hegel, Kierkegaard, Cezanne,
Freud, Picasso, Kandinsky, Plato, Marx, Aquinas, Spengler, Einstein, Bell,
Croce, Monet - the list grows monotonous. But that ultimate in irony - the
Armory Show of 1913 - had dumped upon us the combined and sterile
conclusions of Western European decadence. For nearly a quarter of a century
we groped and stumbled through the nightmare of its labyrinthine evasions.



i



Va The American Avant-Garde 585

And even yet its banalities and trivia are welcomed and exploited by many who
find the aura of death more reassuring than their impotence or fears. No one
was permitted to escape its fatalistic rituals - yet I, for one, refused to accept
its ultimatums.

To add to the body of reference or 'sensibility' which indulges homage or
acquiescence to the collectivist rationale of our culture, I must equate with
intellectual suicide. The omnivorousness of the totalitarian mind, however,
demands a rigor of purpose and subtlety of insight from anyone who would
escape incorporation.

Semantically and ethically the corruption is complete. Preoccupation with
luminous devices is equated with spiritual enlightenment. The laws of Euclid
are publicly damned to promote work illustrating an authoritarian dialectic.
Witless parodies are displayed as evidence of social artistic commitment; and
qualitative arrangements are presented as evidence of access to supernal mys-
teries. The rush to betray, in the name of aesthetics or 'painting', an imagery
born in repudiation of socio-psychological fallacies becomes a popular, but
sinister, measure of its power.

Unknown are the crimes not covered by the skirts of that ubiquitous old
harridan called Art. Even the whimperings and insolence of the venal are
treasured in her name - and for their reassurance - by the arrogant and
contemptuous. Indeed, among ambitious esthetes, artists, architects, and writers,
the burden of our heritage is borne lightly but mainly by hatred or cyncism.
The impudence and sterility which so hypnotically fascinate the indifferent,
perform a sordid substitute for responsibility and truth.

I held it imperative to evolve an instrument of thought which would aid in
cutting through all cultural opiates, past and present, so that a direct, immediate,
and truly free vision could be achieved, and an idea be revealed with clarity.

To acquire such an instrument, however - one that would transcend the
powers of conventional technics and symbols, yet be as an aid and instant critic
of thought - demanded full resolution of the past, and present, through it. No
shouting about individualism, no capering before an expanse of canvas, no
manipulation of academic conceits or technical fetishes can truly liberate. These
only make repetition inevitable and compound deceit.

Thus it was necessary to reject the superficial value of material - its qualities,
its tensions, and its concomitant ethic. Especially it became necessary not to
remain trapped in the banal concepts of space and time, nor yield to the
morbidity of 'the objective position 1 ; nor to permit one's courage to be perverted
by authoritarian devices for social control.

It was as a journey that one must make, walking straight and alone. No respite
or short-cuts were permitted. And one's will had to hold against every challenge
of triumph, or failure, or the praise of Vanity Fair. Until one had crossed the
darkened and wasted valleys and come at last into clear air and could stand on
a high and limitless plain. Imagination, no longer fettered by the laws of fear,
became as one with Vision. And the Act, intrinsic and absolute, was its meaning,
and the bearer of its passion.



586 The Individual and the Social

The work itself, whether thought of as image of Idea, as revelation, or as a
manifest of meaning, could not have existed without a profound concern to
achieve a purpose beyond vanity, ambition, or remembrance, for a man's term
of life. Yet, while one looks at this work, a warning should be given, lest one
forget, among the multitude of issues, the relation I bear to those with 'eyes'.
Although the reference is in a different context and for another purpose, a
metaphor is pertinent as William Blake set it down:

The Vision of Christ that thou dost see
Is my Vision's Greatest Enemy:
Thine is the friend of All Mankind,
Mine speaks in parables to the Blind:

Therefore, let no man under-value the implications of this work or its power
for life:- or for death, if it is misused.

Although several large and significant areas of the work can not be exhibited,
I believe what will be shown will justify the interest and effort you have so
courageously given.



Vb

Individualism in Europe



1 Jean-Paul Sartre (1905-1980) from Existentialism
and Humanism

'Humanism' was a term adopted by the Communist Parties to describe their philo-
sophical world-view, particularly during the period of struggle against Fascism. Such
orthodox Marxism tended to be determinist. By contrast, Sartre had developed the
philosophy of Existentialism during the 1930s, laying heavy emphasis on subjectivity
and the consequences of the individual will. In the aftermath of the Second World War
and the Resistance, Sartre attempted to connect Marxism and Existentialism. Here he
stresses the latter's hitherto under-emphasized social implications, and likens moral
action in the world to the production of a work of art. (It should be noted that in his
contemporary essay 'What Is Literature?', Sartre emphasized a concept of the com-
mitted artist, distinct both from a view of art as beyond politics and from the Stalinist
reduction of art to politics.) Originally published as L'existentialisme est un humanisme,
Paris, 1946. These extracts are taken from the English translation by Philip Mairet,
London, 1948, pp. 27-30 and p. 49.

If one considers an article of manufacture - as, for example, a book or a
paper-knife - one sees that it has been made by an artisan who had a conception
of it; and he has paid attention, equally, to the conception of a paper-knife and
to the pre-existent technique of production which is a part of that conception
and is, at bottom, a formula. Thus the paper-knife is at the same time an article
producible in a certain manner and one which, on the other hand, serves a
definite purpose, for one cannot suppose that a man would produce a paper-knife
without knowing what it was for. Let us say, then, of the paper-knife that its
essence - that is to say the sum of the formulae and the qualities which made
its production and its definition possible - precedes its existence. The presence
of such-and-such a paper-knife or book is thus determined before my eyes.
Here, then, we are viewing the world from a technical standpoint, and we can
say that production precedes existence.

When we think of God as the creator, we are thinking of him, most of the
time, as a supernal artisan. Whatever doctrine we may be considering, whether
it be a doctrine like that of Descartes, or of Leibnitz himself, we always
imply that the will follows, more or less, from the understanding or at least



588 The Individual and the Social

accompanies it, so that when God creates he knows precisely what he is creating.
Thus, the conception of man in the mind of God is comparable to that of the
paper-knife in the mind of the artisan: God makes man according to a procedure
and a conception, exactly as the artisan manufactures a paper-knife, following
a definition and a formula. Thus each individual man is the realization of a
certain conception which dwells in the divine understanding. In the philosophic
atheism of the eighteenth century, the notion of God is suppressed, but not,
for all that, the idea that essence is prior to existence; something of that idea
we still find everywhere, in Diderot, in Voltaire and even in Kant. Man possesses
a human nature; that 'human nature, 1 which is the conception of human being,
is found in every man; which means that each man is a particular example of
an universal conception, the conception of Man. In Kant, this universality goes
so far that the wild man of the woods, man in the state of nature, and the
bourgeois are all contained in the same definition and have the same fundamental
qualities. Here again, the essence of man precedes that historic existence which
we confront in experience.

Atheistic existentialism, of which I am a representative, declares with greater
consistency that if God does not exist there is at least one being whose existence
comes before its essence, a being which exists before it can be defined by any
conception of it. That being is man or, as Heidegger has it, the human reality.
What do we mean by saying that existence precedes essence? We mean that
man first of all exists, encounters himself, surges up in the world - and defines
himself afterwards. If man as the existentialist sees him is not definable, it is
because to begin with he is nothing. He will not be anything until later, and
then he will be what he makes of himself. Thus, there is no human nature,
because there is no God to have a conception of it. Man simply is. Not that
he is simply what he conceives himself to be, but he is what he wills, and as
he conceives himself after already existing - as he wills to be after that leap
towards existence. Man is nothing else but that which he makes of himself.
That is the first principle of existentialism. And this is what people call its
'subjectivity,' using the word as a reproach against us. But what do we mean
to say by this, but that man is of a greater dignity than a stone or a table? For
we mean to say that man primarily exists - that man is, before all else, something
which propels itself towards a future and is aware that it is doing so. Man is,
indeed, a project which possesses a subjective life, instead of being a kind of
moss, or a fungus or a cauliflower. Before that projection of the self nothing
exists; not even in the heaven of intelligence: man will only attain existence
when' he is what he purposes to be. Not, however, what he may wish to be.
For what we usually understand by wishing or willing is a conscious decision
taken - much more often than not - after we have made ourselves what we are.
I may wish to join a party, to write a book or to marry - but in such a case
what is usually called my will is probably a manifestation of a prior and more
spontaneous decision. If, however, it is true that existence is prior to essence,
man is responsible for what he is. Thus, the first effect of existentialism is that
it puts every man in possession of himself as he is, and places the entire
responsibility for his existence squarely upon his own shoulders. And, when we



Vb Individualism in Europe 589

say that man is responsible for himself, we do not mean that he is responsible
only for his own individuality, but that he is responsible for all men. The word
'subjectivism' is to be understood in two senses, and our adversaries play upon
only one of them. Subjectivism means, on the one hand, the freedom of the
individual subject and, on the other, that man cannot pass beyond human
subjectivity. It is the latter which is the deeper meaning of existentialism. When
we say that man chooses himself, we do mean that every one of us must choose
himself; but by that we also mean that in choosing for himself he chooses for
all men. For in effect, of all the actions a man may take in order to create
himself as he wills to be, there is not one which is not creative, at the same
time, of an image of man such as he believes he ought to be. To choose between
this or that is at the same time to affirm the value of that which is chosen; for
we are unable ever to choose the worse. What we choose is always the better;
and nothing can be better for us unless it is better for all. If, moreover, existence
precedes essence and we will to exist at the same time as we fashion our image,
that image is valid for all and for the entire epoch in which we find ourselves.
Our responsibility is thus much greater than we had supposed, for it concerns
mankind as a whole. If I am a worker, for instance, I may choose to join a
Christian rather than a Communist trade union. And if, by that membership,
I choose to signify that resignation is, after all, the attitude that best becomes
a man, that man's kingdom is not upon this earth, I do not commit myself
alone to that view. Resignation is my will for everyone, and my action is, in
consequence, a commitment on behalf of all mankind. Or if, to take a more
personal case, I decide to marry and to have children, even though this decision
proceeds simply from my situation, from my passion or my desire, I am thereby
committing not only myself, but humanity as a whole, to the practice of
monogamy. I am thus responsible for myself and for all men, and I am creating
a certain image of man as I would have him to be. In fashioning myself I fashion
man.
* * *

[. . .] In our view, . . . man finds himself in an organized situation in which
he is himself involved: his choice involves mankind in its entirety, and he cannot
avoid choosing. Either he must remain single, or he must marry without having
children, or he must marry and have children. In any case, and whichever he
may choose, it is impossible for him, in respect of this situation, not to take
complete responsibility. Doubtless he chooses without reference to any pre-
established values, but it is unjust to tax him with caprice. Rather let us say
that the moral choice is comparable to the construction of a work of art.

But here I must at once digress to make it quite clear that we are not
propounding an aesthetic morality, for our adversaries are disingenuous enough
to reproach us even with that. I mention the work of art only by way of
comparison. That being understood, does anyone reproach an artist when he
paints a picture for not following rules established a priori? Does one ever ask
what is the picture that he ought to paint? As everyone knows, there is no
pre-defined picture for him to make; the artist applies himself to the composition
of a picture, and the picture that ought to be made is precisely that which he



590 The Individual and the Social

will have made. As everyone knows, there are no aesthetic values a priori, but
there are values which will appear in due course in the coherence of the picture,
in the relation between the will to create and the finished work. No one can
tell what the painting of tomorrow will be like; one cannot judge a painting
until it is done. What has that to do with morality? We are in the same creative
situation. We never speak of a work of art as irresponsible; when we are
discussing a canvas by Picasso, we understand very well that the composition
became what it is at the time when he was painting it, and that his works are
part and parcel of his entire life.

It is the same upon the plane of morality. There is this in common between
art and morality, that in both we have to do with creation and invention. We
cannot decide a priori what it is that should be done. [. . .]



2 Jean Dubuffet (b. 1901) 'Notes for the
Well-Lettered'

In the immediate aftermath of the Second World War, as after the First, artists were
drawn to a foundational critique of the protocols of a culture which, for all its overt
embrace of higher values had, in the last instance, failed to prevent the Holocaust.
Dubuffet, who had practised as a full-time artist since 1942, coined the term 'Art Brut'
for the collection he made of artefacts produced by children, the naive, the 'primitive'
and the psychotic. These were first exhibited at the Galerie Rene Drouin in Paris in
November 1947 as examples of an immediate creation, untainted by the decorum of
a discredited civilization. Written during the spring and summer of 1945, Dubuffet's
'Notes' consisted of eighty-two dictionary-like entries, ranging from a few lines to over
a page in length, from which the present seven are selected. Originally published in
Dubuffet's Prospectus, Paris, 1946, pp. 47-99; reprinted in Dubuffet, Prospectus et
tous ecrits suivants, Paris, 1967, from which text the present translation is made.

Departing from the formless

The point of departure is the surface one is to bring alive - canvas or a piece
of paper - and the first stroke of colour or ink that one lays on it; the resulting
effect, the resulting adventure. It is this stroke, the degree to which one enriches
it and gives it direction, that shapes the work. A painting is not built like a
house, following architectural specifications; but rather by facing away from the
end result; gropings, going backwards! Alchemist, it is not by looking at gold
that you will discover how to make it. Go to your retorts, boil urine, look avidly
at lead; that's your job. And you, painter, look to your palettes and rags, strokes
of colour, patches and lines, that's where you'll find the keys you're looking
for.



Painting Ensnared

'This is not painting! It's a line that you have drawn on the ground with your
nail - and that? No better! It's soft fabric like a curtain or a tapestry. As for




Vb Individualism in Europe 591

this, it looks like a railway signal. This looks like house painting! And this other
one, which you've baked, it's not painting, it's pottery or pastry. This one is a
piece of interior decor; this one should be a poster; this one's a book cover.
Here's a piece of kitchenware, there's a coloured-in drawing. I wouldn't accept
this at the paint counter. You mix everything up. A skin specialist doesn't treat
liver diseases. I need works that are mutually comparable, so I can classify them,
give them a relative ranking, in a well-defined category. And then? Well, I fix
the prices accordingly. That's it, it's all clear.' Too clear, I say. I'm in favour
of confusion. Do not confine art, cut it off from the real world, keep it in a
trap. I want painting to be full of life - decorations, swatches of colour, signs
and placards, scratches on the ground. These are its native soil.

The Native Soil Forgotten

There is no commerce between so-called artistic painting (which claims the
exclusive right to this title) and that which is more moderately called house
painting, or interior decorating. They don't know each other, don't speak to
each other. This is not good. Come on! Do both kinds of people spend their
entire working lives with the same colours; thickening them, thinning them,
applying them in all sorts of ways, yet not giving each other the slightest bit
of advice? Can it be that they just do not meet? I once helped out an artist at
the very beginning of his career. He walked straight past a paint merchant's,
where there were large tins and barrels of paint of every sort of pigment, drawers
full of the most stunning powders, without so much as a sidelong glance - he
quickened his step. At a stationer's shop, he bought six small tubes of special
artists' colours, smaller than those used for Vaseline or Seccotine. Back home
he squeezed a little from each tube, and sat down in front of an apple. Under
his window a workman, armed with some cans of paint, was working on a lifesize
shop sign of an innkeeper presenting a menu. But he noticed neither the
workman nor his work. I met this artist twenty years later. He was still painting
apples with his small tubes of paint. I mentioned the picture of the innkeeper
on the facade of his house. It never occurred to him to look at it, he told me.
I also mentioned the colours of his studio walls but he told me that artists are
distracted and quirky people, so profoundly absorbed in their work that they
never take note of things like that.

Bargain Hunter

Accidents which happen by chance. Admittedly, a slightly contrived chance, or
provoked, or more or less consented to; used by the artist for profit - chances
which are, quite rightly, the game that the artist hunts, which he constantly
calls out to, watches and traps. Chances like: the slight unevenness, the small
gaps resulting from the shaking of the brush (it sometimes happens that a line
is more or less coloured than another), all of which cause the underlying tones
to become more or less transparent. There are an infinite number of such
accidents in a painting. They are very important for the picture's attractiveness.



592 The Individual and the Social



The distribution of tones, of light and shade, often results from such accidents.
They often cause light to fall on one part of a face, for example; whereas the
painter wanted to put the light on a different aspect of the subject. But the
accident rules supreme: it occured in that spot and the painter must accomodate
it, turn it to advantage. How thrilling is the pursuit and exploitation of these
favourable accidents; how full of surprises and lures the painter's game! It is
no longer a matter of using docile colours, whose effects are known in advance,
but rather of using their magical properties, those that seem to arise from a
will of their own, which have more power than the strongest intentions of the
artist! He uses these helpers, whose power is greater than his own, like someone
who moulds in lead. It is as if the brushes are enchanted: they work wonders.
Take a subject, such as a portrait of a human face, at a certain stage of the
picture's development. I roughly work on a polychromatic background, paint-
brush full of an unexpected colour - with black, for example, or green, or
whatever; then a miracle is produced, a magic trick! This colour rapidly and
sketchily slapped on, happily joins the colours it covers, whilst leaving them
imperceptibly transparent in other places, in such a way that it forms gradations
and links of tone that are so fine, so subtle, that no deliberate plan could have
proposed them, let alone executed them. What does it matter at this point that
you have used black or green or pink for this purpose, and that the portrait
remains bright or dark as a consequence; you still have this effect of nuanced
subtlety in any case. It also does not matter that the path of the paintbrush has
left a touch of black which was not dry; this will be a moustache. Instead of a
female figure, which the artist originally proposed - though he lacked a detailed
plan, and he was not particularly committed to the subject - it can now be a
portrait of a man.

Never Work Hard

Let us reject tedious work. It goes against human nature, against the cosmic
rhythms, it goes against man himself, to take trouble where none is needed. It
is natural for him to apply himself to avoiding such work; to use every
instrument that comes to hand, every favourable chance which can help him
out, to make his work easier and more pleasant. Tedious work is inhuman and
repugnant, every work which shows signs of it is ugly. It is pleasure and ease,
without harshness and constraint, which create grace in every human gesture.

Two Dimensions

The purpose of painting is to decorate surfaces, and it therefore effects only
two dimensions and excludes depth. The purpose is not to enrich depth, but
to alter and adulterate it, to create a relief effect or trompe-V ml by means of
light and shade. There is an element of deception about this which is repellent.
It offends against reason and taste, and it is clumsy and idle. Put a white dot
in the middle of an apple, with shading of planes to suggest distance; close your
eyes, and it seems like living sculpture - poor little contrivance! Let us find



Vb Individualism in Europe 593

other ingenious ways to transcribe objects on to flat surfaces; make the surface
speak its own surface-language and not a false three-dimensional language which
is alien to it. Is a surface to be somehow completed, by filling it with holes and
lumps and distances? That is to torture it. I rather favour the necessity of
leaving it completely flat. My eyes are gratified when they come to rest on a
completely flat surface, especially a rectangular one. The represented objects
would be transferred onto it changed into pancakes, ironed flat.

Fanfare for the Common Man

There are no more great men, no more geniuses. We are finally free of these
malevolent dummies. Genius was an invention of the Greeks, like the centaurs
and the hippogryphs. There are as many geniuses as there are unicorns. We
have been so scared of them for three thousand years.

It is not men who are great. It is man who is great. It is not wonderful to
be exceptional. It is wonderful to be a man.



3 Jean Dubuffet (b. 1901) 'Crude Art Preferred to
Cultural Art'

The Compagnie de I'Art Brut was formed in June 1948 initially to manage the collection
of artefacts held at the Galerie Drouin, and, in addition, to promote the exhibition of
works embodying similar tendencies but produced by professional artists. Founder
members, as well as Dubuffet, included Andre Breton and Michel Tapie. I'Art Brut
prefere aux arts culturels' was the title of the group's major exhibition held at the Galerie
Drouin in October and November 1948. It included over 200 works by sixty-three artists.
Dubuffet's essay constituted the Preface to the catalogue, and came to be regarded
as the group's manifesto. Reprinted in Dubuffet, 1967 (op. cit), from which the present
translation is made.

Anyone who undertakes, as we do, to look at the works of the Irregulars, will
find his notion of the approved art of the museums, galleries and salons - let
us call it cultural art - totally transformed. This type of approved art will not
seem representative of art in general, rather merely the activity of a particular
clique: a cohort of careerist intellectuals.

What country lacks its small clique of cultural arts; its troop of careerist
intellectuals? It is obligatory. From one capital to another, they ape each other
marvellously; they practise an artificial, esperanto art tirelessly copied every-
where. Is art the right word? Does it actually have anything to do with art?

It is fairly widely thought that in considering the artistic production of
intellectuals one is at the same time grasping the flower of production in general,
since intellectuals, being drawn from the common people, cannot lack any of
their qualities, having rather those additional qualities acquired by wearing out
their trousers on the schoolroom bench - without allowing for the fact that
intellectuals think themselves by definition far more intelligent than ordinary
People. But is this really so? One also meets plenty of people with a far less



594 The Individual and the Social

favourable opinion of the intellectual type. The intellectual type seems to them
directionless, impenetrable, lacking in vitamins, a swimmer in pap. Empty,
without magnetism, without vision.

Perhaps the solid seat of the intellectual has been pulled out from under him. The
intellectual's labours are always carried out while seated: at school, at conferences, at
congresses. Often while dozing; sometimes while dead. Dead in one's seat.

For a long time, intelligence has been highly valued. When one says of
someone that they are intelligent, has one not said everything? Nowadays people
are growing disillusioned with this; they are beginning to demand other things.
Intellectual qualities are less prized. People now value health and vitality. One
can see that what was called intelligence is nothing more than a modicum of
knowledge in the manipulation of simple, false and pointless algebraic formulae,
having nothing to do with genuine vision (but rather obscuring it).

One cannot deny that on the level of vision, the light of the intellectual is
far from bright. The imbecile (or those the intellectual calls imbeciles) shows
greater aptitude. It might even be that this vision gets worn out by the school
benches, along with the seat of the intellectual's pants. Imbecile perhaps, but
sparks fly from him, unlike Mr Grammar School, who doesn't spark at all.
Good for the imbecile! He is our man! [. . .]

There are still people, particularly the intellectuals, who do not clearly see
that the intelligent are hopeless cases, and one needs to rely on the so-called
imbeciles for moments of lucidity; indeed, they just laugh at the idea. They
cannot take the idea seriously.

The intellectual is of course crazy about ideas; he loves to chew them over,
and cannot imagine any other type of chewing gum.

One can with justification call art a chewing gum totally devoid of such ideas.
One can sometimes lose sight of this. Ideas, and the algebra of ideas, may be
a level of knowledge, but art is another means of knowledge, whose levels are
completely different: they are those of vision. Vision has nothing to do with
intellectuals and academics. Knowledge and intelligence are weak instruments
compared to vision.

Ideas are an inert gas. It is when vision is blinded that the intellectual pops
his head up.

Art exists to be a way of operating that does not involve ideas. When it is
mixed with ideas, art becomes oxidized and worthless. Let there be as few ideas
as possible! Ideas do not nourish art!

There are people (the present writer for example) who go so far as to maintain
that the art of these intellectuals is false art, the counterfeit currency of art,
which is intricately ornamented but unsound.

Certainly the ornament is of some slight interest, but whether it sounds true
is more interesting. Many slight works, brief, almost lacking form ring very
loudly indeed; and for that reason they are preferable to many monumental
works by illustrious professionals.

It is enough for certain people just to tell them that the creator of a work is
a professional artist, so that the spell is immediately broken. Amongst artists,
as amongst card-players or lovers, professionals are a little like crooks. [. . .]




Vb Individualism in Europe 595

True art is never where it is expected to be: in the place where no one
considers it, nor names it. Art hates to be recognized and greeted by its name.
It runs away immediately. Art is a person in love with anonymity. As soon as
it's unmasked, as soon as someone points the finger, it runs away. It leaves in
its place a prize stooge wearing on its back a great placard marked ART, which
everybody immediately showers with champagne, and which the lecturers lead
from town to town with a ring through its nose. That is the false Art. That is
the art which the public knows, the art of the prize and the placard. The real
Mr Art, no one recognizes. He walks everywhere, everyone has met him, jostled
him at every junction, but no one thinks it could be him, Mr Art himself, of
whom so much has been said. He does not have the right air about him. You
see, it is the false Mr Art who has the air of being the true one; it is the real
one who lacks this air. That means that one is deceived! So many people deceive
themselves!

It was in July 1945 that we undertook in both France and Switzerland, then
in other countries, methodical research into the relevant ways of producing that
which we now call Crude Art.

We understand by this works created by those untouched by artistic culture;
in which copying has little part, unlike the art of intellectuals. Similarly, the
artists take everything (subjects, choice of materials, modes of transposition,
rhythms, writing styles) from their own inner being, not from the canons of
classical or fashionable art. We engage in an artistic enterprise that is completely
pure, basic; totally guided in all its phases solely by the creator's own impulses.
It is therefore, an art which only manifests invention, not the characteristics of
cultural art which are those of the chameleon and the monkey.

Before concluding this essay we want to say a word about the mad. Madness
gives man wings and helps his power of vision; many of the objects (almost
half) that our exhibition contains are works by people in psychiatric hospitals.
We see no reason to segregate them, unlike others. All the numerous dealings
that we have had with our friends have convinced us that the mechanisms of
artistic creation are the same in them as in so-called normal people. This
distinction between normal and abnormal seems to us to be quite far-fetched:
who is normal? Where is he, your normal man? Show him to us! The artistic
act, with the extreme tension that it implies, the high fever that accompanies
it, can it ever be considered normal? Finally, mental 'illnesses' are extremely
diverse - there are almost as many of them as there are sick people - and it
seems quite arbitrary to label them all in the same way. Our point of view is
that art is the same in all cases, and there is no more an art of the mad than
there is an art of the dyspeptic, or an art for those with bad knees.



4 Antonin Artaud (1896-1948) from Van Gogh: the
Man Suicided by Society

Artaud had been involved with the Surrealists in the 1920s, but broke with them in
1927 on political grounds. He published the manifesto of his own Theatre of Cruelty'




596 The Individual and the Social

in 1932. Continually subject to mental instability, he was treated from 1943 under the
supervision of Dr Gaston Ferdiere, a collector of psychotic art, who encouraged him
to draw for therapeutic purposes. Written and pictorial forms of expression thus became
inextricably linked for Artaud. He increasingly identified with the figure of van Gogh, as
the utterer of truths unbearable to society. The long text from which the present extracts
are taken was composed in response to the large van Gogh exhibition held in Paris in
January-March 1947. Originally published as Van Gogh le suicide de /a societe, Paris,
September 1947, in a limited edition of 630 copies including reproductions of works
by van Gogh. The present extracts are reproduced from the essay's Introduction, and
are taken from the English translation by Helen Weaver in Susan Sontag (ed.), Antonin
Artaud: Selected Writings, Los Angeles, 1976-88. (The identity of the Dr L. criticized
in the text remains unclear.)

One can speak of the good mental health of van Gogh who, in his whole life,
cooked only one of his hands and did nothing else except once to cut off his
left ear,

in a world in which every day one eats vagina cooked in green sauce or penis
of newborn child whipped and beaten to a pulp,

just as it is when plucked from the sex of its mother.

And this is not an image, but a fact abundantly and daily repeated and
cultivated throughout the world.

And this, however delirious this statement may seem, is how modern life
maintains its old atmosphere of debauchery, anarchy, disorder, delirium, de-
rangement, chronic insanity, bourgeois inertia, psychic anomaly (for it is not
man but the world which has become abnormal), deliberate dishonesty and
notorious hypocrisy, stingy contempt for everything that shows breeding,

insistence on an entire order based on the fulfillment of a primitive injustice,

in short, of organized crime.

Things are going badly because sick consciousness has a vested interest right
now in not recovering from its sickness.

This is why a tainted society has invented psychiatry to defend itself against
the investigations of certain superior intellects whose faculties of divination
would be troublesome.

Gerard de Nerval was not mad, but society accused him of being mad in order
to discredit certain very important revelations that he was about to make,

and besides being accused, he was also struck on the head, physically struck
on the head on a certain night so that he would lose memory of the monstrous
facts which he was about to reveal and which, as a result of this blow, were
pushed back within him onto a supranatural level, because all society, secretly
in league against his consciousness, was at that moment powerful enough to
make him forget their reality.

No, van Gogh was not mad, but his paintings were bursts of Greek fire,
atomic bombs, whose angle of vision, unlike all other paintings popular at the
time, would have been capable of seriously upsetting the spectral conformity of
the Second Empire bourgeoisie and of the myrmidons of Thiers, Gambetta, and
Felix Faure, as well as those of Napoleon III.



Vb Individualism in Europe 597

For it is not a certain conformity of manners that the painting of van Gogh
attacks, but rather the conformity of institutions themselves. And even external
nature, with her climates, her tides, and her equinoctial storms, cannot, after
van Gogh's stay upon earth, maintain the same gravitation.

All the more reason why on the social level institutions are falling apart and
medicine resembles a stale and useless corpse which declares van Gogh insane.

In comparison with the lucidity of van Gogh, which is a dynamic force,
psychiatry is no better than a den of apes who are themselves obsessed and
persecuted and who posses nothing to mitigate the most appalling states of
anguish and human suffocation but a ridiculous terminology,

worthy product of their damaged brains.

Indeed, the psychiatrist does not exist who is not a well-known erotomaniac.

And I do not believe that the rule of the confirmed erotomania of psychiatrists
admits of a single exception.

I know one who objected, a few years ago, to the idea of my accusing as a
group this way the whole gang of respected scoundrels and patented quacks to
which he belonged.

I, Mr Artaud, am not an erotomaniac, he told me, and I defy you to show
me a single piece of evidence on which you can base your accusation.

As evidence, Dr L., I need only show you yourself,

you bear the stigma on your mug,

you rotten bastard.

You have the puss of someone who inserts his sexual prey under his tongue
and then turns it over like an almond as a way of showing contempt for it.

This is called feathering one's nest or having one's way.

If in coitus you have not succeeded in chuckling from the glottis in a certain
way that you know, and in rumbling at the same time through the pharynx,
the esophagus, the ureter, and the anus,

you cannot say that you are satisfied.

And through your internal organic thrills you have fallen into a rut which is
the incarnate evidence of a foul lust,

and which you have been cultivating year after year, more and more, because
socially speaking it does not come under the jurisdiction of the law,

but it comes under the jurisdiction of another law whereby it is the whole
damaged consciousness that suffers, because by behaving in this way you prevent
it from breathing.

You dismiss as delirious a consciousness that is active even as you strangle
it with your vile sexuality.

And this was precisely the level on which poor van Gogh was chaste,

chaste as a seraph or a maiden cannot be, because it was in fact they

who fomented

and nourished in the beginning the vast machinery of sin.

And perhaps, Dr L., you belong to the race of iniquitous seraphim, but for
pity's sake, leave men alone,

the body of van Gogh, untouched by any sin, was also untouched by madness
which, indeed, sin alone can bring.



598 The Individual and the Social

And I do not believe in Catholic sin,

but I do believe in erotic crime which in fact all the geniuses of the earth,

the authentic madmen of the asylums, have guarded themselves against,

or if not, it was because they were not (authentically) mad.

And what is an authentic madman?

It is a man who preferred to become mad, in the socially accepted sense of
the word, rather than forfeit a certain superior idea of human honor.

So society has strangled in its asylums all those it wanted to get rid of or
protect itself from, because they refused to become its accomplices in certain
great nastinesses.

For a madman is also a man whom society did not want to hear and whom
it wanted to prevent from uttering certain intolerable truths.

But, in this case, confinement is not its only weapon, and the concerted
gathering of men has other means of overcoming the wills it wants to break.

Besides the minor spells of country sorcerers, there are the great sessions of
world-wide spell-casting in which all alerted consciousness participates period-
ically.

Thus on the occasion of a war, a revolution, or a social upheaval still in the
bud, the collective consciousness is questioned and questions itself, and makes
its judgment.

This consciousness may also be aroused and called forth spontaneously in
connection with certain particularly striking individual cases.

Thus there were collective magic spells in connection with Baudelaire, Poe,
Gerard de Nerval, Nietzsche, Kierkegaard, Holderlin, Coleridge,

and also in connection with van Gogh.

This may take place in the daytime, but generally, it is more likely to take
place at night.

Thus strange forces are aroused and brought up into the astral vault, into
that kind of dark dome which constitutes, over all human respiration, the
venomous hostility of the evil spirit of the majority of people.

It is thus that the few rare lucid well-disposed people who have had to struggle
on the earth find themselves at certain hours of the day or night in the depth
of certain authentic and waking nightmare states, surrounded by the formidable
suction, the formidable tentacular oppression of a kind of civic magic which
will soon be seen appearing openly in social behavior.

In the face of this concerted nastiness, which has as its basis or fulcrum on the
one hand sexuality and on the other hand the mass, or other psychic rites, it
is not delirium to walk around at night in a hat with twelve candles on it to
paint a landscape from nature;

for how else could poor van Gogh have managed to have light, as our friend
the actor Roger Blin pointed out so justly the other day?

As for the cooked hand, that is heroism pure and simple;

as for the severed ear, that is straightforward logic,

and I repeat,

a world which, day and night, and more and more, eats the uneatable,




Vb Individualism in Europe 599

in order to carry out its evil designs,
has nothing to do on this point
but to shut up about it.

Post-Scriptum

Van Gogh did not die of a state of delirium properly speaking,

but of having been bodily the battlefield of a problem around which the evil
spirit of humanity has been struggling from the beginning.

The problem of the predominance of flesh over spirit, or of body over flesh,
or of spirit over both.

And where in this delirium is the place of the human self?

Van Gogh searched for his throughout his life, with a strange energy and
determination,

and he did not commit suicide in a fit of madness, in dread of not succeeding,

on the contrary, he had just succeeded, and discovered what he was and who
he was, when the collective consciousness of society, to punish him for escaping
from its clutches,

suicided him.

And this happened to van Gogh the way this always generally happens, during
an orgy, a mass, an absolution, or some other rite of consecration, possession,
succubation or incubation.

Thus it wormed its way into his body,

this society

absolved,

consecrated,

sanctified

and possessed,

erased in him the supernatural consciousness he had just achieved, and, like
an inundation of black crows in the fibers of his internal tree,

overwhelmed him with one final surge,

and, taking his place,

killed him.

For it is the anatomical logic of modern man that he has never been able to
live, has never thought of living, except as one possessed.



5 Jean-Paul Sartre (1905-1980) 'The Search for the
Absolute'

Sartre became increasingly involved with the problems of art in the immediate post-war
period. His emphasis on the body as the human being's 'anchorage in the world' initially
led him to view the exiled German painter Wols (Wolfgang Schulze) as the Existential
artist par excellence, an assessment expressed in an essay of 1945. His writing on
the sculptor Giacometti followed in 1948. The text represents a contemporary search
for Origins, the felt need to begin again with the naked thing, rather than to work with



600 The Individual and the Social

the received conventions of cultural expression. An additional distinction of Sartre's
essay is that it was one of the first vehicles through which these ideas were communi-
cated to the English-speaking world. Originally published in the catalogue of the exhibi-
tion Alberto Giacometti. Sculptures, Paintings, Drawings, Pierre Matisse Gallery, New
York, January-February 1948, from which the present extracts are taken.



One does not have to look long on the antediluvian face of Giacometti to sense
this artist's pride and will to place himself at the beginning of the world. He
does not recognize such a thing as Progress in the fine arts, he does not consider
himself more 'advanced' than his contemporaries by preference, the man of
Eyzies, the man of Altamira. In that drastic youthfulness of nature and of men,
neither the beautiful nor the ugly yet existed, neither taste nor people possessing
it; and there was no criticism: all this was still in the future. For the first time,
the idea came to one man to sculpt another in a block of stone. There was the
model: man. Not dictator, general, or athlete, he did not yet own those
ornaments and decorations which would attract the sculptors of the future.
There was only a long indistinct silhouette, moving against the horizon. But
one could already see that the movements did not resemble those of things:
they emanated from the figure like veritable beginnings, they outlined an airy
future; to understand these motions, it was necessary to start from their goals
- this berry to be picked, that thorn to be removed - and not from their causes.
They never let themselves be separated or localized: I can consider separately
from the tree itself this wavering branch; but I cannot think of an arm rising,
a fist closing, apart from a human agent. A man raises his arm, a man clenches
his fist; man is the indissoluble unity and the absolute source of his movements.
Moreover, he is a symbol-charmer; signs are caught in his hair, shine in his
eyes, dance between his lips, fall from his fingertips; he speaks with his whole
body: if he runs he speaks, if he stops he speaks, if he sleeps, his sleep is
worded. Now, here is the matter to be formed: a rock, a simple clot of space.
[. . .] 'He is mad,' people tell you, 'men have made sculptures for three
thousand years - and done pretty well, too - without so much fuss. Why doesn't
he try to achieve something perfect, relying on some reliable technique, instead
of seeming to ignore his predecessors?' But, for three thousand years, sculpture
modelled only corpses. Sometimes they were laid out to sleep on tombs,
sometimes they were seated on curule chairs, they were also perched on horses.
But a dead man plus a dead horse do not equal the half of one living being.
They lie, these people of the Museums, these people with white eyes. These
arms pretend to move, but they float, steadied between high and low by supports
of iron; these frozen forms contain within themselves an infinite dispersion; it
is the imagination of the spectator, mystified by a gross resemblance, which
lends movement, warmth and life, to the eternal collapse of matter. So one must
begin again from scratch. After three thousand years, the task of Giacometti
and of contemporary sculptors, is not to enrich the galleries with new works,
but to prove that sculpture itself is possible. To prove it by sculpting, as
Diogenes proved movement by walking. To prove it, like Diogenes, against




Vb Individualism in Europe 601

parmenides and Zeno. It was necessary to go to the very end, and see what can
be done. Were the effort to fail, it would be impossible, in any case, to decide
whether this meant the failure of the sculptor or of sculpture: others would
come, who would begin again; Giacometti himself perpetually starts afresh.
However, it is not a question of an infinite progression; there is a definite goal
to be attained, a single problem to be solved: how to mould a man in stone
without petrifying him? It is all or nothing: if the problem be solved, the number
of statues matters little. 'Let me know how to make only one,' says Giacometti,
fand I will be able to make a thousand . . . ' So long as he does not know this,
Giacometti is not interested in statues at all, but only in sketches, insofar as
they help him towards his goal. He breaks everything, and begins all over again.
From time to time, friends are able to save a head, a young woman, a youth,
from the massacre. He doesn't care, and goes back to his task. He has not had
a single exhibition in fifteen years. Finally, having a show has become a necessity
to him, but he is nevertheless disturbed; he writes to excuse himself: 'It is
mainly because I don't want to be thought of as sterile and incapable of achieving
anything, as a dry branch almost; then too, it is from fear of poverty (which
my attitude could very well involve), that I have brought these sculptures to
their present point (in bronze and photographed) but I am not too happy about
them; they represent something of what I intended just the same, not quite.'
What bothers him is that these moving outlines, always half-way between
nothingness and being, always modified, bettered, destroyed and begun once
more, setting out at last on their own and for good, are commencing a social
career far from him. He will forget them. The marvellous unity of this life lies
in its insistent search for the absolute. [. . .]

. . . Giacometti has a horror of the infinite. Not of the Pascalian infinite, of
the infinitely great: there is another infinite, more devious, more secret, which
slips away from divisibility: 'In space', says Gacometti, 'there is too much.' This
too much is the pure and simple coexistence of parts in juxtaposition. Most
sculptors let themselves be taken in by this; they confuse the flaccidness of
extension with largesse, they put too much in their works, they delight in the
fat curve of a marble hip, they spread out, thicken, and expand the human
gesture. Giacometti knows that there is nothing redundant in a living man,
because everything there is functional; he knows that space is a cancer on being,
and eats everything; to sculpt, for him, is to take the fat off space; he compresses
space, so as to drain off its exteriority. This attempt may well seem desperate;
and Giacometti, I think, two or three times came very near to despair. If, in
order to sculpt, it is necessary to cut and then resew in this incompressible
medium, why, then sculpture is impossible. 'Just the same,' he said, 'if I begin
my statue, as they do, with the tip of the nose, then an infinity of time will
not be too much before I get to the nostrils.' It was then that he made his
discovery.

Here is Ganymede on his pedestal. If you ask how far away he is from me,
I will reply that I don't know what you are talking about. By 'Ganymede', do
you mean the young lad who was carried off by the eagle of Jupiter? In that



IPly



602 The Individual and the Social

case, I will say that from him to me there is no real relation of distance, for
the simple reason that he does not exist. But perhaps you have in mind the
marble block which the sculptor shaped in the image of the darling boy? In
that case, we have something real to deal with, an existent mineral that we can
measure. Painters have understood all this for a long time, because, in pictures,
the unreality of the third dimension causes ipso facto the unreality of the other
two. Thus the distance of the figures from me is imaginary. If I approach, I
come closer to the canvas, not to the figures on it. Even if I put my nose against
it, I should still see them twenty paces distant, since it was at twenty paces
from me that they came to exist once and for all. Thus painting escapes the
paradoxes of Zeno: even if I were to divide in two the space separating the foot
of the Virgin from the foot of Saint Joseph, and each one of the two halves in
two again, and so on infinitely, it would be a certain length of canvas that I
should be dividing, and not the pavement supporting the Virgin and her
husband. Sculptors have not recognized these elementary truths because they
have worked in a tridimensional space on real marble. And in spite of the fact
that the product of their art was to be an imaginary man, they thought it possible
to project him in a real space. This confusion of two spaces has had curious
results: in the first place, when they worked from nature, instead of rendering
what they saw - that is to say, the model, ten paces off - they outlined in the
clay what they knew to be there - that is to say, the model. As they wanted
their statue to give a spectator standing ten feet off from it the impression they
had experienced before the model, it seemed to them logical to make a figure
which would be for the spectator what the model had been for them; and that
was only possible if the marble were here as the model was there. But what
does it mean to be 'as it is' and 'there'? At ten paces, I form a certain image
of that nude woman; if I approach her, and regard her from up close, I no
longer recognize her: these craters, tunnels, cracks, this rough black hair, these
smooth shiny surfaces, this whole lunar orography: how could all these qualities
go to compose the sleek fresh skin that I admired from far off? Which is it
then that the sculptor ought to imitate? However close he comes to this face,
one can approach closer still. Thus the statue will never truely resemble what
the model is or what the sculptor sees; one must construct it in accordance with
certain rather contradictory conventions, imagining certain details which are not
visible from so far off, under the pretext that they exist, and neglecting certain
others which exist just the same, under the pretext that one does not see them.
What does this mean if not that one finally leaves it to the spectator to
recompose a satisfying figure? But, in that case, my relation to Ganymede will
vary with the position; if I am near, I will discover details that from a distance
I would miss. And this brings us to the paradox that I have real relations with
an illusion; or, if you like, that my real distance from the block of marble has
become one with my imaginary distance from Ganymede. Thus, it results that
the properties of real space cover up and mask those of imaginary space: more
especially, the real divisibility of the marble destroys the indivisibility of the
figure. It is the stone which triumphs, along with Zeno. So the classical sculptor



Vb individualism in Europe 603

falls into dogmatism, believing he can eliminate his own glance, and sculpt
human nature in general; but he does not know what he does because he does
not make what he sees. Seeking the true, he has arrived at convention. And,
as, in the last analysis, he leaves it to the visitor to animate these inert
semblances, the classical seeker of the absolute ends by making his work subject
to the relativity of the points of view one can adopt towards it. As to the
spectator, he takes the imaginary for the real and the real for the imaginary; he
seeks the indivisible, and everywhere encounters its opposite!

In frontally opposing classicism, Giacometti has restored an imaginary and
indivisible space to statues. In accepting relativity from the very start, he has
found the absolute. This is because he was the first one to take it into his head
to sculpt man as he appears, that is to say, from a distance. He confers on his
plaster figures an absolute distance, as the painter does for those who live in
his canvas. He creates his figure 'at ten paces,' 'at twenty paces,' and whatever
you do, there it stays. By the same token, the figure places itself in the unreal,
since its relation to you no longer depends on your relation to the block of
plaster: art is liberated. One has to learn a classical statue, or come near to it:
at each moment one sees new details, the parts appear separately, then parts of
the parts, one ends by getting lost. One does not approach a sculpture of
Giacometti. Do not expect this breast to swell to the degree that you come
close to it: it will not change, and you, in approaching will have the strange
impression that you are stamping on the nipples; we have intimations of them,
we divine them, now we are on the point of seeing them: another step or two,
and we are about to have them; one more step, and everything vanishes: there
remain the corrugations of the plaster; these statues only permit themselves to
be seen from a respectful distance. However, everything is there: the whiteness,
the roundness, the elastic subsidence of a beautiful ripe breast. Everything except
matter: at twenty paces one thinks one sees, but one does not observe the tedious
desert of adipose tissue; it is suggested, outlined, meant, but not given. We
know now what squeezer Giacometti used to compress space: there is only one:
distance. He puts distance within reach of your hand, he thrusts before your
eyes a distant woman - and she remains distant, even when you touch her with
your fingertips. The breast glimpsed and hoped for will never expose itself: it
is only a hope; these bodies have only as much matter as is necessary for making
promises. [. . .] What must be understood is that these figures, who are wholly
and all at once what they are, do not permit one to study them. As soon as I
see them, they spring into my visual field as an idea before my mind; the idea
alone possesses such immediate translucidity, the idea alone is at one stroke all
that it is. Thus Giacometti has resolved in his own way the problem of the
unity of the multiple: he has just suppressed multiplicity. It is the plaster or
the bronze which can be divided: but this woman who moves within the
indivisibility of an idea or of a sentiment, has no parts, she appears totally and
at once. It is to give sensible expression to this pure presence, to this gift of
the self, to this instantaneous coming forth, that Giacometti resorts to elong*
ation. The original movement of creation, that movement without duration,



604 The Individual and the Social

without parts, and so well imaged by these long, gracile limbs, traverses their
Greco-like bodies, and raises them towards heaven. I recognize in them, more
clearly than in an athlete of Praxiteles, the figure of man, the real beginning
and absolute source of gesture. Giacometti has been able to give this matter the
only truly human unity: the unity of the Act.

Such, I think, is the sort of Copernican revolution Giacometti has tried to
introduce into sculpture. Before him the effort was to sculpt being, and that
absolute melted away in an infinity of appearances. He has chosen to sculpt the
situated appearance, and he has shown that in this way the absolute may be
attained. He shows us men and women already seen. But not already seen by
him alone. These figures are already seen as the foreign language we try to
learn is already spoken. Each one of them reveals man as one sees him to be,
as he is for other men, as he appears in an intersubjective world, not, as I said
above, to entangle himself at ten or twenty paces, but at a proper human
distance; each shows us that man is not there first and to be seen afterwards,
but that he is the being whose essence is to exist for others. In perceiving this
woman of plaster, I encounter athwart her, my own glance, chilled. Hence the
delightful disquiet that seeing her puts me in: I feel compelled and I do not
know to what end or by whom until I discover that I am compelled to see, and
by myself. And then, often enough Giacometti likes to put us at a loss by
placing, for example, a distant head on top of a near body, so that we no longer
know what position to take, or how to synthesize what we see. But even without
this, his ambiguous images disconcert, breaking as they do with the most
cherished habits of our eyes: we have become so accustomed to the sleek mute
creatures, made to cure us of the illness of having bodies: these domestic powers
kept an eye on us when we were children; they bore witness in the parks to
the conviction that the world is not dangerous, that nothing happens to anybody,
that actually all that had happened to them was to die at their birth. But to
the bodies of Giacometti something has happened: do they come, we ask, from
a concave mirror, from the fountain of youth, or from a camp of displaced
persons? At first glance we seem to be up against the fleshless martyrs of
Buchenwald. But a moment later we have a quite different conception; these
fine and slender natures rise up to heaven, we seem to have come across a group
of Ascensions, of Assumptions; they dance, they are dances, they are made of
the same rarified matter as the glorious bodies that were promised us. And
when we have come to contemplate this mystic thrust, these emaciated bodies
expand, what we see before us belongs to earth. This martyr was only a woman.
But a woman complete, glimpsed, furtively desired, a woman who moved away
and passed, with the comic dignity of those long impotent and breakable girls
that high-heeled slippers carry lazily from bed to their bath, with the tragic
horror of the grimy victims of a fire, given, refused, near, far, a woman complete
whose delicious plumpness is haunted by a secret thinness, and whose terrible
thinness by a suave plumpness, a complete woman, in danger on this earth, and
yet not utterly of this earth, and who lives and tells us of the astonishing
adventure of the flesh, our adventure. For she, like us, was born, f . . . ]




Vb Individualism in Europe 605

6 Samuel Beckett (1906-1990) and Georges Duthuit
(1891-1973) from Three Dialogues

The writers Beckett and Duthuit composed three 'dialogues' on contemporary painting
in 1949. Their subjects were Tal Coat, Andre Masson and Bram Van Velde, three artists
associated in the post-war Parisian art world with the school of informal abstraction.
Although given the appearance of, and perhaps rooted in, conversations, the 'dialogues'
are none the less manifestly literary. Their recurrent preoccupation is with the recon-
struction from nothing of a broken world, a weight of responsibility to be borne, alone,
by the individual: an imperative which results in the simultaneous necessity for and
impossibility of action. Such a perspective aligns with that of the contemporary Theatre
of the Absurd. The dialogues were originally published in Transition, no, 5, Paris, 1949,
edited by Georges Duthuit. The present extracts are taken from the English version by
the authors in Samuel Beckett and Georges Duthuit, Proust: Three Dialogues, London,
1965, pp. 97-126.



I Tal Coat

B: Total object, complete with missing parts, instead of partial object. Question
of degree.

D: More. The tyranny of the discreet overthrown. The world a flux of
movements partaking of living time, that of effort, creation, liberation, the
painting, the painter. The fleeting instant of sensation given back, given forth,
with context of the continuum it nourished.

B: In any case a thrusting towards a more adequate expression of natural
experience, as revealed to the vigilant coenaesthesia. Whether achieved
through submission or through mastery, the result is a gain in nature.

D: But that which this painter discovers, orders, transmits, is not in nature.
What relation between one of these paintings and a landscape seen at a
certain age, a certain season, a certain hour? Are we not on a quite different
plane?

B: By nature I mean here, like the naivest realist, a composite of perceiver and
perceived, not a datum, an experience. All I wish to suggest is that the
tendency and accomplishment of this painting are fundamentally those of
previous painting, straining to enlarge the statement of a compromise.

D: You neglect the immense difference between the significance of perception
for Tal Coat and its significance for the great majority of his predecessors,
apprehending as artists with the same utilitarian servility as in a traffic-jam
and improving the result with a lick of Euclidian geometry. The global
perception of Tal Coat is disinterested, committed neither to truth nor to
beauty, twin tyrannies of nature. I can see the compromise of past painting,
but not that which you deplore in the Matisse of a certain period and in the
Tal Coat of today.

B: I do not deplore. I agree that the Matisse in question, as well as the
Franciscan orgies of Tal Coat, have prodigious value, but a value cognate
with those alreadv accumulated. What we have to consider in the case of



606 The Individual and the Social

Italian painters is not that they surveyed the world with the eyes of build-
ing-contractors, a mere means like any other, but that they never stirred from
the field of the possible, however much they may have enlarged it. The only
thing disturbed by the revolutionaries Matisse and Tal Coat is a certain order
on the plane of the feasible.

D: What other plane can there be for the maker?

B: Logically none. Yet I speak of an art turning from it in disgust, weary of
puny exploits, weary of pretending to be able, of being able, of doing a little
better the same old thing, of going a little further along a dreary road.

D: And preferring what?

B: The expression that there is nothing to express, nothing with which to
express, nothing from which to express, no power to express, no desire to
express, together with the obligation to express.

D: But that is a violently extreme and personal point of view, of no help to
us in the matter of Tal Coat.

B: -

D: Perhaps that is enough for today.



Ill Bram van Velde

B: Frenchman, fire first.

D: Speaking of Tal Coat and Masson you invoked an art of a different order,
not only from theirs, but from any achieved up to date. Am I right in thinking
that you had van Velde in mind when making this sweeping distinction?

B: Yes. I think he is the first to accept a certain situation and to consent to
a certain act.

D: Would it be too much to ask you to state again, as simply as possible, the
situation and act that you conceive to be his?

B: The situation is that of him who is helpless, cannot act, in the event cannot
paint, since he is obliged to paint. The act is of him who, helpless, unable
to act, acts, in the event paints, since he is obliged to paint.

D: Why is he obliged to paint?

B: I don't know.

D: Why is he helpless to paint?

B: Because there is nothing to paint and nothing to paint with.

D: And the result, you say, is art of a new order?

B: Among those whom we call great artists, I can think of none whose concern
was not predominantly with his expressive possibilities, those of his vehicle,
those of humanity. The assumption underlying all painting is that the domain
of the maker is the domain of the feasible. The much to express, the little
to express, the ability to express much, the ability to express little, merge in
the common anxiety to express as much as possible, or as truly as possible,
or as finely as possible, to the best of one's ability. What 

D: One moment. Are you suggesting that the painting of van Velde is inex-
pressive?




Vb individualism in Europe 607

(A fortnight later) Yes.

You realize the absurdity of what you advance?

I hope I do.

What you say amounts to this: the form of expression known as painting,
since for obscure reasons we are obliged to speak of painting, has had to wait
for van Velde to be rid of the misapprehension under which it has laboured
so long and so bravely, namely, that its function was to express, by means
of paint.

Others have felt that art is not necessarily expression. But the numerous
attempts made to make painting independent of its occasion have only
succeeded in enlarging its repertory. I suggest that van Velde is the first
whose painting is bereft, rid if you prefer, of occasion in every shape and
form, ideal as well as material, and the first whose hands have not been tied
by the certitude that expression is an impossible act.

But might it not be suggested, even by one tolerant of this fantastic theory,
that the occasion of his painting is his predicament, and that it is expressive
of the impossibility to express?

No more ingenious method could be devised for restoring him, safe and
sound, to the bosom of Saint Luke. But let us, for once, be foolish enough
not to turn tail. All have turned wisely tail, before the ultimate penury, back
to the mere misery where destitute virtuous mothers may steal bread for their
starving brats. There is more than a difference of degree between being short,
short of the world, short of self, and being without these esteemed com-
modities. The one is a predicament, the other not.

But you have already spoken of the predicament of van Velde.

I should not have done so.

You prefer the purer view that here at last is a painter who does not paint,
does not pretend to paint. Come, come, my dear fellow, make some kind of
connected statement and then go away.

Would it not be enough if I simply went away?

No. You have begun. Finish. Begin again and go on until you have finished.
Then go away. Try and bear in mind that the subject under discussion is
not yourself, nor the Sufist Al-Haqq, but a particular Dutchman by name
van Velde, hitherto erroneously referred to as an artiste peintre.

How would it be if I first said what I am pleased to fancy he is, fancy he
does, and then that it is more than likely that he is and does quite otherwise?
Would not that be an excellent issue out of all our afflictions? He happy, you
na PP>S I happy, all three bubbling over with happiness.

Do as you please. But get it over.

There are many ways in which the thing I am trying in vain to say may
be tried in vain to be said. I have experimented, as you know, both in public
and in private, under duress, through faintness of heart, through weakness of
mind, with two or three hundred. The pathetic antithesis possession-poverty
was perhaps not the most tedious. But we begin to weary of it, do we not?
The realization that art has always been bourgeois, though it may dull our



608 The Individual and the Social

pain before the achievements of the socially progressive, is finally of scant
interest. The analysis of the relation between the artist and his occasion, a
relation always regarded as indispensable, does not seem to have been very
productive either, the reason being perhaps that it lost its way in disquisitions
on the nature of occasion. It is obvious that for the artist obsessed with his
expressive vocation, anything and everything is doomed to become occasion,
including, as is apparently to some extent the case with Masson, the pursuit
of occasion, and the every man his own wife experiments of the spiritual
Kandinsky. No painting is more replete than Mondrian's. But if the occasion
appears as an unstable term of relation, the artist, who is the other term, is
hardly less so, thanks to his warren of modes and attitudes. The objections
to this dualist view of the creative process are unconvincing. Two things are
established, however precariously: the aliment, from fruits on plates to low
mathematics and self-commiseration, and its manner of dispatch. All that
should concern us is the acute and increasing anxiety of the relation itself,
as though shadowed more and more darkly by a sense of invalidity, of
inadequacy, of existence at the expense of all that it excludes, all that it blinds
to. The history of painting, here we go again, is the history of its attempts
to escape from this sense of failure, by means of more authentic, more ample,
less exclusive relations between representer and representee, in a kind of
tropism towards a light as to the nature of which the best opinions continue
to vary, and with a kind of Pythagorean terror, as though the irrationality of
pi were an offence against the deity, not to mention his creature. My case,
since I am in the dock, is that van Velde is the first to desist from this
estheticized automatism, the first to submit wholly to the incoercible absence
of relation, in the absence of terms or, if you like, in the presence of
unavailable terms, the first to admit that to be an artist is to fail, as no other
dare fail, that failure is his world and the shrink from it desertion, art and
craft, good housekeeping, living. No, no, allow me to expire. I know that all
that is required now, in order to bring even this horrible matter to an
acceptable conclusion, is to make of this submission, this admission, this
fidelity to failure, a new occasion, a new term of relation, and of the act
which, unable to act, obliged to act, he makes, an expressive act, even if only
of itself, of its impossibility, of its obligation. I know that my inability to do
so places myself, and perhaps an innocent, in what I think is still called an
unenviable situation, familiar to psychiatrists. For what is this coloured plane,
that was not there before. I don't know what it is, having never seen anything
like it before. It seems to have nothing to do with art, in any case, if my
memories are correct. (Prepares to go).

D: Are you not forgetting something?

B: Surely that is enough?

D: I understood your number was to have two parts. The first was to consist
in your saying what you - er - thought. This I am prepared to believe you
have done. The second -

B: (Remembering, warmly) Yes, yes, I am mistaken, I am mistaken.



Vb Individualism in Europe 609

7 Jacques Lacan (1901-1981) 4 The Mirror-Phase as
Formative of the Function of the F

Lacan's principal legacy for work in the field of art and culture has been his development
of the concept of the gendered subject. The use of this concept entails a challenge to
that idea of the unitary and homogeneous Self which underlies expression-based
theories of art, and which can ultimately be traced back to Descartes' 'Cogito': 'I think,
therefore I am'. Lacan postulates two main stages in the development of consciousness,
following an initial undifferentiated state which he designates with the pun 'hommelette'.
These are the Imaginary and the Symbolic. The latter concerns the subject's entry into,
and formation by the world of language. The former involves a pre-linguistic stage of
consciousness focused around the visual recognition of images, which Lacan termed
the 'mirror-phase'. His initial formulation of the mirror-phase was made as early as 1936,
in an unpublished paper read to the 14th Congress of the International Psychoanalytical
Association in Marienbad: 'Le Stade du miroir: Theorie d'un moment structurant et
genetique de la constitution de la realite'. During this period Lacan was associated with
the Surrealist group and he published work in the Surrealist journal Minotaure which
has been related to Salvador Dali's 'paranoiac criticism'. Traces of this connection
remain evident in the present essay, 'Le Stade du miroir comme formateur de la fonction
du je'. It was initially read to the International Psychoanalytic Congress in Zurich in July
1949. Reprinted in Lacan's Ecrits, Paris, 1966. English translation in New Left Review,
51, September-October 1969, from which the present version is taken.

The conception of the mirror-phase which I introduced at our last congress,
thirteen years ago, has since become more or less established in the practice of
the French group; I think it nevertheless worthwhile to bring it again to your
attention, especially today, for the light that it sheds on the formation of the /
as we experience it in psychoanalysis. It is an experience which leads us to
oppose any philosophy directly issuing from the Cogito,

Some of you may perhaps remember our starting-point in a feature of human
behaviour illuminated by a fact of comparative psychology. The human off-
spring, at an age when he is for a time, however short, outdone by the
chimpanzee in instrumental intelligence, can nevertheless already recognize as
such his own image in a mirror. [. . .]

This event can take place . . . from the age of six months, and its repetition
has often compelled us to ponder over the startling spectacle of the nurseling
in front of the mirror. Unable as yet to walk, or even to stand up, and narrowly
confined as he is within some support, human or artificial (what, in France, we
call a 'trotte-bebe'), he nevertheless surmounts, in a flutter of jubilant activity,
the obstructions of his support in order to fix his attitude in a more or less
leaning-forward position, and bring back an instantaneous aspect of the image
to hold it in his gaze.

For us, this activity retains the meaning we have given it up to the age of
eighteen months. This meaning discloses a libidinal dynamism, which has
hitherto remained problematic, as well as an ontological structure of the human
world which accords with our reflections on paranoiac knowledge.



610 The Individual and the Social

We have only to understand the mirror-phase as an identification, in the full
sense which analysis gives to the term: namely, the transformation which takes
place in the subject when he assumes an image - whose predestination to this
phase-effect is sufficiently indicated by the use, in analytical theory, of the old
term imago.

This jubilant assumption of his mirror-image by the little man, at the infans
stage, still sunk in his motor incapacity and nurseling dependency, would seem
to exhibit in an exemplary situation the symbolic matrix in which the / is
precipitated in a primordial form, before it is objectified in the dialectic of
identification with the other, and before language restores to it, in the universal,
its function as subject.

This form would have to be called the Ideal-I, if we wanted to restore it to
a familiar scheme, in the sense that it will also be the root-stock for secondary
identifications, among which we place the functions of libidinal normalization.
But the important point is that this form situates the instance of the ego, before
its social determination, in a fictional direction, which will always remain
irreducible for the individual alone, or rather, which will only rejoin the
development of the subject asymptotically, whatever the success of the dialectical
syntheses by which he must resolve as / his discordance with his own reality.

The Body as Gestalt

The fact is that the total form of the body by which the subject anticipates in
a mirage the maturation of his power is only given to him as Gestalt, that is to
say in an exteriority in which this form is certainly more constituent than
constituted, but in which it appears to him above all in a contrasting size that
fixes it and a symmetry that inverts it which are in conflict with the turbulence
of the motions which the subject feels animating him. Thus, this Gestalt - whose
pregnancy should be regarded as linked to the species, though its motor style
remains unrecognizable - by these twin aspects of its appearance, symbolizes
the mental permanance of the /, at the same time as it prefigures its alienating
destination; it is pregnant with the correspondences which unite the / with the
statue in which man projects himself, with the phantoms which dominate him,
or finally, with the automaton in which, in an ambiguous relation, the world of
his fabrication tends to find completion.

Indeed, where imagos are concerned . . . the mirror-image would seem to be
the threshold of the visible world, if we go by the mirror disposition which the
imago of our own body presents in hallucinations or dreams, whether it concerns
its individual features, or even its infirmities, or its object-projections; or if we
notice the role of the mirror apparatus in the appearances of the double, in which
psychic realities, however heterogeneous, manifest themselves.

That a Gestalt should be capable of formative effects in the organism is
attested by a piece of biological experimentation which is itself so alien to the
idea of psychic causality that it cannot bring itself to formulate its results in
these terms. It nevertheless recognizes that it is a necessary condition for the
maturation of the gonad of the female pigeon that it should see another member



Vb Individualism in Europe 611

of its species, of either sex; so sufficient in itself is this condition that the
desired effect may be obtained merely by placing the individual within reach
of the field of reflection of a mirror. Similarly, in the case of the migratory
locust, the transition within a generation from the solitary to the gregarious
form, can be obtained by the exposure of the individual, at a certain stage, to
the exclusively visual action of a similar image, provided it is animated by
movements of a style sufficiently close to that characteristic of the species. Such
facts are inscribed in an order of homeomorphic identification which would
itself fall within the larger question of the meaning of beauty as formative and
erotogenic.

But facts of mimicry are no less instructive when conceived as cases of
heteromorphic identification, inasmuch as they raise the problem of the signi-
ficance of space for the living organism; psychological concepts hardly seem less
appropriate for shedding light on these matters than ridiculous attempts to
reduce them to the supposedly supreme law of adaptation. [. . .]

We have ourselves shown in the social dialectic which structures human
knowledge as paranoiac why human knowledge has greater autonomy than animal
knowledge in relation to the field of force of desire, but also why it is determined
in the direction of that 'lack of reality' which surrealist dissatisfaction denounces
in it. These reflections lead us to recognize in the spatial ensnarement exhi-
bited in the mirror-phase, even before the social dialectic, the effect in man of
an organic insufficiency in his natural reality - insofar, that is, as we attach any
meaning to the word 'nature'.

We are therefore led to regard the function of the mirror-phase as a particular
case of the function of the imago, which is to establish a relation of the organism
to its reality - or, as they say, of the Innenwelt to the Umwelt. [. . .]

This development is lived as a temporal dialectic which decisively projects
the formation of the individual into history; the mirror-phase is a drama whose
internal impulse rushes from insufficiency to anticipation and which manufac-
tures for the subject, captive to the lure of spatial identification, the succession
of phantasies from a fragmented body-image to a form of its totality which we
shall call orthopaedic - and to the assumption, finally, of the armour of an
alienating identity, which will stamp with the rigidity of its structure the whole
of the subject's mental development. Thus, to break out of the circle of the
Innenwelt into the Umwelt generates the endless quadrature of the inventorying
of the ego.

The Fragmented Body

This fragmented body, the term for which I have introduced into our theoretical
frame of reference, regularly manifests itself in dreams when the movement of
the analysis encounters a certain level of aggressive disintegration in the
individual. It then appears in the form of disjointed limbs, or of those organs
figured in exoscopy, growing wings and taking up arms for intestinal persecu-
tions - the very same that the visionary Hieronymus Bosch has fixed, for all
time, in painting, as they climbed, in the fifteenth century, to the imaginary



612 The Individual and the Social

zenith of modern man, but this form is even tangibly revealed at the organic
level, in the lines of 'fragilization' which define the anatomy of phantasy, as
exhibited in the schizoid and spasmodic symptoms of hysteria.

Correctively, the formation of the / is symbolized in dreams by a fortress,
or a stadium - its inner arena and enclosure, surrounded by marshes and
rubbish-tips, dividing it into two opposed fields of contest where the subject
flounders in quest of the haughty and remote inner castle, which, in its shape
(sometimes juxtaposed in the same scenario), symbolizes the id in startling
fashion. Similarly, on the mental plane, we find realized the structures of
fortified works, the metaphor of which arises spontaneously, and as if issuing
from the symptoms themselves, to describe the mechanisms of obsessional
neurosis - inversion, isolation, reduplication, cancellation and displacement.

But were we to build on this merely subjective data, and should this be
detached from the experiential condition which would make us derive it from
a language technique, our theoretical enterprise would remain exposed to the
charge of projecting itself into the unthinkable of an absolute subject. That is
why we have to find in the present hypothesis, grounded in a conjunction of
objective data, the guiding grid for a method of symbolic reduction.

It establishes in the defences of the ego a genetic order . . . and situates (as
against a frequently expressed prejudice) hysterical repression and its returns at
a more archaic stage than obsessional inversion and its isolating processes, and
the latter in turn as preliminary to paranoiac alienation, which dates from the
deflection of the mirror / into the social /.

This moment in which the mirror-phase comes to an end inaugurates, by the
identification with the imago of the fellow and the drama of primordial jealousy
... the dialectic which will henceforth link the / to socially elaborated situations.

It is this moment that decisively tips the whole of human knowledge into
mediatization through the desire of the other, constitutes its objects in an abstract
equivalence by virtue of the competition of the other, and makes the / into that
system for which every instinctual thrust constitutes a danger, even though it
should correspond to a natural maturation - the very normalization of this
maturation being henceforth dependent, in man, on a cultural go-between, as
exemplified, in the case of the sexual object, by the Oedipus complex.

In the light of this conception, the term primary narcissism, by which
analytical doctrine denotes the libidinal investment characteristic of that mo-
ment, reveals in those who invented it the most profound awareness of semantic
latencies. But it also illuminates the dynamic opposition of that libido to sexual
libido, which they tried to define when they invoked destructive and, indeed,
death instincts, in order to explain the evident connection between narcissistic
libido and the alienating function of the /, the aggressiveness which it releases
in any relation to the other, albeit that of the most Samaritan aid.

Existentialism

They were encountering that existential negativity whose reality is so warmly
advocated by the contemporary philosophy of being and nothingness.



Vb Individualism in Europe 613

But unfortunately that philosophy only grasps negativity within the confines
of a self-sufficiency of consciousness, which, as one of its premises, links to the
constitutive mis-recognitions of the ego, the illusion of autonomy to which it
entrusts itself. This flight of fancy, for all that it draws, to an unusual extent,
on borrowings from psychoanalytic experience, culminates in the pretention to
provide an existential psychoanalysis.

At the climax of the historical attempt of a society to refuse to recognize that
it has any function other than the utilitarian one, and in the anguish of the
individual confronting the concentrational form of the social bond which seems
to arise to crown this attempt, existentialism must be judged by the account it
gives of the subjective dilemmas which it has indeed given rise to: the freedom
which never claims more authenticity than when it is within the walls of a
prison; the demand for commitment, expressing the impotence of a pure
consciousness to master any situation; the voyeuristic-sadistic idealization of the
sexual relationship; the personality which only realizes itself in suicide; the
awareness of the other which can only be satisfied by Hegelian murder. [... .]

The sufferings of neurosis and psychosis are for us the school of the passions
of the soul, just as the scourge of the psychoanalytic scales, when we compute
the tilt of their threat to entire communities, gives us the index of the deadening
of the passions of the city.

At this junction of nature and culture which is so persistently scanned by
modern anthropology, psychoanalysis alone recognizes this knot of imaginary
servitude which love must always undo again, or sever.

For such a task we place no reliance in altruistic feeling, we who lay bare
the aggressiveness that underlies the activity of the philanthropist, the idealist,
the pedagogue, and even the reformer.

In the recourse of subject to subject which we preserve, psychoanalysis can
accompany the patient to the ecstatic limit of the 'Thou art that", wherein is
revealed to him the cipher of his mortal destiny, but it is not in our mere power
as practitioners to bring him to that point where the real journey begins.



8 Jean-Michel Atlan (1913-1960) 'Abstraction and
Adventure in Contemporary Art'

Born in Algeria of a Jewish background, Atlan went on to study philosophy at the
Sorbonne in Paris. He took up painting during a period of feigned insanity after his
arrest for Resistance activities. A Communist, he nonetheless rejected the doctrine of
Socialist Realism and instead developed a mythic-primitivist technique and imagery to
express the post-war condition. This perspective led Atlan to eventual involvement with
the group Cobra. Cobra is an acronym of Copenhagen, Brussels and Amsterdam, the
cities where the group was based; though it had of course a strong, albeit critical,
focus on Paris. Eight issues of a journal of the same name were published between
1948 and 1951. The present text was first published in Cobra in April 1950. It was
reprinted in the catalogue of the exhibition 'Paris - Paris: Creations en France 1937-
1957', Paris (Centre Pompidou), 1981, from which the present translation is made.



fek



614 The Individual and the Social

1 Contemporary painting, being essential adventure and creation, is threat-
ened by two forms of conformity which we absolutely oppose:

a) Banal realism, vulgar imitation of reality;

b) Orthodox abstract art, new academicism which tries to substitute for living
painting an interplay of solely decorative forms.

We believe that it is at the margin of official abstract art, and only there,
that the most valuable works develop; just as it was at the margin of Impress-
ionism during the last century that the greatness of the works of those great
heretics, van Gogh and Gauguin, was established.

2 The fundamental pretension of theoreticians of abstract academicism,
which is that painting is a spiritual progression of forms excluding all reference
to nature, cannot stand up to clear analysis. All the works of current psychology
tend on the contrary to establish that human vision is itself a creation, in which
the imagination and nature participate equally. (The example of the ink blots
and the Rorschach tests.)

It is just the same when these theoreticians assert that abstraction consitutes
a new language which breaks with the aims and techniques of the past. This
pretension is also ill-conceived.

a) Constructivism, Neo-Plasticism, etc. are examples of movements already
fairly well advanced in age, years before the war.

b) The analysis of essential elements of pictorial language: form, light, colour,
matter show that painting, whether it be figurative or not, is organized
according to the same fundamental rhythms.

3 The forms which appear to us today as the most valuable, as much through
their formal arrangement as by their expressive intensity, are not properly
speaking either abstract or figurative. They participate precisely in these cosmic
powers of metamorphosis where the true adventure is located. (From where there
arise forms which are themselves and something other than themselves, birds
and cacti, abstraction and new figuration.)

4 The creation of a work of art cannot be reduced to formulae, nor to some
construction of more or less decorative forms, rather it supposes a presence, it
is an adventure in which a man commits himself to struggle with the fundamen-
tal forces of nature.

To see this through to the bitter end, some of us today risk our necks. We
turn our backs on vain quarrels about doctrine, resolutely committing ourselves
to those directions which fashion and the public can barely follow.



9 Francis Ponge (1899-1988) 'Reflections on the Statuettes,
Figures and Paintings of Alberto GiacomettF

In the immediate post-war period Giacometti came to be seen by many, including Sartre
and Genet, as the pre-eminent Existentialist artist. His attenuated human figures, alone
in apparently vast tracts of space, seemed to sum up the sense of isolated individualism
pervading the French avant-garde. The writer Francis Ponge eloquently summarized this
view in an article 'Reflexions sur les statuettes, figures et peintures d'Alberto Giacomet-



Vb Individualism in Europe 615

ti', originally published in Cahiers d'Art, Paris, 1951, from the conclusion of which the
present extract is translated. (Ellipses are in the original.)

Man ... the human person ... the free individual ... the I ... at once torturer
and victim ... at once hunter and prey . . .

Man - and man alone - reduced to a thread - in the dilapidation, and misery
of the world - who searches for himself - starting from nothing.

Exhausted, thin, emaciated, naked. Aimlessly wandering in the crowd.

Man anxious about man, in terror of man. Asserting himself one last time in
a hieratic attitude of supreme elegance. The pathos of extreme emaciation, the
individual reduced to a thread.

Man at the stake of his contradictions. No longer crucified. Burned. You are
right, dear friend.

Man on a pavement like burning iron; who cannot lift his heavy feet.

Oh! Since Greek sculpture, what am I saying, since Laurens and Maillol, man
has been well burned at the stake!

It is doubtless true that since Nietzsche and Baudelaire the destruction of
values has accelerated . . .

They drip around him, his values, his fat; to feed the flames!

It is not only that Man has nothing more; but he is nothing more, than this I.



10 Albert Camus (1913-1960) 'Creation and
Revolution' from The Rebel

Born in Algeria, Camus' principal employment after reading philosophy at university was
as a journalist, first in Algeria and later in Paris. During the war he wrote for and later
edited the clandestine Resistance newspaper Combat After the war he gave up
journalism and concentrated on literary and philosophical work. He came to represent
a wing of Existentialism opposed to Sartre's increasing identification with Marxism, and
the publication of his book The Rebel precipitated a public quarrel between the two. In
this extract Camus links the freedom necessary for the production of art to the freedom
paradoxically required by rebellion: totalitarianism snuffs out the liberating impulse to
be found in both, and as such must be resisted in all its forms. Originally published as
L'Homme revolte, Paris, 1951. Translated by Anthony Brower as The Rebel, London,
1953; reprinted London, 1962; the present extract is taken from the 1962 edition (pp.
237-42).



Creation and Revolution

In art, rebellion is consummated and perpetuated in the act of real creation,
not in criticism or commentary. Revolution, in its turn, can only affirm itself
in a civilization and not in terror or tyranny. The two questions posed,
henceforth, by our times to a society caught in a dilemma - Is creation possible?
Is the revolution possible? - are in reality only one question which concerns
the renaissance of civilization.



616 The Individual and the Social

The revolution and art of the twentieth century are tributaries of the same
nihilism and live in the same contradiction. They deny what they affirm,
however, even in their very actions, and both try to find an impossible solution
through terror. The contemporary revolution believes that it is inaugurating a
new world when it is really only the contradictory climax of the ancient world.
Finally capitalist society and revolutionary society are one and the same thing
to the extent that they submit themselves to the same means - industrial
production - and to the same promise. But one makes its promise in the name
of formal principles which it is quite incapable of incarnating and which are
denied by the methods it employs. The other justifies its prophecy in the name
of the only reality it recognizes and ends by mutilating reality. The society
based on production is only productive, not creative.

Contemporary art, because it is nihilistic, also flounders between formalism
and realism. Realism, moreover, is just as much bourgeois, when it is 'tough 1 ,
as socialist when it becomes edifying. Formalism belongs just as much to the
society of the past, when it takes the form of gratuitous abstraction, as to the
society which claims to be the society of the future - when it becomes
propaganda. Language destroyed by irrational negation becomes lost in verbal
delirium; subject to determinist ideology it is summed up in the word of
command. Half-way between the two lies art. If the rebel must simultaneously
reject the frenzy of annihilation and the acceptance of totality, the artist must
simultaneously escape from the passion for formality and the totalitarian aes-
thetic of reality. The world today is one, in fact, but its unity is the unity of
nihilism. Civilization is only possible if, by renouncing the nihilism of formal
principles and nihilism without principles, the world rediscovers the road to a
creative synthesis. In the same way, in art, the time of perpetual commentary
and reportage is at the point of death; it announces the advent of creative
artists.

But art and society, creation and revolution must, to prepare for this event,
rediscover the source of rebellion where refusal and acceptance, in [the] unique
and the universal, the individual and history balance each other in a condition
of the most acute tension. Rebellion, in itself, is not an element of civilization.
But it is a preliminary to all civilization. Rebellion alone, in the blind alley in
which we live, allows us to hope for the future of which Nietzsche dreamed:
'Instead of the judge and the oppressor, the creator'. This formula certainly
does not authorize the ridiculous illusion of a civilization controlled by artists.
It only illuminates the drama of our times in which work, entirely subordinated
to production, has ceased to be creative. Industrial society will only open the
way to a new civilization by restoring to the worker the dignity of a creator; in
other words, by making him apply his interest and his intelligence as much to
the work itself as to what it produces. The type of civilization which is inevitable
will not be able to separate, amongst classes as well as in the individual, the
worker from the creator; any more than artistic creation dreams of form and
foundation, history and the mind. In this way it will bestow on everyone the
dignity which rebellion affirms. It would be unjust, and moreover Utopian, for
Shakespeare to direct the shoemakers' union. But it would be equally disastrous




Vb Individualism in Europe 617

for the shoemakers' union to ignore Shakespeare. Shakespeare without the
shoemakers serves as an alibi for tyranny. The shoemaker without Shakespeare
is absorbed by tyranny when he does not contribute to its propagation. Every
act of creation denies, by its mere existence, the world of master and slave. The
appalling society of tyrants and slaves in which we survive will only find its
death and transfiguration on the level of creation.

. But the fact that creation is necessary does not perforce imply that it is
possible. A creative period in art is determined by the order of a particular style
applied to the disorder of a particular time. It gives form and formulae to
Contemporary passions. [ . . . ] Today when collective passions have stolen a
inarch on individual passions, the ecstasy of love can always be controlled by
art. But the ineluctable problem is also to control collective passions and the
historic struggle. The scope of art, despite the regrets of the plagiarists, has
been extended from psychology to the human condition. When the passions of
the times put the fate of the whole world at stake, creation wants to dominate the
whole of destiny. But, at the same time, it maintains, in the face of totality,
the affirmation of unity. In simple words, creation is then imperilled, first by
itself, and then by the spirit of totality. To create, today, is to create danger-
ously.

Collective passions must, in fact, be lived through and experienced, at least
relatively. At the same time that he experiences them, the artist is devoured by
them. The result is that our period is rather the period of reportage than the
period of the work of art. The exercise of these passions, finally, entails far
greater chances of death than in the time of love and ambition, in that the only
way of living collective passions is to be willing to die for them or by their
hand. The greatest opportunity for authenticity is, today, the greatest defeat of
art. If creation is impossible during wars and revolutions, then we shall have
no creative artists, for war and revolution are our lot. The myth of unlimited
production brings war in its train as inevitably as clouds announce a storm.
Wars lay waste to the West and kill a genius or two. Hardly has it arisen from
the ruins when the bourgeois system sees the revolutionary system advancing
upon it. The genius has not even had time to be reborn; the war which threatens
us will, perhaps, kill all those who might have been geniuses. If a creative
classicism is, nevertheless, proved possible, we must recognize that, even though
it is rendered illustrious by one name alone, it will be the work of an entire
generation. The chances of defeat, in the century of destruction, can only be
compensated for by the hazard of numbers; in other words, the chance that of
ten authentic artists one, at least, will survive, take charge of the first utterances
of his brother artists and succeed in finding in his life both the time for passion
and the time for creation. The artist, whether he likes it or not, can no longer
be a solitary, except in the melancholy triumph which he owes to all his
fellow-artists. Rebellious art also ends by revealing the 'We are' and with it the
w ay to a burning humility.

Meanwhile, the triumphant revolution, in the aberrations of its nihilism,
[nenaces those who, in defiance of it, claim to maintain the existence of unity
*n totality. One of the implications of history today, and still more of the history



618 The Individual and the Social

of tomorrow, is the struggle between the artists and the new conquerors, between
the witnesses to the creative revolution and the founders of the nihilist revol-
ution. As to the outcome of the struggle, it is only possible to make inspired
guesses. At least we know that it must, hereafter, be carried on to the bitter
end. Modern conquerors can kill, but do not seem to be able to create. Artists
know how to create but cannot really kill. Murderers are only very exceptionally
found among artists. In the long run, therefore, art in our revolutionary societies
must die. But then the revolution will have lived its allotted span. Each time
that the revolution kills in a man the artist that he might have been, it attenuates
itself a little more. If, finally, the conquerors succeed in moulding the world
according to their laws, it will not prove that quality is king but that this world
is hell. In this hell, the place of art will coincide with that of vanquished
rebellion, a blind and empty hope in the pit of despair. Ernst Dwinger in his
Siberian Diary mentions a German lieutenant - for years a prisoner in a camp
where cold and hunger were almost unbearable - who constructed himself a
silent piano with wooden keys. In the most abject misery, perpetually surrounded
by a ragged mob, he composed a strange music which was audible to him alone.
And for us who have been thrown into hell, mysterious melodies and the
torturing images of a vanquished beauty will always bring us, in the midst of
crime and folly, the echo of that harmonious insurrection which bears witness,
throughout the centuries, to the greatness of humanity.

But hell can endure for only a limited period and life will begin again one
day. History may perhaps have an end; but our task is not to terminate it but
to create it, in the image of what we henceforth know to be true. Art, at least,
teaches us that man cannot be explained by history alone and that he also finds
a reason for his existence in the order of nature. For him, the great god Pan
is not dead. His most distinctive act of rebellion, while it affirms the value and
the dignity common to all men, obstinately claims, so as to satisfy its hunger
for unity, an integral part of the reality whose name is beauty. One can reject
all history and yet accept the world of the sea and the stars. The rebels who
wish to ignore nature and beauty are condemned to banish from history
everything with which they want to construct the dignity of existence and of
labour. Every great reformer tries to create in history what Shakespeare,
Cervantes, Moliere, and Tolstoy knew how to create: a world always ready to
satisfy the hunger for freedom and dignity which every man carries in his heart.
Beauty, no doubt, does not make revolutions. But a day will come when
revolutions will have need of beauty. The procedure of beauty, which is to resist
the real while conferring unity upon it, is also the procedure of rebellion. Is it
possible eternally to reject injustice without ceasing to acclaim the nature of
man and the beauty of the world? Our answer is yes. This ethic, at once
unsubmissive and loyal, is in any event the only one which lights the way to a
truly realistic revolution. In upholding beauty, we prepare the way for the day
of regeneration when civilization will give first place - far ahead of the formal
principles and degraded values of history - to this living virtue on which is
founded the common dignity of man and the world he lives in, and which we
now have to define in the face of a world which insults it.




L



Vb Individualism in Europe 619
11 Michel Tapie (1909-1987) from An Other Art

A founder member of the Compagnie de I'Art Brut with Dubuffet and Breton in 1948,
Tapie managed the Foyer de I'Art Brut at the Galerie Rene Drouin. Tapie later wrote of
the need for 'temperaments ready to break up everything', and to re-route the public
into a 'real future'. To this end all existing art forms, particularly geometric abstraction
and derivatives of Cubism, were held to be inadequate. Tapie accordingly became
prominent in the support and promotion of a tendency of informal abstract art, orga-
nizing the exhibition 'Signifiants de I'lnformel' at the Studio Fachetti in Paris in 1951.
His book Un Art Autre: oi) il s'agit de nouveaux devidages du reel was published in Paris
in 1952, from which edition the present extract is translated.

The direction of art now presents itself as the mystery appeared to St John
of the Cross; sheer and without solace. Since Nietzsche and Dada art has seemed
the most inhuman of adventures, from beginning to end. Only work which
would justify such a description justifies the current pioneers. And what it earns
has little to do with pleasure, but rather with the most vertiginous test which
it is given to man to confront, which is to lean over the depths of himself
without the protection of a railing. With this much at stake, ideas which seem
unchangeable are questioned, if not swept away, once and for all.

Since Impressionism these notions of beauty, form, space, aesthetics, have all
been to greater or lesser extents subject to question. However, until now, even
the most aggressive works mishandled these ideas, turned their backs on them,
attacked them, denied them; but in any case went against them (which is still
a way of recognizing them). Current works operate totally outside these ideas,
totally indifferent to them, as if ignorant of them, as if they had never existed.
Dada was the great break. Until then, Cubism included, all the classical criteria
were still in play despite the anarchic appearances; order, composition, balance,
rhythm. These all directly descended from a humanism which was en route to
exhaustion, but which had a continuing existence thanks to established routines,
prevalent among both artists and collectors. Until Dada (and with the exception
of the great German Expressionist movement, whose capital importance is only
just being recognized) all the various 'isms' were only outwardly revolutionary,
in a sort of Romanticism according to which adventure involved devaluing
accepted laws in some spectacular act of sacrilegious negation. But there was
no real difference of approach, no recognition that these worn-out laws were a
matter of total indifference, offering no real possibilities for the future.

When one visits collections of contemporary paintings, one does not have the
impression that the lesson of Dada contributed much. One asks oneself how,
after Dada, it is possible to continue such mediocre, useless production; how,
above all, it is possible that people should waste their lives in such stimulating
activities without knowing themselves to be impostors of the first water.
However, I believe that there is something radically new, namely, people's
awareness that it is impossible to create some new 'ism'; there is also a certain
prudishness amongst artists in the handling of form, this stupid form whose



620 The Individual and the Social

name justifies so many pursuits to the detriment of intoxication with life and
the development of mystery. Even those of us with the worst conscience now
know that there is only adventure by the individual, and that form can only
take its seat at the banquet which is contemporary art if it contents itself with
a place just like the others, and is even prepared to give up its place to another.
It thus gives itself a good alibi, which a habitual offender always needs. To the
extent that our art is different, a new etiquette is worked out which does not
improve old criteria, but rather is totally different in both its values and
assumptions.

Our interest is not in movements, but in something much rarer, authentic
Individuals. Movements have only ever existed because the majority of people
follow the group in which they find security from their own cowardice. The
only free person is the leader, if there really is a group, not just the little lifeless
coteries so dear to the hearts of our modern intellectual milieux.

The individual only remains himself in collective experiences in so far as he
takes these experiences in hand, by using them to develop his personal potential.
This supposes a total confidence in oneself, as well as faith in something
incommensurable and undiscussable, something precise and endless; on a scale
as humanly superhuman as the NADA of St John of the Cross. In the face of
this, the swarm of little movements with their history-making theological-critical
quarrels about art are of negligible importance.

The individual worthy of this title is not a prisoner of his past, but rather
of his future. He is not afraid that one can draw these apparent contradictions
from him, since these are only the facile games of immature individuals; of
weaklings who have never developed for fear of making some terrible mistake.
On the contrary, such mistakes are a springboard for those whose works flourish
in the generous spirit of the great adventure. The key to the work, then, is its
ultimate or complete nature; no alchemist is worthy of this name until he has
completed the great work and he does not deserve it during the necessary
preliminary stages, during which the fools don't hesitate to pour out their
hostility. These fools maliciously believe they can drag this individual back into
their ranks, as his very existence is a challenge both to their presence and to the
inevitable fact of their numerousness. Art is at the opposite extreme to universal
suffrage.

But another confession: form has for too long lost all hope of becoming an
incarnation of the god of formalism. Life has become totally estranged from
form; expressiveness is no longer compatible with it. The sculptors of form,
those who want all the beliefs of the great adventure to live in the sculpture,
seek every means to express themselves differently than actually through form.
Painters, with the apparent freedom of an infinitely multiple technique deliber-
ately act without it. They behave with casual indifference to the conventional
wisdom, and act without form, in a profound anarchy. The Occidental world
is finally discovering the Sign; it explodes it in the vehemence of a transcend-
ental calligraphy, of a hyper-significance intoxicated with the cruel vertigo of a
pure future.




Vb Individualism in Europe 621
12 Georg Baselitz (b. 1938) 'Pandemonium Manifestos'

Baselitz was born in what after the Second World War became East Germany. From
the mid-1950s to the mid-1960s he mostly lived and worked in Berlin, the city at the
very centre of the tensions of the Cold War as well as the most redolent site of
Germany's fraught relations to its own past. Although chronologically the Manifestos
coincided with moves among younger artists in America, England and France to deal
with the newly emergent Consumer Society, temperamentally they are of a piece with
the anguished post-war individualism of the previous phase. Baselitz actually cites
Artaud in the Manifestos, and in his painting of the period he was influenced by Fautrier.
In a German context dominated since the 1930s first by Nazi classicism and later by
Socialist Realism, he turned to the Expressionist tradition. His paintings of the time
attest to preoccupations with isolation and violence and are often prefixed with the
letters P.D.' to affirm their relation to the 'Pandemonium' manifestos. Both were issued
in Berlin, under the names of Baselitz and Eugen Schonebeck, in extremely limited
editions: the first in November 1961, the second in February 1962. They are published
in English translation in the exhibition catalogue Georg Baselitz: Paintings 1960-83,
London, Whitechapel Art Gallery, 1983, from which the present text is taken.



The poets lay in the kitchen sink,

body in morass.

The whole nation's spittle

floated on their soup.

They grew between mucous membranes

into the root areas of humanity.

Their wings did not carry them heavenward -

they dipped their quills in blood,

not a drop wasted writing -

but the wind bore their songs,

and those have shaken faith . . .

The poets are still throwing up their hands. Point to changes? Bitterness,
impotence and negation are not expressed in gesture. Till it hurts! With a final,
finite truth pouring out. No truck with those who can't wrap art up in a smell.
I have no kind word to say to the amiable. They have proceeded by art-historical
accretion, they have ruled neat lines under things, they have practised mystifi-
cation with all the passion of a collector. The survivors' beds are not unmade
- remnants of the last housework stuffed under the bed - the gelatinous threads
have not become visible, the unfruitful troubles derided. The rest of history is
instances. We have blasphemy on our side! They have escaped their sickbeds.
Their simplifying methods have swept them on to the crests of the waves. The
ice beneath the foggy maze is broken. They are all frozen stiff - those who
believe in fertility, those who believe in it - those who deny their pens and
those who revere them. Fiery furrows in the ice, flowerlike crystals, crisscross
icicles, starry sky torn open. Frozen nudes with encrusted skin - spilt trail of



622 The Individual and the Social

blood. The amiable are washed up, deposited as sediment. Faces that the moon
pulls, in perspective, in the rivers, faces into which waste water drips. The toad
that licks up the singers' spittle. Glowing crystal mountain. Homer, the water
of thine eye, in the mountain lake. Caught in the curlicues of the manuals which
invented the method.

Pacifying meditation, starting with the contemplation of the little toe. On the
horizon, in the depths of the fog, you can always see faces. Under the blanket
a being stirs, and behind the curtain someone laughs. In my eyes can be seen
the altar of Nature, the sacrifice of flesh, bits of food in the drain, evaporation
from the bedclothes, bleeding from stumps and aerial roots, oriental light on
the pearly teeth of lovely women, gristle, negative shapes, spots of shadow,
drops of wax, parades of epileptics, orchestrations of the flatulent, warty, mushy,
and jellyfishy beings, bodily members, braided erectile tissue, mouldy dough,
gristly growths in a desert landscape.

Withered, timorous conifers and flailing deciduous trees in the memory.
Anthropomorphic pot-bellied putty rocks (without Arcimboldi). M. Vrubel in
the cold sacristy of a Byzantine stone church - in the memory form.

Redon in the fleece of a one-eyed sheep, in the garden where the soft-leaved
plants have faces - in the memory form. I am warped, bloated and sodden with
memories. The destinies that make no one look up: I have them all on record.
By night, troubles soon come to mind, like starlings in late summer - a negative
film. The influence of the stars is undeniable, the purity of the night sky is
awesome, only the source is poisoned. The many killings, which I daily
experience in my own person, and the disgrace of having to defend my excessive
births, lead to a malady of age and experience. Ramparts are built, byways
pursued, sweets on offer, and more and more slides, sleepier and sleepier.

They have harassed me. The alien rhythm betrays them into the craziest
dances. I deplore their rhythmic function. They are special editions of passion.
Their art is a breathing exercise - ecstatic, contemplative, misty, inward,
mathematical. Art as a meditative action, as the manifestation of an in-group.

In me there are pre-pubertal enclaves (the smell when I was born); in me
there is the greening of youth, love in decoration, the tower-building idea. The
greening of youth and the coming autumn leaves are valid, even if I fall into
paranoid decline in winter. In me the brewers of poison, the annihilators, the
degenerates, have attained a place of honour.

The seat of all unfruitful religion. Piles of squatting background monks, spread
out in tiers, rigidly staring. In me there is a dead-end slide, the longing for
Grecian columns, the addiction to excess, the Mannerists' addiction to excess,
a tangle of tendrils and artifices, coldness and devotion - it is always enforced
love. Because revulsion often overcame me without warning. I took - and still
take - delight in sullying my own moments of innocent openness. Flatchested
and lacerated, I assail the hollow spaces. It has turned into impressiveness.
Another procedure that shame demands. Shame is not Situationism, it is the
slide into the abyss, it is frightening, it is mob delusion, it is a relapse into the
pubertal ooze. Euphoria deepens abysses.




Vb Individualism in Europe 623



Case 13

Often saw original mind in .,
but character mixed.
December joy: I am thy death.



Negation is a gesture of genius , not a wellspring of responsibility.
With solemn obsessiveness, autocratic elegance, with warm hands, pointed
fingers, rhythmic love, radical gestures - we want to excavate ourselves, abandon
ourselves irrevocably - as we have no questions, as we look at each other, as
we are wordless, as we, noblest profanity - our lips kiss the canvas in constant
embrace - as we pull sweat-rags through our veins and mendicantly, non-viol-
ently, corrosively, painfully carry our colour ordeal over into life, as we naturally
sully our cave tomb with exuberance - what our sacrifice is, we are. In happy
desperation, with inflamed senses, undiligent love, gilded flesh: vulgar Nature,
violence, reality, fruitless - parents forgotten - in answer to the vanished
question, in our looks at you, lust and blood, our bodies prove that we love.
Audacious twinness (deux, deux, deux) springs from love. Doubly pregnant cave.
We have moved into a locked cave of Pandemoniac origin. Dark images
(spendour in front, squalor behind) - mighty infatuation with senseless death.
No outstanding debts. No. Twenty-four hypocritical years purged to the last
dregs, to the creatorial uniform death in the front-line city. Left to my own
devices, with no fear of the sudden break, I look into myself. Now I am here!
Hygienic solace maintains the advantage gained by my isolation. First my restless
eyes - mould gathered between ecstatic reactions of erectile tissue, then caress
the gristle in the randy evening hours. Fantastic reality! Nameless life passes
by Fantastic reality - the picture of my great parturition. On a foray into the
crematorium, I found I had set out into my own bloody nose, navel oozing, on
a painful migration into my eyes. Then I shut myself into a blazing light and
departed. The last note I heard hung sweetly in the air. The smell chews ivy.
In tulip gardens, gates of retirement set up to the saturnine schizophrenic G.
As we do not lose our way amid hybrid dough fantasies. Our friends are still
deceased. Glad mourning is the breath of our cave. The rampart of broken
fingernails (plucked in euphoria), a witness of resistance, preserves us from
non-satanic tortures. Blunt fingers with no nails, tombs of the one minute in
the place of collective sadness, Finger joints fill A.A.'s mouth. We are still the
only friends of our happy intercourse. The enticing, seductive WE. Fastidious
contemporaries, democratic visitors - wealth of this city. It stinks. We live
through endless ecstasy. My secret. Paranoia, on to paranoia, in the outspread
fingers, the knuckles that leave the gentle rhythm of paranoia on the wall. We
love cigarettes with mourning-bands. We are capable of distinguishing, we are
not blind, but we are deaf. We foment rebellion among epileptics. The sexual
knots of pain enclosed in larval disguise. Physical weakness in the moment of
climax. No intolerable signs of degeneracy. Honest depravity with a blasphemous
stamp. The greatest Mannerist de-monstrance. Essential feigned isolation. This



tes-kL



624 The Individual and the Social

penetrable crust which contains Artaud (bursting sign). Colourful linens of
esoteric light outdazzle the entry of pale youth. Social desolation lashed with
dirty tricks - the age's style. Secretions of the flesh, sexual fantasy, embrace
with kisses, direct love (two, two) - I see them! - timeless threads preserved
among women. That is the Creatorium. A Pandemoniac redoubt which makes
further hope impossible. Demoniac vulgarity is constantly visible beauty. This
is the essential malice. Demoniac vulgarity is constantly visible beauty. The
men's god-substitute, praised in chorus of unanimous reserve. Herein have I
chosen. The smell conceals a plainness. Nothing reflects, nothing evaporates,
I always find myself thrown back, whereby historical instances no longer serve.
I always find dwindling lust. The choice is indecisive, unemotive, lasting
splendour, nevertheless, pathogenic. The torments of the jellyfish, who ever
feels them? Secret malady . . . uniform death - soothing, fetishistic agonies of
conscience. The year of sweet apprehension once lived through, here surviving
is now the most painful ordeal of all. I am in Pandemonium undergoing hygienic
solace. My handsome, overdue body is in this (A.A.'s) especially colourful
shadow. Passionate feelings of the crowd, corroborating cliches, visiting religious
soul-brothels, with rhythm and click of backgammon, smiling inanely at the one
thing that is painful. What is victorious about this? - Do you want to see me
cry? Pandemoniac shots in the back along the roadbed - umbilical rails.
Recognized a family that coughs among the hinds' udders in Saxony without
need of inner help. More of these little nest explosions - such a lot of skin
scrubbed away already. Glass eyes cool them off, Never note down an observa-
tion. A. Gallen! Standing barefoot on suppurating stumps of felled trees,
shouting into madness. I have only now been offered the annual rings. Far and
wide I shake drops of water from my feet. Poor A. Gallen. Death has long been
abandoned as a school disease. I. Ducasse is fateful, without willingness to love.
An epidemic of pederasts shitting blood - doubly fruitful in a religious sense,
if none of you helps out the wings of words. In this I myself stand resurrected.
All downright poetry. Cleared away. Here I lie in tulips - G.'s epitaph. I'm
the vanguard of my journey. No picture without silk stockings as a guiding
thread, no picture without this useless crowd of ecstatic faces in boxes. Extract
from five-year professional training. As they can't say anything to me. I warned
you. In spite of that, these passionate bonds - you all do know. No more
materialstations. Of which there still remains - uniquely - one real possibility
which has come my way. To let the unnamable bleed the crystallization of a
miscarriage, to let exuded ice-ups ice up, is to transcend all automation - autism
is a flower stalk.

Only one life - living withdrawn, in attacks against life. Mourn the loss - no
mourning for the lost. Flying clods steered into Pandemonium. Feverish aper-
tures feverishly filled. No impossible leadership without a hidden malady.
Constant renewal of the toxins. Euphoria deepens the abysses. All withdraw.
The fancy enjoyments have won. For all the rebellion, for all the loving embrace
(insanity) I see you all drift away. Times of never-halting devastation. Upswing
through Pandemoniac roofing to the ultimate vision. Cold snaps enforce mo-
ments of salvation, such as: calling a word to mind, all those poets in boxes,




Vb Individualism in Europe 625

oil painting, care of adhesives, fear of looking at excrement, horizontal formats,
remains of housework under the bed, trips to Paris, repression of exhibitionism,
building blocks . . . Pandemoniac upswing through the creatorial roofing to the
ultimate vision, the Pandemoniac redoubt, which leaves no more room for hope.
Ripped away all skin, the last simile, and cut oneself through to the quick.
Ineluctable, unshakeable, upright stasis, where no end-products (precise pictures)
are present. Past it goes, past it goes, through Circassia. Paranoid March, Ride
of the Paranoids, Paranoids' Leap, paranoiacide, December joy . . . and so I swim
from your sight in sperm - away from the surprised eyes of my mother.

Irreconcilable with cognac and sober - fastidious democratic contemporaries.
Asiandom of the Season. Now the membrane borrowed from the sacrosanct
surface, vibrating canvas (lending sexual maturity a helping hand), lovingly
violated. Ripped away, the last skin, the last simile. On, far on, on into the
white quick. Look good in boxes, all the heads, the poets, confusion of profusion.
Lightning without God into bare woods, body of mine born into clearest water.
Fearsome darkness in the ice crystal of one and only truth. Up, floated twisting
celestial updraught to the final mission.

I am of invisible extent. Systematic mortification of the regions without
sensation (grading off) in a single lapse of time. The infinity that blows from
my mouth. I am on the moon as others are on the balcony. Life will go on.

All writing is crap.



13 Francis Bacon (1910-1992) Interview with David
Sylvester

Bacon first exhibited paintings in London in the late 1930s, but his mature style dates
from the end of the Second World War. His characteristic themes, very much of the
temper of that time, concern violence, suffering and the aloneness of the human
individual. Bacon disavows the literary and sees his paint as directly expressive, but
his thought, as revealed in the present interview, remains consistent with the concep-
tualizations of the 1940s and early 1950s. Even after almost twenty years, when asked
to account for his painting, he returns to preoccupations with despair, with the virtual
arbitrariness of effort, and with life as a 'game without reason'. In effect, Bacon treats
the historically specific concerns of the post-war conjuncture as universal truths of the
modern condition. The interview was recorded by the BBC in October 1962, and
broadcast on 23 March 1963. A version was printed as The Art of the Impossible' in
the Sunday Times Colour Magazine, London, 14 July 1963. The present extracts are
taken from the text as published in David Sylvester, The Brutality of Fact: Interviews
with Francis Bacon, London, 1975, reprinted 1987.

DS: Have you ever had any desire at all to do an abstract painting?

FB: I've had a desire to do forms, as when I originally did three forms at the
base of the Crucifixion [Three Studies for Figures at the Base of a Crucifixion,
1944]. They were influenced by the Picasso things which were done at the



626 The Individual and the Social

end of the 'twenties. And I think there's a whole area there suggested by
Picasso, which in a way has been unexplored, of organic form that relates to
the human image but is a complete distortion of it.

DS: After that triptych, you started to paint in a more figurative way: was it
more out of a positive desire to paint figuratively or more out of a feeling
that you couldn't develop that kind of organic form further at that time?

FB: Well, one of the pictures I did in 1946 [Painting], the one like a butcher's
shop, came to me as an accident. I was attempting to make a bird alighting
on a field. And it may have been bound up in some way with the three forms
that had gone before, but suddenly the lines that I'd drawn suggested
something totally different, and out of this suggestion arose this picture. I
had no intention to do this picture; I never thought of it in that way. It was
like one continuous accident mounting on top of another.

DS: Did the bird alighting suggest the umbrella or what?

FB: It suddenly suggested an opening-up into another area of feeling altogether.
And then I made these things, I gradually made them. So that I don't think
the bird suggested the umbrella; it suddenly suggested this whole image. And
I carried it out very quickly, in about three or four days.

DS: It often happens, does it, this transformation of the image in the course
of working?

FB: It does, but now I always hope it will arrive more positively. Now I feel
that I want to do very, very specific objects, though made out of something
which is completely irrational from the point of view of being an illustration.
I want to do very specific things like portraits, and they will be portraits of
the people, but, when you come to analyse them, you just won't know - or
it would be very hard to see - how the image is made up at all. And this is
why in a way it is very wearing; because it is really a complete accident.

DS: An accident in what sense?

FB: Because I don't know how the form can be made. For instance, the other
day I painted a head of somebody [Head /, 1961], and what made the sockets
of the eyes, the nose, the mouth were, when you analysed them, just forms
which had nothing to do with eyes, nose or mouth; but the paint moving
from one contour into another made a likeness of this person I was trying to
paint. I stopped; I thought for a moment I'd got something much nearer to
what I want. Then the next day I tried to take it further and tried to make
it more poignant, more near, and I lost the image completely. Because this
image is a kind of tightrope walk between what is called figurative painting
and abstraction. It will go right out from abstraction but will really have
nothing to do with it. It's an attempt to bring the figurative thing up onto
the nervous system more violently and more poignantly. [ . . . ]

DS: In painting this Crucifixion [Three Studies for a Crucifixion, 1962], did you
have the three canvases up simultaneously, or did you work on them quite
separately?

FB: I worked on them separately and, gradually, as I finished them, I worked
on the three across the room together. It was a thing that I did in about a
fortnight, when I was in a bad mood of drinking, and I did it under




Vb Individualism in Europe 627

tremendous hangovers and drink; I sometimes hardly knew what I was doing.
And it's one of the only pictures that I've been able to do under drink. I
think perhaps the drink helped me to be a bit freer.

DS: Have you been able to do the same in any picture that you've done since?

FB: I haven't. But I think with great effort I'm making myself freer. I mean,
you either have to do it through drugs or drink.

DS: Or extreme tiredness?

FB: Extreme tiredness? Possibly. Or will.

DS: The will to lose one's will?

FB: Absolutely. The will to make oneself completely free. Will is the wrong
word, because in the end you could call it despair. Because it really comes out
of an absolute feeling of it's impossible to do these things, so I might as well
just do anything. And out of this anything, one sees what happens. [. . .]
You know in my case all painting - and the older I get, the more it becomes
so - is accident. So I foresee it in my mind, I foresee it, and yet I hardly
ever carry it out as I foresee it. It transforms itself by the actual paint. I use
very large brushes, and in the way I work I don't in fact know very often
what the paint will do, and it does many things which are very much better
than I could make it do. Is that an accident? Perhaps one could say it's not
an accident, because it becomes a selective process which part of this accident
one chooses to preserve. One is attempting, of course, to keep the vitality of
the accident and yet preserve a continuity.

DS: What is it above all that happens with the paint? Is it the kind of
ambiguities that it produces?

FB: And the suggestions. When I was trying in despair the other day to paint
that head of a specific person, I used a very big brush and a great deal of
paint and I put it on very, very freely, and I simply didn't know in the end
what I was doing, and suddenly this thing clicked, and became exactly like
this image I was trying to record. But not out of any conscious will, nor was
it anything to do with illustrational painting. What has never yet been analysed
is why this particular way of painting is more poignant than illustration. I
suppose because it has a life completely of its own. It lives on its own, like
the image one's trying to trap; it lives on its own, and therefore transfers the
essence of the image more poignantly. So that the artist may be able to open
up or rather, should I say, unlock the valves of feeling and therefore return
the onlooker to life more violently. [. . .]

DS: Most of your paintings have been of single figures or single heads, but in
the new Crucifixion triptych you've done a composition with several figures.
Would you like to do that more often?

FB: I find it so difficult to do one figure that that generally seems enough.
And, of course, I've got an obsession with doing the one perfect image.

DS: Which would have to be a single figure?

FB: In the complicated stage in which painting is now, the moment there are
several figures - at any rate several figures on the same canvas - the story
begins to be elaborated. And the moment the story is elaborated, the boredom
sets in; the story talks louder than the paint. This is because we are actually



k--:



628 The Individual and the Social

in very primitive times once again, and we haven't been able to cancel out
the story-telling between one image and another.

* * *

DS: You may not want a story, but you certainly seem to want subjects with
a lot of dramatic charge when you choose a theme like the Crucifixion. Can
you say what impelled you to do the triptych?

FB: I've always been very moved by pictures about slaughterhouses and meat,
and to me they belong very much to the whole thing of the Crucifixion.
There've been extraordinary photographs which have been done of animals
just being taken up before they were slaughtered; and the smell of death. We
don't know, of course, but it appears by these photographs that they're so
aware of what is going to happen to them, they do everything to attempt to
escape. I think these pictures were very much based on that kind of thing,
which to me is very, very near this whole thing of the Crucifixion. I know
for religious people, for Christians, the Crucifixion has a totally different
significance. But as a nonbeliever, it was just an act of man's behaviour, a
way of behaviour to another. [ . . . ]

DS: And is it the sort of mood implicit in some unique and possibly tragic
situation that you want above all?

FB: No. I think, especially as I grow older, I want something much more
specific than that. I want a record of an image. And with the record of the
image, of course, comes a mood, because you can't make an image without
its creating a mood.

DS: A record of an image you've seen in life?

FB: Yes. Of a person, or a thing, but with me it's nearly always a person.

DS: A particular person?

FB: Yes.

DS: But this was less so in the past?

FB: Less so in the past, but now it becomes more and more insistent, only
because I think that, by being anchored in that way, there is the possibility
of an extraordinary irrational remaking of this positive image that you long
to make. And this is the obsession: how like can I make this thing in the
most irrational way? So that you're not only remaking the look of the image,
you're remaking all the areas of feeling which you yourself have apprehensions
of. You want to open up so many levels of feeling if possible, which can't
be done in. . . . It's wrong to say it can't be done in pure illustration, in purely
figurative terms, because of course it has been done. It has been done in
Velasquez. That is, of course, where Velasquez is so different to Rembrandt,
because, oddly enough, if you take the great late self-portraits of Rembrandt,
you will find that the whole contour of the face changes time after time; it's
a totally different face, although it has what is called a look of Rembrandt,
and by this difference it involves you in different areas of feeling. But with
Velasquez it's more controlled and, of course, I believe, more miraculous.
Because one wants to do this thing of just walking along the edge of the
precipice, and in Velasquez it's a very, very extraordinary thing that he has
been able to keep it so near to what we call illustration and at the same time



Vb Individualism in Europe 629

so deeply unlock the greatest and deepest things that man can feel. Which
makes him such an amazingly mysterious painter. Because one really does
believe that Velasquez recorded the court at that time and, when one looks
at his pictures, one is possibly looking at something which is very, very near
to how things looked. Of course the whole thing has become so distorted and
pulled-out since then, but I believe that we will come back in a much more
arbitrary way to doing something very, very like that - to being as specific
as Velasquez was in recording an image. But of course so many things have
happened since Velasquez that the situation has become much more involved
and much more difficult, for very many reasons. And one of them, of course,
which has never actually been worked out, is why photography has altered
completely this whole thing of figurative painting, and totally altered it.

DS: In a positive as well as a negative way?

FB: I think in a very positive way. I think that Velasquez believed that he was
recording the court at that time and recording certain people at that time;
but a really good artist today would be forced to make a game of the same
situation. He knows that the recording can be done by film, so that that side
of his activity has been taken over by something else and all that he is involved
with is making the sensibility open up through the image. Also, I think that
man now realizes that he is an accident, that he is a completely futile being,
that he has to play out the game without reason. I think that, even when
Velasquez was painting, even when Rembrandt was painting, in a peculiar
way they were still, whatever their attitude to life, slightly conditioned by
certain types of religious possibilities, which man now, you could say, has
had completely cancelled out for him. Now, of course, man can only attempt
to make something very, very positive by trying to beguile himself for a time
by the way he behaves, by prolonging possibly his life by buying a kind of
immortality through the doctors. You see, all art has now become completely
a game by which man distracts himself; and you may say it has always been
like that, but now it's entirely a game. And I think that that is the way things
have changed, and what is fascinating now is that it's going to become much
more difficult for the artist, because he must really deepen the game to be
any good at all.




VC

Art and Society



1 Maurice de Vlaminck (1876-1958) 'Open Opinions
on Painting'

After the defeat of France in 1940, Vlaminck became a leading figure in the cultural
establishment of Vichy, and participated in the ambiguous episode of the so-called
'study voyage' to Germany in 1941, undertaken by a group of French artists on the
initiative of Goebbels. The interest of this establishment, as exemplified in the reopening
of the Musee d'Art Moderne in 1942, was to emphasize the national characteristics of
the Parisian avant-garde, asserting continuity with the French tradition, and at the same
time occluding any overtly leftist tendencies. Accordingly, Matisse, Braque and Bonnard
remained in favour, whereas the Spaniard Picasso was marginalized. Vlaminck's criti-
cism of Picasso was originally published as 'Opinions libre sur la peinture', Comoedia,
Paris, 6 June 1942; reprinted in the catalogue of the exhibition 'Pahs - Paris' (op. cit.J,
p 101, from which the present translation is made.

It is difficult to kill something that does not exist. But if it is true that there
are dead people who must be killed, I shall try none the less. ... It must be
asked whether Picasso is aware of his shrewdness, and one is afraid of discovering
a facade, where one thought to find a character. The slightly cheeky mask which
he affects gives him the appearance of a sort of monster which takes you in
with its simplicity. He detests being discovered in this.

. . . Pablo Picasso is guilty of having led French painting into the most mortal
impasse, into an indescribable confusion. From 1900 to 1930, he has led it to
negation, to powerlessness, to death. For alone with himself, Picasso is power-
lessness made man; nature having refused him all real character, he has used
his entire intelligence, all his malice to create a personality for himself. . .

Everything is fine for him! Dilettante, he plays music, but this music is a
pot-pourri, he does not draw a line, he does not paint a stroke, without
reminding you of some source.

Giorgione, El Greco, Steinlen, Lautrec, Greek figurines and funeral masks:
he uses everything. Forain, Degas, Cezanne, African and Polynesian sculptures,
he orchestrates everything. . . . The only thing that Picasso is incapable of doing,
is a Picasso which is a Picasso!



Vc Art and Society 631

. . . Picasso was encouraged by complicities of all kinds. His greatest hopes
have been surpassed. He could not have hoped for more! The most deprived,
the incapable, the failures devoid of all sensibility and of any gift, rallied around
Pablo Picasso. They tagged along behind this hybrid and decorative art:
*Painting-by-numbers\

If it is difficult to kill what does not exist, it is because in reality there is no
Cubism: there is Picasso. ... A collective aberration, which the critics encour-
aged, has alienated all good sense, all true sentiment. Cubism! Perversity of
spirit, insufficiency, amoralism, as far from painting as pederasty is from love.

Picasso has suffocated, for many generations of artists, the spirit of creation,
faith, sincerity in work and in life. For it is certain that a work of art has
nothing to prove 'socially 1 , it is certain that it must be human: a lesson!

At our last meeting in a gallery, we shook hands.

'We're getting old,' Picasso, I said to him.

'Me!' he replied with a bitter smile. Tm not getting old, I'm going out of
fashion.'



2 Francis Klingender (1907-1955) from Marxism and
Modern Art

Klingender's adoption of a binary view of art history wherein Realist tendencies are in
continual conflict with Idealist ones, can be related both to Soviet artistic doctrine and,
beyond that, to Lenin's claim that history itself embodies at each moment a struggle
between two tendencies: the one ultimately progressive, the other reactionary. However,
Klingender then proceeds to link this orthodox Communist tradition to the Utopian
socialism of the English nineteenth-century author and designer William Morris. Originally
published as a pamphlet in the 'Marxism Today' series, under the title Marxism and
Modem Art: an Approach to Social Realism, London 1943. The present extract is taken
from the concluding section, pp. 47-9.

[.. .] The distinction between the principle of a given style and the works
actually produced in it is analogous to that between a philosophical or scientific
system and the concrete discoveries made within the framework of that system.
A principle or system which tends to deflect the artist or thinker from reality
is unconditionally inferior to one which directs his energies towards objective
truth. But one need only think of Hegel to realize that some of the greatest
advances in human understanding have been made within the framework of a
reactionary system of thought - or rather in spite of it. In other words, style
'ft art, like system in philosophy or hypothesis in science, is historically
conditioned, transitory and relative, but if we use the term in the wider sense
of a period style (e.g. Greek, Gothic, etc)., there is not a single style in the
history of art which has not produced some concrete advances towards the
absolute. It is the task of scientific criticism to discover these concrete achieve-
ments of permanent significance within their relative and transitory shell.

If the history of art is examined from this point of view, it will be found
that there is a continuous tradition of realism which started with the dawn of



632 The Individual and the Social

art (e.g. in the palaeolithic cave paintings) and which will survive to its end,
for it reflects the productive intercourse between man and nature which is the
basis of life. At that important phase in the development of society, when mental
labour was divided from material labour, there emerged another, secondary
tradition of spiritualistic, religious or idealistic art. This, too, is continuous until
it will vanish with the final negation of the division of labour - i.e. in a
Communist world. During this entire period of development, i.e. as long as
society is divided into classes, the history of art is the history of the ceaseless
struggle and mutual inter-penetration of these two traditions. At successive,
though widely overlapping phases corresponding to specific stages in the deve-
lopment of society, both these traditions, and also the results of their interplay,
assume the historical forms which we call the 'Classical', 'Gothic', 'Baroque',
etc., styles. A Marxist history of art should describe, first, the struggle which is
absolute between these two opposite and mutually exclusive trends, and secondly,
their fleeting, conditional and relative union, as manifested in the different styles
and in each work of art, and it should explain both these aspects of art in terms
of the social processes which they reflect. Marxist criticism consists in discovering
the specific weight within each style, each artist and each single work of those
elements which reflect objective truth in powerful and convincing imagery. But
it should always be remembered that, unlike science which reduces reality to a
blue-print or formula, the images of art reveal reality in its infinite diversity
and many-sided richness. And it is in its infinite diversity and many-sided
richness that art, too, must be appreciated.

Conclusion

Realism, the attitude of the artist who strives to reflect some essential aspect
of reality and to face the problems set by life, is from its very nature popular.
It reflects the outlook of those men and women who produce the means of life.
It is the only standard which can bring art back to the people today. For, as
Lenin told Clara Zetkin: 'it does not greatly matter what we ourselves think
about art. Nor does it matter what art means to some hundreds or even
thousands in a nation, like our own, of many millions. Art belongs to the people.
Its roots should penetrate deeply into the very thick of the masses of the people.
It should be comprehensible to these masses and loved by them. It should unite
the emotions, the thoughts and the will of these masses and raise them to a
higher level. It should awaken artists in these masses and foster their develop-
ment.' [On Lenin. Moscow, 1925]

Such an aim may well seem Utopian to the artist who is only too sadly aware
of the havoc which a century and a half of unbridled commercialism has wrought
with the aesthetic sensibility of our people. But instead of despairing, let him
take heart from the words William Morris wrote in 1879, long before the signs
could be discerned which herald a revival of popular art today:

'But I will say at least, Courage! for things wonderful, unhoped-for, glorious
have happened even in this short while I have been alive.

'Yes, surely these times are wonderful and fruitful of change, which, as it



1



Vc Art and Society 633

wears and gathers new life even in its wearing, will one day bring better things
for the toiling days of men, who, with freer hearts and clearer eyes, will once
more gain the sense of outward beauty, and rejoice in it.

'Meanwhile, if these hours be dark, as, indeed, in many ways they are, at
least do not let us sit deedless, like fools and fine gentlemen, thinking the
common toil not good enough for us, and beaten by the muddle; but rather let
us work like good fellows trying by some dim candle-light to set our workshop
ready against tomorrow's daylight - that tomorrow, when the civilised world,
no longer greedy, strifeful, and destructive, shall have a new art, a glorious art,
made by the people and for the people, as a happiness to the maker and the
user.' [The Art of the People, 1879]

3 Theodor Adorno (1903-1969) and Max Horkheimer
(1895-1973) The Parable of the Oarsmen'

The authors were jointly leading figures of the Frankfurt School in its exile in the United
States during the Nazi period in their native Germany. In 1944 they published a major
critique of the fundamental Western categories of Reason and Nature, under the title
Dialektik der Aufklarung, later translated into English as Dialectic of Enlightenment, New
York, 1972. In the early part of this work, their discussion of Myth involves an
extraordinary reading of the story of Odysseus and the Sirens as an allegory of the
sundering of utilitarian labour and the disinterested contemplation of art at the very
onset of the Western tradition. The present extract is taken from the 1972 translation,
pp. 31-34, but the title is derived from Fredric Jameson's discussion of the passage
in his Late Marxism, London and New York, 1990.

[ . . . ] From Homer to modern times, the dominant spirit wishes to steer between
the Scylla of a return to mere reproduction and the Charybdis of unfettered
fulfillment; it has always mistrusted any star other than that of the lesser evil.
The new German pagans and warmongers want to set pleasure free once more.
But under the pressure of labor, through the centuries, pleasure has learned
self-hatred, and therefore in the state of totalitarian emancipation remains mean
and disabled by self-contempt. It remains in the grip of the self-preservation
to which it once trained reason - deposed in the meantime. At the turning
points of Western civilization, from the transition to Olympian religion up to
the Renaissance, Reformation, and bourgeois atheism, whenever new nations and
classes more firmly repressed myth, the fear of uncomprehended, threatening
nature, the consequence of its very materialization and objectification, was
reduced to animistic superstition, and the subjugation of nature was made the
absolute purpose of life within and without. If in the end self-preservation has
been automated, so reason has been abandoned by those who, as administrators
f production, entered upon its inheritance and now fear it in the persons of
the disinherited. The essence of enlightenment is the alternative whose ineradi-
cability is that of domination. Men have always had to choose between their
subjection to nature or the subjection of nature to the Self. With the extension
of the bourgeois commodity economy, the dark horizon of myth is illumined



634 The Individual and the Social

by the sun of calculating reason, beneath whose cold rays the seed of the new
barbarism grows to fruition. Under the pressure of domination human labor has
always led away from myth - but under domination always returns to the
jurisdiction of myth.

The entanglement of myth, domination, and labor is preserved in one of the
Homeric narratives. Book XII of the Odyssey tells of the encounter with the
Sirens. Their allurement is that of losing oneself in the past. But the hero to
whom the temptation is offered has reached maturity through suffering.
Throughout the many mortal perils he has had to endure, the unity of his own
life, the identity of the individual, has been confirmed for him. The regions of
time part for him as do water, earth, and air. For him, the flood of that-which-
was has retreated from the rock of the present, and the future lies cloudy on
the horizon. What Odysseus left behind him entered into the nether world; for
the self is still so close to prehistoric myth, from whose womb it tore itself,
that its very own experienced past becomes mythic prehistory. And it seeks to
encounter that myth through the fixed order of time. The three-fold schema is
intended to free the present moment from the power of the past by referring
that power behind the absolute barrier of the unrepeatable and placing it at the
disposal of the present as practicable knowledge. The compulsion to rescue what
is gone as what is living instead of using it as the material of progress was
appeased only in art, to which history itself appertains as a presentation of past
life. So long as art declines to pass as cognition and is thus separated from
practice, social practice tolerates it as it tolerates pleasure. But the Sirens' song
has not yet been rendered powerless by reduction to the condition of art. They
know 'everything that ever happened on this so fruitful earth,' including the
events in which Odysseus himself took part, 'all those things that Argos' sons
and the Trojans suffered by the will of the gods on the plains of Troy. 1 While
they directly evoke the recent past, with the irresistible promise of pleasure as
which their song is heard, they threaten the patriarchal order which renders to
each man his life only in return for his full measure of time. Whoever falls for
their trickery must perish, whereas only perpetual presence of mind forces an
existence from nature. Even though the Sirens know all that has happened, they
demand the future as the price of that knowledge, and the promise of the happy
return is the deception with which the past ensnares the one who longs for it,
Odysseus is warned by Circe, that divinity of reversion to the animal, whom
he resisted and who therefore gives him strength to resist other powers of
disintegration. But the allurement of the Sirens remains superior; no one who
hears their song can escape. Men had to do fearful things to themselves before
the self, the identical, purposive, and virile nature of man, was formed, and
something of that recurs in every childhood. The strain of holding the I together
adheres to the I in all stages; and the temptation to lose it has always been
there with the blind determination to maintain it. The narcotic intoxication
which permits the atonement of deathlike sleep for the euphoria in which the
self is suspended, is one of the oldest social arrangements which mediate between
self-preservation and self-destruction - an attempt of the self to survive itself.
The dread of losing the self and of abrogating together with the self the barrier



I



Vc Art and Society 635

between oneself and other life, the fear of death and destruction, is intimately
associated with a promise of happiness which threatened civilization in every
moment. Its road was that of obedience and labor, over which fulfillment shines
forth perpetually - but only as illusive appearance, as devitalized beauty. The
mind of Odysseus, inimical both to his own death and to his own happiness,
is aware of this. He knows only two possible ways to escape. One of them he
prescribes for his men. He plugs their ears with wax, and they must row with
all their strength. Whoever would survive must not hear the temptation of that
which is unrepeatable, and he is able to survive only by being unable to hear
it. Society has always made provision for that. The laborers must be fresh and
concentrate as they look ahead, and must ignore whatever lies to one side. They
must doggedly sublimate in additional effort the drive that impels to diversion.
And so they become practical. The other possibility Odysseus, the seigneur who
allows the others to labor for themselves, reserves to himself. He listens, but
while bound impotently to the mast; the greater the temptation the more he
has his bonds tightened - just as later the burghers would deny themselves
happiness all the more doggedly as it drew closer to them with the growth of
their own power. What Odysseus hears is without consequence for him; he is
able only to nod his head as a sign to be set free from his bonds; but it is too
late; his men, who do not listen, know only the song's danger but nothing of
its beauty, and leave him at the mast in order to save him and themselves. They
reproduce the oppressor's life together with their own, and the oppressor is no
longer able to escape his social role. The bonds with which he has irremediably
tied himself to practice, also keep the Sirens away from practice: their temptation
is neutralized and becomes a mere object of contemplation - becomes art. The
prisoner is present at a concert, an inactive eavesdropper like later concertgoers,
and his spirited call for liberation fades like applause. Thus the enjoyment of
art and manual labor break apart as the world of prehistory is left behind. [. . .]



4 Robert Motherwell (1915-1991) 'The Modern
Painter's World 1

The author was a member of the 'first generation' of the American Abstract Expression-
ist avant-garde, who untypically also maintained a prominent career as a writer and
editor. Here he discusses those conditions of the contemporary world which force the
artist into isolation, but which nonetheless his art cannot do other than represent.
Originally delivered as a lecture at Mount Holyoke College, Massachusetts, in August
1944, first published in the magazine Dyn, vol. 1, no. 6, New York, November 1944,
PP. 8-14, from which the present version is taken.

I must apologize for my subject, which is that of the relation of the painter to
A middle-class world. This is not the most interesting relation by which to grasp
our art. More interesting are the technical problems involved by the evolution
of artistic structure. More fundamental is the individual problem, the capacity
of an artist to absorb the shocks of reality, whether coming from the internal



636 The Individual and the Social

or external world, and to reassert himself in the face of such shocks, as when
a dog shakes off water after emerging from the sea. The twentieth century has
been one of tremendous crises in the external world, yet, artistically speaking,
it has been predominantly a classic age. In such epochs it is architecture, not
painting or poetry or music, which leads. Only modern architecture, among the
great creations of twentieth-century art, is accepted quite naturally by everyone.
Both Surrealist and 'non-figurative' painting, with which I am concerned in this
lecture, are the feminine and masculine extremes of what, when we think of
the post-impressionists, the fauves, the cubists, and the art which stems, in
conception, from them, has been a classic age.

Great art is never extreme.

Criticism moves in a false direction, as does art, when it aspires to be a social
science. The role of the individual is too great. If this were not so, we might
all well despair. The modern states that we have seen so far have all been
enemies of the artist; those states which follow may be, too.

Still, the social relation is a real one. [. . .]

The function of the artist is to express reality as felt. In saying this, we must
remember that ideas modify feelings. The anti-intellectualism of English and
American artists has led them to the error of not perceiving the connection
between the feeling of modern forms and modern ideas. By feeling is meant
the response of the 'body-and-mind' as a whole to the events of reality. [. . .]

The function of the modern artist is by definition the felt expression of modern
reality. This implies that reality changes to some degree. This implication is
the realization that history is 'real,' or, to reverse the proposition, that reality
has a historical character. Perhaps Hegel was the first fully to feel this. With
Marx this notion is coupled with the feeling of how material reality is.

It is because reality has a historical character that we feel the need for new
art. The past has bequeathed us great works of art; if they were wholly satisfying,
we should not need new ones. From this past art, we accept what persists qua
eternally valuable, as when we reject the specific religious values of Egyptian
or Christian art, and accept with gratitude their form. Other values in this past
art we do not want. To say this is to recognize that works of art are by nature
pluralistic: they contain more than one class of values. It is the eternal values
that we accept in past art. By eternal values are meant those which, humanly
speaking, persist in reality in any space-time, like those of aesthetic form, or
the confronting of death.

Not all values are eternal. Some values are historical - if you like, social, as
when now artists especially value personal liberty because they do not find
positive liberties in the concrete character of the modern state. It is the values
of our own epoch which we cannot find in past art. This is the origin of our
desire for new art. In our case, for modern art . . .

The term 'modern' covers the last hundred years, more or less. Perhaps it
was Eugene Delacroix who was the first modern artist. But the popular
association with the phrase 'modern art' like that of mediaeval art, is stronger
than its historical denotation. The popular association with mediaeval art is
religiousness. The popular association with modern art is its remoteness from the




Vc Art and Society 637

symbols and values of the majority of men. There is a break in modern times
between artists and other men without historical precedent in depth and
generality. Both sides are wounded by the break. There is even hate at times,
though we all have a thirst for love.

The remoteness of modern art is not merely a question of language, of the
increasing 'abstractness' of modern art. Abstractness, it is true, exists, as the
result of a long, specialized internal development in modern artistic structure.
But the crisis is the modern artist's rejection, almost in toto, of the values of
the bourgeois world. In this world modern artists form a kind of spiritual
underground.

Modern art is related to the problem of the modern individual's freedom. For
this reason the history of modern art tends at certain moments to become the
history of modern freedom. It is here that there is a genuine rapport between
the artist and the working-class. At the same time, modern artists have not a
social, but an individualist experience of freedom: this is the source of the
irreconcilable conflict between the Surrealists and the political parties of the
working-class.

The social condition of the modern world which gives every experience its form
is the spiritual breakdown which followed the collapse of religion. This condition
has led to the isolation of the artist from the rest of society. The modern artist's
social history is that of a spiritual being in a property-loving world.

No synthesized view of reality has replaced religion. Science is not a view,
but a method. The consequence is that the modern artist tends to become the
last active spiritual being in the great world. It is true that each artist has his
own religion. It is true that artists are constantly excommunicating each other.
It is true that artists are not always pure, that sometimes they are concerned
with their public standing or their material circumstance. Yet for all that it is
the artists who guard the spiritual in the modern world.

The weakness of socialists derives from the inertness of the working-class.
The weakness of artists derives from their isolation. Weak as they are, it is
these groups who provide the opposition. The socialist is to free the working-class
from the domination of property, so that the spiritual can be possessed by all.
The function of the artist is to make actual the spiritual, so that it is there to
be possessed. It is here that art instructs, if it does at all.

In the spiritual underground the modern artist tends to be reduced to a single
subject, his ego . . . This situation tells us where to expect the successes and
failures of modern art. If the artist's conception, from temperament and
conditioning, of freedom is highly individualistic, his egoism then takes a
romantic form. Hence the Surrealists' love at first sight for the Romantic period,
for disoriented and minor artists: individualism limits size. If the artist, on the
contrary, resents the limitations of such subjectivism, he tries to objectify his
e go. In the modern world, the way open to the objectivization of the ego is
through form. This is the tendency of what we call, not quite accurately, abstract



m



638 The Individual and the Social

art. Romanticism and formalism both are responses to the modern world, a
rejection, or at least a reduction, of modern social values. [ . . . ]

* * *

The present ruling class was able to gain its freedom from the aristocracy by
the accumulation of private property. Property is the historical base of contempor-
ary freedom. The danger lies in thinking we own only our private possessions.
Property creates the unfreedom of the majority of men. 'When this majority in
turn secures its freedom by expropriating the bourgeoisie; the condition of its
freedom is the unfreedom of the bourgeoisie; but whereas the bourgeoisie like
all ruling classes, requires an unfree exploited class for its existence, the
proletariat does not require to maintain the bourgeoisie in order to maintain its
own freedom.' [Caudwell, Illusion and Reality] There is hope therefore of ending
the conflict inherent in class society.

The artist's problem is with what to identify himself The middle-class is
decaying, and as a conscious entity the working-class does not exist. Hence the
tendency of modern painters to paint for each other.

* * *

The Surrealists had the laudable aim of bringing the spiritual to everyone. But
in a period as demoralized as our own, this could lead only to the demoralization
of art. In the greatest painting, the painter communes with himself. Painting is
his thought's medium. Others are able to participate in this communion to the
degree that they are spiritual. But for the painter to communicate with all, in
their own terms, is for him to take on their character, not his own.

Painting is a medium in which the mind can actualize itself; it is a medium
of thought. Thus painting, like music, tends to become its own content.

The medium of painting is color and space: drawing is essentially a division of
space. Painting is therefore the mind realizing itself in color and space. The greatest
adventures, especially in a brutal and policed period, take place in the mind.

Painting is a reality, among realities, which has been felt and formed.

It is the pattern of choices made, from the realm of possible choices, which
gives a painting its form.

The content of painting is our response to the painting's qualitative character,
as made apprehendable by its form. This content is the feeling 'body-and-mind.'
The 'body-and-mind,' in turn, is an event in reality, the interplay of a sentient
being and the external world. The 'body-and-mind' being the interaction of the
animal self and the external world, is just reality itself. It is for this reason that
the 'mind,' in realizing itself in one of its mediums, expresses the nature of
reality as felt.

5 Pablo Picasso (1881-1973) 'Why I Joined the
Communist Party'

The Salon d'Automne of October 1944 was known as the 'Salon de la Liberation'.
Following the attempted marginalization of his work during the Vichy period, Picasso
was feted for his role as a symbolic figurehead with a retrospective of seventy-four



Vc Art and Society 639

paintings and five sculptures within the overall exhibition. In the same month he joined
the French Communist Party (PCF). His reasons were given in an interview with Pol
Gaillard which was cabled to New York and published in condensed form in New Masses,
24 October 1944. The original interview was then published in full in the French
Communist Party newspaper UHumanite, 29-30 October 1944. It was reprinted in
Alfred H. Barr Jr, Picasso: Fifty Years of his Art, New York, 1946, from which the present
translation is made.

*I would have liked better to have replied to you by means of a picture', he
told us; 'I am not a writer, but since it is not very easy to send my colours by
cable, I am going to try to tell you.' 'My membership of the Communist Party
is the logical consequence of my whole life, of my whole work. For, I am proud
to say, I have never considered painting as an art of simple amusement, of
recreation; I have wished, by drawing and by colour, since those are my weapons,
to reach ever further into an understanding of the world and of men, in order
that this understanding might bring us each day an increase in liberation; I have
tried to say, in my own way, that which I considered to be truest, most accurate,
best, and this was naturally always the most beautiful, as the greatest artists
know well. Yes, I am aware of having always struggled by means of my painting,
like a genuine revolutionary. But I have come to understand, now, that that
alone is not enough; these years of terrible oppression have shown me that I
must fight not only through my art, but with all of myself. And so, I have
come to the Communist Party without the least hesitation, since in reality I was
with it all along. Aragon, Eluard, Cassou, Fougeron, all my friends know well;
if I have not joined officially before now, it has been through 'innocence' of a
sort, because I believed that my work and my membership at heart were
sufficient; but it was already my Party. Is it not the Communist Party which
works the hardest to know and to construct the world, to render the men of
today and tomorrow clearer-headed, freer, happier? Is it not the Communists
who have been the most courageous in France as in the USSR or in my own
Spain? How could I have hesitated? For fear of committing myself? But on the
contrary I have never felt freer, more complete! And then I was in such a hurry
to rediscover a home country: I have always been an exile, now I am one no
longer; until the time when Spain may finally receive me, the French Com-
munist Party has opened its arms to me; there I have found all that which I
most value: the greatest scholars, the greatest poets, and all those beautiful faces
of Parisian insurgents which I saw during the days of August.'



6 Pablo Picasso (1881-1973) Statement to Simone Tery

Picasso's membership of the Communist Party caused tensions with the doctrine of
Socialist Realism. In November 1944 and January 1945 he gave two interviews to
Jerome Seckler, an American soldier and amateur artist, in which he denied that the
colours and forms in his works carried specifically symbolic meanings, and added, with
obvious reference to the demands of Socialist Realism, that 1 can't use an ordinary
manner just to have the pleasure of being understood.' Such arguments led to the claim



640 The Individual and the Social

that his Communism was without substance, and that he held art and politics to be
unrelated. When told of this during another interview with the French journalist Simone
Tery, Picasso, angered, took a sheet of paper and wrote out the following statement.
It was originally published in Les Lettres Franceses, V, no. 48, Paris, 24 March 1945;
reprinted in Barr, op. cit, from which the present translation is made.

What do you think an artist is? An imbecile who, if he is a painter, has only
eyes, if he's a musician has only ears, if he's a poet has a lyre in each chamber
of his heart, or even, if he's a boxer, just muscles? On the contrary, he is at
the same time a political being, constantly alert to the heart-rending, stirring
or pleasant events of the world, taking his own complexion from them. How
would it be possible to dissociate yourself from other men; by virtue of what
ivory nonchalance should you distance yourself from the life which they so
abundantly bring before you? No, painting is not made to decorate apartments.
It is an instrument for offensive and defensive war against the enemy.



7 Fernand Leger (1881-1955) 'The Human Body
Considered as an Object'

Leger had supported the pre-war Popular Front government, and on his return to France
from exile in the United States he joined the French Communist Party. Like Picasso,
however, he refused to adopt Socialist Realism. Instead he continued to develop his
notion of a 'new realism' based on the deployment of plastic contrasts. He saw the war
against Fascism, and the experiences of resistance and suffering which it engendered,
as paradoxically enabling the achievement of this new art. To the charge that such art
was elitist and beyond the comprehension of the working class, Leger replied that what
people needed was time: which was precisely what their position in capitalist society
denied them. It was modern capitalism, not modern art, which lay at the root of the
problem. Originally published in Montreal in 1945. The present extract is taken from
the English translation by Alexandra Anderson in Fernand Leger, Functions of Painting,
New York, 1973, pp. 132-6.

As long as the human body is considered a sentimental or expressive value in
painting, no new evolution in pictures of people will be possible. Its development
has been hindered by the domination of the subject over the ages.

But for the last six years, plastic courses have been liberated. The impres-
sionists were the first to reject the fetters of noble subjects - and they gradually
allowed interest in the 'object' to appear.

In contemporary modern painting, the object must become the leading char-
acter and dethrone the subject. Then, in turn, if the person, the face, and the
human body become objects, the modern artist will be offered considerable
freedom. At this moment, it is possible for him to use the law of contrasts,
which is the constructive law, with all its breadth.
* * *

The law of contrast dominates human life in all its emotional, spectacular, or
dramatic manifestations. [. . .]




f ,



Vc Art and Society 641

AH work, in any area at all, is involved for the most part with a purelv
decorative value if it does not resolve this constructive conflict. Naturally it i s
a disruptive and antiharmonious device, but in this fact resides the difference
between major plastic art and decorative art.

All great periods of painting have always been followed by a minor, decorative
period that they inspired. Industry and decorators have known how to popularize
them.

Without wishing to play the role of a prophet, I see no other way out for
the future except a powerful, human painting that can embrace all plastic
methods, both old and new. All this within an absolute order, guided by a
tranquil will that knows where it is going.

Every curious and surprising experience has been tried. Above all traditional
constraints, in unlimited freedom, a plastic anarchy has been born. It is very
seductive; the streets have no more sidewalks, everything is thrown in together;
it is dazzling and imprecise.

In the midst of this romantic confusion it is hard to find one's bearings. Is
it a beginning? Is it an ending? 'The ghost of David prowls in these parts.'

Out of the ranks of minor artists who have risked their necks during these
past five terrible years, some will emerge to settle the question. They are to be
trusted. People are capable of infinite possibilities when they have suffered
pressures and constraints. When those bonds are relaxed, there is an accumu-
lation of energy and potential that bursts out with a wholly new strength.
Perhaps astonishing pictures, made by God knows who, will be found in the
back of a barn. They are to be trusted.

One of the most damaging charges that can be made against contemporary
modern artists is that their work is accepted only by a few initiates. The masses
cannot understand them.

There are several reasons for this situation. The minority of privileged
individuals who can be interested in these works is made up exclusively of
people who have the leisure to see and look, to develop their sensibilities. They
have free time at their disposal.

In 1936 and 1937, I had an opportunity to talk about these issues in
working-class and community centers. 'You work for the rich,' they shouted
bluntly at me, 'we're not interested in you.'

: Their objection was wrong because it was too simplistic. The matter is a little
more complicated.

The situation is created by the existing social order. Factory workers and
Clerks have very limited leisure time. They cannot be asked to spend their
Sundays shut up in museums. Private galleries and museums close their doors
at the very time when the workers leave their shops, their factories.

Everything is organized to keep them away from these sanctuaries. Time must
be made available so that this majority of individuals can be interested in modern
Works. As soon as they have time, you will be able to watch the rapid
development of their sensibilities.

The people have a poetic sense in themselves. They are the men who invent



642 The Individual and the Social

that ceaselessly renewed verbal poetry - slang. These men are endowed with a
constantly creative imagination. 'They transpose reality.' What then do modern
poets, artists, and painters do? They do the same thing. Our pictures are our slang;
we transpose objects, forms, and colors. Then why don't we meet each other?

On the other hand, if you examine the backgrounds of creative artists, you
will see that all or nearly all of them come out of a working-class or lower-
middle-class background. So what? Between these two poles, however, there is
a society that does absolutely nothing to bring about this meeting. All the same,
painting, like everything intellectual, requires a period of time for adaptation.
There is a preliminary period of quite painful confusion, during which taste
and choice must be formed and exercised. This does not happen in five minutes.
It takes longer than choosing a necktie. It is not a question of special preparation.
Education or instruction has nothing to do with artistic arrangements. Art books
can no more give rise to an artistic vocation than they can manage any longer
to control the restlessness of our young workers or clerks seeking the satisfac-
tions and emotions of art. People who are very intelligent and rich often fritter
away their leisure time. Those who are instinctive are closest to the goal; they
are motivated by need and not by curiosity. The masses are rich in unsatisfied
desires. They have a capacity for admiration and enthusiasm that can be
sustained and developed in the direction of modern painting. Give them time
to see, to look, to stroll around. It is inexcusable that after five years of war,
the hardest war of all, men who have been heroic actors in this sad epic should
not have their rightful turn in the sanctuaries. The coming peace must open
wide for them doors that have remained closed until now. The ascent of the
masses to beautiful works of art, to Beauty, will be the sign of a new time.



8 Lucio Fontana (1899-1968) 'The White Manifesto'

Argentinian by birth, Fontana was educated in Italy in the classical-academic tradition,
and in the 1920s was drawn to the Novecento movement in Milan. His work and ideas
effected an important transition between the advanced movements of the pre-war years
and the re-emergent European avant-gardism of the later 1950s and 1960s. During the
1930s he was briefly a member of Abstraction-Creation in Paris (see IVa6), but he
developed independent ideas concerning the irrational, and the synthesis of hitherto
conventional distinctions in the making of art: as between, for example, painting and
sculpture, or the avant-garde and kitsch. Particularly significant in the formation of this
synthesis was Bataille's concept of the 'Informe', or of a 'base materialism' (see
IVcl2-13). As a result of his transgression of conventional categories Fontana remained
for many years a comparatively neglected figure in standardly Modernist art histories.
He spent the war years in Buenos Aires, where the 'Manifesto Blanco' was originally
published in 1946. He was teaching at the time and the text was collectively produced
with his students. It formed the basis for his subsequent concept of 'Spazialismo'
(Spatialism) and for ensuing work based on the idea of 'an art in which our idea of art
cannot intervene'. The manifesto was reprinted in facsimile, and in French translation,
in the exhibition catalogue Lucio Fontana, Paris (Centre Pompidou), 1987, pp. 278-80.
The present translation is made from the original Spanish.




Vc Art and Society 643



We are continuing the evolution of art



Art is currently in a dormant phase. There is an energy which man cannot
convey. In this manifesto we shall express it verbally.

For this reason we call on all those in the world of science who know that
art is a fundamental requirement for our species, that they may direct part of
their research towards discovering that malleable substance full of light, and
instruments that will produce sounds which will enable the development of
four-dimensional art.

We will provide the researchers with the necessary information. The ideas
are irrefutable. They exist as seeds within the social fabric, awaiting expression
by artists and thinkers.

All things arise from necessity and are of value in their own time.

The transformations of the material base of existence have determined man's
psychological states throughout history.

The system which has directed civilization from the beginning is undergoing
transformation.

Gradually, it is being replaced by another system, which is its opposite in
both essence and form. The fabric and character of both society and the
individual will be transformed. Each man will live in an organization integral
to his work.

The great scientific discoveries are directed towards this new organization of
our lives.

The discovery of new physical forces, the mastery of matter and space, have
gradually imposed unprecedented conditions on mankind.

The application of these discoveries to all aspects of our lives brings about a
change in human nature. Man's psychological make-up is transformed. We are
living in a mechanical age, in which plaster and paint on canvas are no longer
meaningful.

Since the discovery of the known artforms at various junctures throughout
history, an analytical process has taken place within each one. Each has its own
ordering principles independent of the others.

Everything that could be expressed has been done - all possibilities have come
to light and have been developed.

Identical spiritual states have been expressed through music, architecture and
poetry.

Man divided his energy in various ways, in response to the need for knowledge.

Wherever the limits of concrete explanation were reached, idealism came to
predominate. The workings of nature were neglected. Man became aware of the
process of intelligence. Everything lay in the possibilities of intelligence. Know-
ledge consisted in confused speculations which rarely attained truth.

Art (i.e. plastic or representational art) consisted of ideal portrayals of familiar
forms through images which were idealistically seen as lifelike. The observer



644 The Individual and the Social

imagined that one object was, in fact, behind another; he imagined in the
portrayal the actual difference between the muscles and the clothing.

Today knowledge acquired from experience has replaced creative, imaginative
knowledge. We are aware of a world that exists and which is self-explanatory;
a world which cannot be modified in any way by our ideas.

We need an art which is, of itself, valid; an art unsullied by our ideas.

The materialism anchored in every consciousness demands that art have its
own values, free from the style of representation which is today stripped of all
credibility. Twentieth-century man, shaped by materialism, has become inured
to conventional forms of representation and to the constant re-telling of already
familiar experiences. Abstraction has been developed as the culmination of
successive transformations.

However, this new stage no longer corresponds to the demands of contem-
porary man.

What is required is a change in both essence and form. It is necessary to
transcend painting, sculpture, poetry, and music. We require a greater art, which
will be consistent with the demands of the new spirit.

The fundamental conditions of modern art have been clear since the thirteenth
century, when space and depth were first represented. The great artists who
followed gave renewed momentum to this tendency.

Baroque artists made great progress in this respect - their style of repre-
sentation had a grandeur which has remained unsurpassed, imbuing the plastic
arts with a sense of time. The figures appeared to leap out of the flat surface
and to continue their represented movements in actual space.

This conception developed as a result of man's growing concept of existence.
Then, for the first time, physics managed to explain nature through dynamics.
As a means of explaining the universe, it was determined that movement was
an inherent property of matter.

Having arrived at this evolutionary juncture, the need to represent movement
was so great that it could not be met through the plastic arts. Therefore, the
evolution continued through music. Painting and sculpture entered the neo-
classical period, a stagnant point in the history of art, and the connection
between art and time was ignored. Having conquered time, the need for
movement grew increasingly clear. Progressive freedom from the restrictions of
the church gave music greater and greater dynamism (Bach, Mozart, Beethoven).
Art continued to develop around the notion of movement.

Music retained its dominant position for the next two hundred years, and
since Impressionism it has developed parallel to the plastic arts. Since then,
man's evolution has been a march towards movement which has developed in
time and space. In painting, the elements which obscured the impression of
dynamism have been progressively suppressed.

The Impressionists sacrificed drawing and composition. The Futurists elimi-
nated some elements and reduced the importance of others as they were
subordinated to sensation. Futurism adopted motion as its solitary goal and




Vc Art and Society 645

objective. The Cubists denied that their painting was dynamic; yet the real
essence of Cubism was the vision of nature in movement. [ . . . ]

Man has exhausted pictorial and sculptural forms of art. His own experiences,
overwhelmingly repeated time and time again, bear witness to the fact that these
art forms are stagnating in values which are alien to our civilization, devoid of
the possibility of any future development.

The peaceful, gentle life has come to an end. Speed has become a constant
in the life of mankind.

The artistic era of colours and static forms is coming to an end. Man is
becoming less and less responsive to fixed, motionless images. The old static
images no longer satisfy the modern man who has been shaped by the need for
action, and a mechanized lifestyle of constant movement. The aesthetics of
organic motion have replaced the out-moded aesthetics of fixed forms.

Calling on this change in man's nature, the moral and psychological changes
of all human relations and activities, we leave behind all known art-forms, and
commence the development of an art based on the union of time and space.

The new art takes its elements from nature.
Existence, nature and matter come together in a perfect unity.
They develop in time and space.

Change is an essential property of existence.

Movement, the capacity to evolve and to develop, is a basic property of matter.
The latter exists solely in movement, not in any other manner. Its development
is eternal. Colour and sound, bound together in matter, come together in nature.

Matter, colour and sound in motion, are the phenomena whose simultaneous
development makes up the new art.

Colour in matter, developing in space, assuming different forms. Sound
produced by artefacts as yet unknown. Existing musical instruments are inade-
quate to meet the challenge of the required fullness and greatness of sound.

The construction of voluminous, changing shapes from a moving, malleable
substance. Arranged in space, they integrate moving images in a synchronised form.
< Thus, we are celebrating nature in all its plenitude. [ . . . ]

We demand an art which is free of all aesthetic artifice.

We use what is true and natural in man. We reject the false aesthetics invented
by speculative art.

We will draw closer to nature than ever before in the history of art.

Our love of nature does not compel us to copy it. The sense of beauty which
w e get from the shape of a plant, or a bird, or the sexual feelings aroused by
a woman's body, are developed and elevated in man according to his sensitivity.
We reject the particular emotions which can be derived from certain shapes.
We aim to draw together in synthesis all of man's experiences which, along
With his natural temperament, constitute a true manifestation of existence.

As our point of departure we shall take the earliest artistic experiences.
Prehistoric man, who first heard the sound made by striking a hollow object,



646 The Individual and the Social

found himself captivated by the rhythm. Driven by the power of the rhythm
he must have danced into a state of euphoria. For primitive man, sensation was
everything - the sensation of nature, wild and unknown, the sensation of music
and rhythm. We intend to develop that original characteristic of man.

The subconscious, that magnificent well of images perceived by the mind, takes
on the essence and form of those images and harbours the notions that make
up man's nature. Thus, as the objective world is transformed, what the
subconscious identifies with is also transformed, and this produces changes in
man's mode of conception.

The subconscious determines the historical legacy of pre-civilized states and
the manner of our adaptation to new lifestyles. The subconscious shapes,
composes and transforms the individual. It gives him a sense of order, which
comes from the world and is adopted by the individual. All artistic concepts
are due to the workings of the subconscious.

Plastic art developed from its original base of natural shapes. The manifestations
of the subconscious adapted easily to natural forms as a consequence of the
idealized conception of existence.

Our material consciousness, that is, our need for things which are easily
verifiable, demands that art-forms should flow directly from the individual and
that they should assume natural form. An art based on forms created by the
subconscious and balanced by reason, constitutes a true expression of existence
and is the synthesis of a moment in time.

The position of the rational artists is false. In their effort to privilege reason
and to deny the workings of the subconscious, they succeed only in rendering
them less visible. We can see this process at work in their every endeavour.

Reason does not create. In creating shapes, it is subordinate to the subcon-
scious. In all of his activities, man uses all of his faculties. Their free develop-
ment is fundamental for creating and interpreting a new kind of art. Analysis
and synthesis, meditation and spontaneity, construction and sensation, are all
values which come together to work in union; and their development in
experience is the only way to achieve a complete demonstration of being.

Society suppresses disparate energies and integrates them into a greater
unified force. Modern science is based on the progressive unification of all its
elements.

Humanity weaves together its knowledge and its values, in an historic process
which has developed over hundreds of years.

A new, integrated art flows from this new state of consciousness, in which
existence is shown in its totality.

After several millennia of analytical artistic development, the moment of
synthesis has arrived. Prior to this moment, specialization was necessary. Now
however this specialization amounts to a disintegration of the unity we envisage.

We imagine synthesis as the sum total of the physical elements: colour, sound,
movement, time, space, integrated in physical and mental union. Colour, the
element of space; sound, the element of time and movement, which develops




Vc Art and Society 647

in time and space. These are fundamental to the new art which encompasses
the four dimensions of existence. Time and space.

The new art requires that all of man's energies be used productively in creation
and interpretation. Existence is shown in an integreated manner, with all its vitality.
Colour Sound Movement

(Bernardo Arias, Horacio Cazeneuve, Marcos Fridman, Pablo Arias, Rodolfo
Burgos, Enrique Benito, Cesar Bernal, Luis Coll, Alfredo Hansen, Jorge Roca-
monte)



9 Vladimir Kemenov (b. c. 1920) from 'Aspects of
Two Cultures'

With the onset of the Cold War immediately following the defeat of Fascism, culture
became a site of struggle between the two leading world powers. In the Soviet Union
the doctrine of Socialist Realism was hardened again after a comparative relaxation
during the years of the Popular Front. Kemenov's article is a root-and-branch attack on
the avant-garde, for its 'decadence', 'individualism', and 'anti-humanism'. As a text
published in English specifically for foreign consumption, it achieved considerable
prominence as clinching evidence of Communist perfidy in the eyes of Western defen-
ders of the avant-garde. Originally published in the VOKS Bulletin by the USSR Society
for Cultural Relations with Foreign Countries, Moscow, 1947, pp. 20-36. Reprinted in
H. B. Chipp, Theories of Modern Art, California, 1968, from which the present extracts
are taken.

The basic features of decadent bourgeois art are its falseness, its belligerent
anti-realism, its hostility to objective knowledge and to the truthful portrayal
of life in art. Here, too, the reactionary tendency in contemporary bourgeois art
is presented under the banner of 'originality,' of struggle against 'bourgeois'
ideology, etc. Those extreme forms represented by the various '-isms' of
anti-realistic bourgeois art were led up to by the gradual renunciation by
bourgeois artists of the finest traditions of bourgeois realism in the eighteenth
and nineteenth centuries as well as of the realistic traditions of the art of Greece
and the Renaissance. The decline of bourgeois art became most rapid at the
end of the nineteenth and the beginning of the twentieth centuries, with the
rise of the epoch of imperialism and the decay of bourgeois culture which it
involved, f . . .]
* * *

For all the 'freedom' which artists won after they had driven life from the
realm of their formalistic art, they nevertheless tried at the beginning of the
century to justify this subjective anarchy by pseudo-scientific, technical, and
other subterfuges in their work, writings and declarations ... to prove its
analytical character, and so on. However, very soon even this quasi-scientific
terminology was discarded, and in contemporary bourgeois formalistic art the
ntost rampant subjectivism, proclaiming the cult of mysticism and of the



648 The Individual and the Social

subconscious, has triumphed openly, and abnormal mental states are held up as
examples of the complete creative freedom of the individual.

All these features of decadent bourgeois art were declared aspects of 'art for
art's sake,' which is alleged to be alien to any semblance of ideological content.
As a matter of fact, this 'pure' art actually disseminated reactionary ideas, ideas
that were advantageous or useful to the capitalists. Formalistic artists ceased to
be rebels and became the abject slaves of capital, even though from time to
time they did assail capitalism, sometimes even sincerely. How are these different
factors to be reconciled? Among certain formalistic artists in foreign countries
a yawning chasm formed between their political views and public sympathies
on the one hand, and their artistic practice on the other. This chasm proved
so great that even the events of the world war against fascism, in which many
of them participated as members of the allied armies or the resistance movement,
could not change their views on art. They continued demonstratively to deny
the ideological content of art and all connection between the aims of art and
the interests of the wide masses.

Even those formalists, who, like Picasso, have repeatedly professed sympathy
for the struggle of democracy against fascism show a marked unwillingness to
apply the progressive aspects of their world outlook to their artistic practice. A
yawning chasm still exists in their work to this day, resulting not merely in the
failure of these artists to advance the struggle of their peoples against fascism
and reaction by their creative efforts, but also, objectively, in their furthering
(through their art) the very aims of the bourgeois reaction against which they
vehemently protest in their political utterances and declarations.

By proclaiming 'art for art's sake,' void of all contact with the struggle,
aspirations and interests of the wide masses, by cultivating individualism, the
formalists are affirming the very thing the reactionaries want them to. They are
playing into the hands of the decadent bourgeoisie who in their efforts to
preserve their domination look with hatred upon the development of the
consciousness of the masses, upon the growth of their sense of human dignity
and their feeling of solidarity, upon any rousing of their activity through the
means of realistic art rich in ideological content.
* * *

Soviet art is progressing along the path of socialist realism, a path pointed
out by Stalin. It is this path that has led to the creation of a vital Soviet art,
ideologically forward-looking and artistically wholesome: socialist in content and
national in form; an art worthy of the great Stalin epoch.

As opposed to decadent bourgeois art, hypocritically hiding its reactionary
class nature behind phrases such as 'pure art' and 'art for art's sake,' Soviet
artists openly espouse the ideas of Bolshevism expressing the advanced ideas of
the Soviet people who at present represent the most advanced people of the
world, for they have built up Socialism, the most advanced form of contempor-
ary society. As opposed to decadent bourgeois art with its anti-humanism, Soviet
artists present the art of socialist humanism, an art imbued with supreme love
for man, with pride in the emancipated individual of the socialist land, with
profound sympathy for that part of humanity living under the capitalist system,




Vc Art and Society 649
a system which cripples and degrades men. As opposed to decadent bourgeois
ar t with its falseness, its rejection of a realistic, truthful reflection of life as it
is, Soviet artists present the wholesome and integral art of socialist realism
expressed in profound artistic images reflecting true life, showing the struggle
between the old and the new and the inevitable triumph of the new and
progressive, an art mobilizing Soviet people for further victories. As opposed
to decadent bourgeois art, divorced from the people, hostile to the interests of
the democratic masses, permeated with biological individualism and mysticism,
reactionary and anti-popular, Soviet artists present an art created for the people'
inspired by the thoughts, feelings and achievements of the people, and which
in its turn enriches the people with its lofty ideas and noble images.

Young Soviet art has already created works of world-wide significance. Soviet
artists are inspired by great tasks and purposes. Soviet art is advancing along
the true path indicated by the genius of Stalin.

Among the many burdens which the young Soviet republic inherited a quarter
of a century ago from old landlord-bourgeois Russia, was the decadent, formal-
istic art of that time. All those 'original' tricks which the formalists of Europe
and America take such pride in, were ousted by Soviet artists long ago as
ridiculous anachronisms.

The road travelled by Soviet art in overcoming formalism is of inestimable
importance to the art culture of the whole world. The experience accumulated
by Soviet artists will time and again stand the artists of other countries in good
stead when they begin to look for a way out of the impasse of formalism and
to create a genuine people's art. [. . .]



10 Robert Motherwell (1915-1991) and Harold
Rosenberg (1906-1978) 'The Question of What
Will Emerge Is Left Open'

The authors offer a refusal of the direction of artistic practice according to the mounting
dictates of Cold War politics. The hope was that an essentially unplanned, open-ended
inquiry would prove indigestible by the competing monoliths, and even constitute a kind
of subversive third force with respect to both. In the event, liberalism was substantially
able to turn such a programme to its own ends. Originally published as the opening
statement in the first (and only) issue of Possibilities: An Occasional Review, no. 1, New
York, Winter 1947/8 r p. 1. Reprinted in Chipp, op. cit. f from which the present text is
taken.

This is a magazine of artists and writers who 'practice' in their work their own
experience without seeking to transcend it in academic, group or political formulas.

Such practice implies the belief that through conversion of energy something
valid may come out, whatever the situation one is forced to begin with.

The question of what will emerge is left open. One functions in an attitude
of expectancy. As Juan Gris said: 'You are lost the instant vou know what the
result will be.'



650 The Individual and the Social

Naturally the deadly political situation exerts an enormous pressure.

The temptation is to conclude that organized social thinking is 'more serious 1
than the act that sets free in contemporary experience forms which that
experience has made possible.

One who yields to this temptation makes a choice among various theories of
manipulating the known elements of the so-called objective state of affairs. Once
the political choice has been made, art and literature ought of course be given up.

Whoever genuinely believes he knows how to save humanity from catastrophe
has a job before him which is certainly not a part-time one.

Political commitment in our times means logically - no art, no literature. A
great many people, however, find it possible to hang around in the space between
art and political action.

If one is to continue to paint or write as the political trap seems to close
upon him he must perhaps have the extremest faith in sheer possibility.

In his extremism he shows that he has recognized how drastic the political
presence is.

11 Constant (Constant A. Nieuwenheuys) (b. 1920)
'Our Own Desires Build the Revolution'

Dutch by birth, Constant gravitated to Paris at the end of the war. He shared in the
contemporary attraction to the primitive, and to a radical social vision which none the
less rejected the conventional left-wing forms of Social Realism. Moving between Paris
and Amsterdam, he initially identified with the post-war rump of Surrealism before
becoming involved, along with Karl Appel, Asger Jorn and others, in the formation of
the group Cobra in 1948 (see Vb8). The present essay originally appeared in Cobra,
no, 4, Amsterdam, 1949, p. 304. It is reprinted, in an English translation by Lucy
Lippard, in Chipp, op.cit, from which the present extract is taken.

For those of us whose artistic, sexual, social, and other desires are farsighted,
experiment is a necessary tool for the knowledge of our ambitions - their
sources, goals, possibilities, and limitations.

But what can be the purpose of going from one extreme to the other, like
man, and of surmounting even those barriers erected by morals, aesthetics, and
philosophy? What is the reason for this need to break the bonds which have
kept us within the social system for hundreds of years and thanks to which we
have been able to think, live, create? Is our culture incapable of prolonging itself
and of leading us one day to the satisfaction of our desires?

In fact, this culture has never been capable of satisfying anyone, neither a
slave, nor a master who has every reason to believe himself happy in a luxury,
a lust, where all the individual's creative potential is centered.

When we say desire in the twentieth century, we mean the unknown, for all
we know of the realm of our desires is that it continuously reverts to one
immeasurable desire for freedom. As a basic task we propose liberation of social
life, which will open the way to the new world - a world where all the cultural
aspects and inner relationships of our ordinary lives will take on new meaning.



Vc Art and Society 651

It is impossible to know a desire other than by satisfying it y and the satisfaction
of our basic desire is revolution. Therefore, any real creative activity - that is,
cultural activity, in the twentieth century - must have its roots in revolution.
Revolution alone will enable us to make known our desires, even those of 1949.
The revolution submits to no definition! Dialectical materialism has taught us
that conscience depends upon social circumstances, and when these prevent us
from being satisfied, our needs impel us to discover our desires. This results in
experiment, or the release of knowledge. Experiment is not only an instrument
of knowledge, it is the very condition of knowledge in a period when our needs
no longer correspond to the cultural conditions which should provide an outlet
for them.
* * *

. . . being free is like being strong; freedom appears only in creation or in
strife - and these have the same goal at heart - fulfillment of life.

Life demands creation and beauty is life\

So if society turns against us and against our works, reproaching us for being
practically 'incomprehensible,' we reply:

1 That humanity in 1949 is incapable of understanding anything but the
necessary struggle for freedom.

2 That we do not want to be 'understood' either, but to be freed, and that
we are condemned to experiment by the same causes that drive the world into
war.

3 That we could not be creators in a passive world, and that today's strife
sustains our inventiveness.

4 Finally, that humanity, once it has become creative, will have no choice but
to discard aesthetic and ethical conceptions whose only goal has been the
restraint of creation - those conceptions responsible for man's present lack
of understanding for experiment.

Therefore, understanding is nothing more than recreating something born of
the same desire.

Humanity (us included) is on the verge of discovering its own desires, and
by satisfying them we shall make them known.



12 Asger Jorn (1914-1973)
Language'



'Forms Conceived as



Born in Denmark, Jorn was active in the Parisian avant-garde of the late 1930s. He
spent the war years in Denmark before returning to Paris in 1947. Although politically
of the Left, and philosophically materialist, Jorn rejected Socialist Realism. He was a
founder member of Cobra, and his continuing interest lay in children's drawings and
primitive imagery. It was hoped that this resource would penetrate through accumulated
layers of bourgeois artifice, as a kind of visual Ur-language, to enable an authentic and
popular form of expression. Originally published as les formes concues comme
Engage' in Cobra, no, 2, 1949. Reprinted in English translation by Sarah Wilson in the



652 The Individual and the Social

exhibition catalogue Aftermath, London (Barbican Art Gallery), 1982, from which the
present text is taken. (Wilson notes that the 'poor woman buying fish' refers to a
Socialist Realist painting by Andre Fougeron, Parisiennes au marche.)

To state and attempt to resolve the problem for its part, a materialist art must put
art back on a foundation of the senses. We say 'put back' with reason, for we
believe that the origins of art are instinctive and thus materialist. It is the
metaphysical aspects of classicism which have managed to spiritualize and intellec-
tualise art. And it's miserable today to see the materialists in all good faith marching
along on their heads - with a realism and a naturalism which are opposed to reality
and to nature, which are based on 'illusion'. True realism, materialist realism, lies
in the search for the expression of forms faithful to their content.

But there's no content detached from human interest. True realism, materialist
realism, renouncing the idealist equation of subjectivity with individualism as
described by Marx, seeks the forms of reality that are 'common to the senses
of all men'.

Thus, the red flag is an expression of revolution which immediately strikes the
senses, the senses of 'all men', a synthesis of the reality and the vested needs
of revolution, a common link and not an allegory, outside the range of the
senses or a symbol for 'flag manufacturers'. We can identify ourselves only
accidentally with a poor woman buying a fish.




13 Andre Fougeron (b.
Battlement'



1913) The Painter on his



Fougeron was familiar with the Parisian avant-garde of the 1930s, and his early work
reveals his awareness of Picasso and of the Expressionist tradition. He took part in the
key exhibition of May 1941, Twenty Young Painters in the French Tradition', which was
later to be seen as marking a form of cultural resistance to the German Occupation.
However, Fougeron's left-wing politics and activity in the Resistance increasingly led him
away from the avant-garde towards an adoption of the Communist Party's artistic policy
of Socialist Realism. He became in effect the French Communist Party's official painter
(though he was later to be attacked by Louis Aragon for deviation from Socialist
Realism). In this essay he quotes the Communists' principal cultural spokesman Laurent
Casanova, who had confirmed the party's adherence to Socialist Realism in a policy
speech to the 11th Party Congress at Strasbourg in June 1947. Originally published
as le peintre a son creneau' in La Nouvelle Critique, Paris, December 1948, from
which the present translation is made. The French title plays on an untranslatable pun:
'creneau' means both 'battlement' and 'easel'.

The drama of reality expressed by the courageous gesture of the miner,
hazarding his life to gain no more than the means of subsistence, can have only
an intolerable aspect to one who sees the miners' oppression.

If we take this aspect of our present life as a starting-point, it becomes
necessary to investigate why it is that the expression of reality remains so



Vc Art and Society 653

intolerable to those who are consciously or unconsciously on the side of the
oppressors.

Nowadays, it is paramount that the artist should be oriented towards the
formal interplay of lines and colours. Otherwise, he must accuse in his turn and
commit himself to struggle. This is why one needs to judge the political
significance of a realism yet to be created, like abstract art in 1948.

The premises of a new realism are to be derived from the richness of the feelings
of a people considered as the major source of inspiration, and of subject-matter.

For the artist who is conscious of this richness, it is deserving of the
skilful subordination of the relations of lines and colours. And slowly, from this
point, works develop which are balanced from the point of view of content and
form.

To be more precise: the realism of three apples on a plate is not at issue, on
the grounds that the realization of this motif can allow as much evasion, as
much aesthetic isolation, as an abstract painting can contain. It therefore remains
necessary, above all, to accentuate the social reality of the subject. This will
already be a serious assault on the aesthetic positions of the enemy, and, for
the artists who courageously intend to carry this out, will provide the means to
avoid a danger: that the effort of the painter will be futile 'if there is not at the
outset the capacity for both the masses and the artist to be affected by the same
things* [Laurent Casanova, Report to the Xlth Congress of the French Com-
munist Party at Strasbourg].

Today the artist is a prisoner to the extent that he is afraid of creating a
work with simple feelings, and that he is embarrassed by such feelings, instead
of being proud of putting them to the test like all honest people.

It remains to unmask these impostures thoroughly. Because when confronted
by abstract painting, we do not always have the requisite rigour of thought . . .
The shoulder-shrugging of the aesthetes should not intimidate us; we should
not underestimate our power in any domain. To be profane is one thing. To
say that one does not understand anything, is quite another. Because it is true,
there is nothing to understand. The problem is not to look for something to
understand, but to admit.

Admit quite openly that there is nothing to understand; and at the same time
take this as measure of what one has done in the way of painting.

Painting was in the beginning cave paintings of wild animals, the terrifying
food of our ancestors. Then of gods, that were believed capable of causing
natural disasters. Finally, painting became a woman who gave her breast to a
haloed child; a symbol of life, which renews itself ceaselessly, of a future desired
to be ever more beautiful.

But today, to what idea of human evolution does painting find itself linked?
To mine,' responds one voice. Which one? That of the mailing list of a good
gallery. Properly counted, that adds up to 1500 names. Amongst decent amateurs
w ho take delight in the visual harmony offered by the painter, how many of
them think: Ts painting a good venture in which to invest my money? What



654 The Individual and the Social

will it be worth in ten years' time?' This is the elite. Those who affirm it are
those who can talk of nothing else. It is a lame response!

Today it is necessary to look for the elite elsewhere. That is the place where
you will also find the source of inspiration necessary for an artistic renaissance:
in the people, in the power of the people, because 'those who live, are those
who fight' and art is always on the side of life.

15 November 1948.



14 George Dondero (1883-1968) from The Congressional
Record

Dondero was the United States Senator for Michigan. In the late 1940s he became the
principal voice of American conservatism's attack on modern art, speaking for a position
which was in principle shared by the then President Harry S. Truman. The wider context
of this attack is the anti-Communist hearings of the House Un-American Activities
Committee led by Senator Joseph McCarthy. In the first extract Dondero targets
organized left-wing groups. In many respects his accusation of Communism in modern
art mirrored the Stalinists' accusations of bourgeois individualism. The ironies of this
did not pass unnoticed. Accordingly, Dondero sophisticated his argument in the speech
represented in the second extract. Socialist Realism is now cast as the art of propa-
ganda suitable for misleading the Communist rulers' own subject populations. Some-
thing more subtle is therefore required in order to destabilize the culture and society
of Communism's enemies abroad. This is the role in the worldwide Communist cons-
piracy supposedly fulfilled by a predominantly abstract or expressive modern art. The
two speeches were delivered on 25 March and 16 August 1949 respectively, and are
published in The Congressional Record for 1949, pp. 3233-5 and 11584-7. The
present extracts are taken from this source.



Communists Maneuver to Control Art in the United
States

Mr Speaker, twenty-three of the officers and directors of the Artists' Equity
Association are sponsoring the pro-Soviet Cultural and Scientific Conference
now being held at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel in New York. There will be mass
picketing there this evening and perhaps tomorrow. I mention that as an
introduction to the remarks I am now about to make on the subject of
Communists' maneuver to control art in the United States.

Exposure of Communist infiltration in the United States has been directed
principally toward the fields of government and labor. We have been neglectful
of the knowledge that communism is a hydraheaded serpent that attacks the
true democracies on all fronts, political, social, economic, scientific, cultural.
Generally we have been blind to the fact that Communist standards of meas-
urement and Communist undermining of our traditional values have made broad
progress in one of our great cultural fields - the field of art. The average




Vc Art and Society 655

American has only limited knowledge of the importance of art in our national
existence. Art is a large and important factor in our educational system, in our
repositories of culture, as represented by such public institutions as libraries
and museums, in our great endowments and philanthropic organizations, and,
through commercial art, in our great fields of industry.

In the Communist campaign to undermine the standards of American culture
through the substitution of Marxist standards, the comrades have followed the
same practices, the same technique, which they have established in other fields.
Fortunately, we are able to identify their propaganda in art, and if we are alert
to contemporary activities, can put the finger on the latest moves in the
campaign of Communist infiltration.

The Communist-front organization is the same in the field of art as it has
been in the field of political ideology. A disguised structure is built up and,
when its true purpose is disclosed to the public, it fades from view - to be
followed by an organization with a new name, but controlled by the same
Marxist individuals. [. . .]

* * *

The Artists' Equity Association was formed at a meeting held in the Modern
Museum of Art in April of 1947. It seems to be rising phoenixlike out of the
members of the American Artists' Congress which is described on page 5 of
Citations, a pamphlet by an official Government agency, showing organizations
and publications found to be Communist or Communist fronts, as typical of
Communist-created and controlled organizations. This seeming immortality of
the left-dominated culture groups is due to the apathy and confusion in artistic
circles. In the Red camp, where they have tasted victory by measure of their
continuous attention to organization, no such apathy exists. [. . .]

* * *

On the board of Artists Equity we find the name of Ben Shahn. He was one
of the New Yorkers who worked with Mexican Red Diego Rivera on the mural
which included Lenin in its design. It was removed from the walls of Radio
City Building in New York. He was a member of the John Reed Club, listed
in Citation as a Communist organization named in honor of John Reed, who
was one of the earliest Communist leaders in the United States. Later he became
a member of the American Artists' Congress and right up to the present he has
continued his revolutionary aim. He is now in the National Council of Arts,
Sciences, and Professions.

Max Weber, another of the many Artists' Equity Association key men who
have long Red records, and who has received tremendous publicity throughout
America, due to the predominance of Marxian critics rather than art critics on
our papers, is quite a favorite among the appreciators of Communist culture.
Even before the revolutionary armory exhibition of 1913 he was an intimate of
Picasso, the Communist artist in Paris, and was an influential factor in foisting
a Communist international criterion into the judging of art in America. [. . .J

* * *

. . . One could continue at great length to enumerate the Communist-front
connections of these officials in the Artists' Equity Association. However, these



656 The Individual and the Social

facts are portentous enough to convey the seriousness of the situation and to
impress upon you the ulterior purpose behind this so-called art group, and to
disclose its progress.

Through the aid of Marxist evaluators in the cultural sphere, leftists in art
have succeeded in lowering, and are attempting to break down the standard to
which artists of the past adhered - to be worthy of the calling of art.

The veritable wave of would-be painters, sculptors, with which America is
drenched is directly traceable to the need of the Red culture group to create a
numerically strong Communist art movement. The fact that the quality of both
art and artists is inferior in no way deters them - though it should strike a
warning note to all real Americans.
* * *

We are dealing with a subtle enemy. Let every loyal citizen be on guard
against this insidious menace to our way of life.



Modern Art Shackled to Communism

Mr Speaker, quite a few individuals in art, who are sincere in purpose, honest
in intent, but with only a superficial knowledge of the complicated influences
that surge in the art world of today, have written me - or otherwise expressed
their opinions - that so-called modern or contemporary art cannot be Commun-
ist because art in Russia today is realistic and objective.

The left-wing art magazines advance the same unsound premises of reasoning,
asserting in editorial spasms that modern art is real American art. They plead
for tolerance, but in turn tolerate nothing except their own subversive 'isms.'

The human art termites, disciples of multiple 'isms' that compose so-called
modern art, boring industriously to destroy the high standards and priceless
traditions of academic art, find comfort and satisfaction in the wide dissemina-
tion of this spurious reasoning and wickedly false declaration, and its casual
acceptance by the unwary. [. . .]

As I have previously stated, art is considered a weapon of communism, and
the Communist doctrinaire names the artist as a soldier of the revolution. It is
a weapon in the hands of a soldier in the revolution against our form of
government, and against any government or system other than communism.

From 1914 to 1920 art was used as a weapon of the Russian Revolution to
destroy the Czarist Government, but when this destruction was accomplished,
art ceased to be a weapon and became a medium of propaganda, picturing and
extolling the imaginary wonders, benefits and happiness of existence under the
socialized state.

Let me trace for you a main artery from the black heart of the isms of the
Russian Revolution to the very heart of art in America.

In 1914 Kandinsky, a Russian-born Expressionist and nonobjective painter,
who found it safer to live in Germany, returned to Russia, and three years later
came the revolution. He is the man who preached that art must abandon the
logical and adopt the illogical. He dominated a group of black knights of the



Vc Art and Society 657

isms, who murdered the art of the Russian academies. They were Cubists,
Futurists, Expressionists, Constructionists, Suprematists, Abstractionists, and
the rest of the same ilk. Kandinsky was a friend of Trotsky, and after the
revolution founded the Moscow Institute of Art Culture. He was Communist
leader in Red art - the commissar of the isms.

Kandinsky remained in Russia until 1921, when the art of the isms began to
feel the iron grip of the new art control, the art for the sake of propaganda,
the art of social realism. Kandinsky went back to Germany.

The Communist art that has infiltrated our cultural front is not the Com-
munist art in Russia today - one is the weapon of destruction, and the other
is the medium of controlled propaganda. Communist art outside Russia is to
destroy the enemy, and we are the enemy of communism. Communist art in
Russia is to delude the Russian workers.

The art of the isms, the weapon of the Russian Revolution, is the art which has
been transplanted to America, and today, having infiltrated and saturated many of
our art centers, threatens to overawe, override and overpower the fine art of our
tradition and inheritance. So-called modern or contemporary art in our own beloved
country contains all the isms of depravity, decadence, and destruction.

What are these isms that are the very foundation of so-called modern art?
They are the same old lot of the Russian Revolution, some with transparent
disguises, and others added from time to time as new convulsions find a new
designation. I call the roll of infamy without claim that my list is all-inclusive:
dadaism, futurism, constructionism, suprematism, cubism, expressionism, sur-
realism, and abstractionism. All these isms are of foreign origin, and truly should
have no place in American art. While not all are media of social or political
protest, all are instruments and weapons of destruction. [ . . . ]

Cubism aims to destroy by designed disorder.

Futurism aims to destroy by the machine myth. [. . .]

Dadaism aims to destroy by ridicule.

Expressionism aims to destroy by aping the primitive and insane. [ . . . ]

Abstractionism aims to destroy by the creation of brainstorms.

Surrealism aims to destroy by the denial of reason.

* * *

[ . . . ] The evidence of evil design is everywhere, only the roll call of the art
contortionists is different. The question is, what have we, the plain American
people, done to deserve this sore affliction that has been visited upon us so
direly; who has brought down this curse upon us; who has let into our homeland
this horde of germ-carrying art vermin?

* * *

We are now face to face with the intolerable situation, where public schools,
colleges, and universities, art and technical schools, invaded by a horde of foreign
art manglers, are selling to our young men and women a subversive doctrine
of 'isms,' Communist-inspired and Communist-connected which have one com-
mon, boasted goal - the destruction of our cultural tradition and priceless
heritage. [. . .]

In my previous addresses on this subject, I have used the word infiltration



658 The Individual and the Social

in describing the present Red element in American art. This is an under-
statement. Communist art, aided and abetted by misguided Americans, is
stabbing our glorious American art in the back with murderous intent.



15 Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr (b. 1917) from The

Politics of Freedom

Schlesinger represented the so-called 'business liberal' wing of the American estab-
lishment. Unlike the conservatives, such as Dondero, Truman and McCarthy, these
interests identified the individualism of modern art as a bulwark against Totalitarianism.
Despite the fact that the Nazis had victimized Communists and modern artists under
the rubric 'Kulturbolschewismus', and the additional fact that left-wing artists had
organized against Fascism during and before the Second World War, the theory of
Totalitarianism enabled liberal capitalism to identify the Nazi state under Hitler with the
Soviet state under Stalin; and hence to equate Fascism and Communism tout court.
One of the outcomes of this strategy was that the supposedly a-political art of the
post-war American avant-garde became deployed as an element of no small significance
in US international policy, as a token of freedom in the American way of life. Schles-
inger's book, a wide-ranging and not merely cultural contribution to this perspective,
was first published in 1950. It was reprinted as The Vital Centre, London and New York,
1970; the present extracts are taken from pp. 77-81 of that edition.

Lenin's terror, being attached to objective conditions, like a still-existing
capitalism, had some limits. But Stalin's terror, operating after the liquidation
of capitalism, is directed at thoughts - the 'vestiges of capitalism,' as Molotov
calls them, adding that they 'are extremely persistent in people's consciousness.'
It is consequently unlimited in its application. 'The tasks of the ideological
front,' observes Zhdanov, ' ... are not removed, but, on the contrary, grow
more important under conditions of peaceful development.' [. . .]

[. . .] Everything in a totalitarian state is eventually sucked into the vortex
where totalitarian man interminably revindicates himself.

The recent Soviet campaign against cultural freedom and diversity becomes
all too comprehensible in this light. The totalitarian man requires apathy and
unquestioning obedience. He fears creative independence and spontaneity. He
mistrusts complexity as a device for slipping something over on the regime; he
mistrusts incomprehensibility as a shield which might protect activities the
bureaucracy cannot control. After all, the mission of art is clear and definite.
In the words of Konstantin Simonov, 'We must show the Soviet person - the
builder of the future - in such a light that the audience and the whole world
will see the moral and spiritual superiority of people who have been reared in
a socialist society.' 'We have in real life, living,' adds Alexander Fadeyev, the
secretary of the Soviet Writers Union, 'those heroes who created the new social
order, who are the personification of the new moral values.'

The paintings of Picasso, the music of Stravinsky are strangely disturbing.
They reflect and incite anxieties which are incompatible with the monolithic




Vc Art and Society 659

character of 'the Soviet person.' Their intricacy and ambiguity, moreover, make
them hard for officialdom to control [ . . . ] Complexity in art further suggests
the whole wicked view of 'cosmopolitanism' summed up for the Communists
in the conception of Europe. 'It is not by chance that the Russian Communists
attack Picasso,' Malraux has written. 'His painting is the presence of Europe in
its most acute form. In the order of the spirit, all that which Russia calls
formalism and which she has been deporting or tirelessly destroying for ten
years, is Europe.'

The conclusion is clear. Let artists turn their back on Europe. Let them
eschew mystery, deny anxiety and avoid complexity. Let them create only
compositions which officials can hum, paintings which their wives can decipher,
poems which the Party leaders can understand. This is the Diktat of the state.
[ . . . ] The delicate phrases of Alexander Fadeyev at the World Congress of
Intellectuals are characteristic: 'If hyenas could type and jackals could use a
fountain pen,' they would write like T. S. Eliot, Dos Passos, Sartre and Malraux.

In an article for dissemination by the USSR Society for Cultural Relations
with Foreign Countries, Vladimir Kemenov exhausts the arsenal of philistinism
in his denunciations of Picasso, Henry Moore, Georgia O'Keeffe, even of
individualists so comparatively restrained as Cezanne and the impressionists.
Modern art, says Kemenov, is 'a mixture of pathology and chicanery, which
trace their origin to the daubs painted by the donkey's tail. ... In order to
analyze this work, the healthy normal people of the future will seek the services
not of the art expert, but the psychiatrist.' The healthy normal art of the future,
one would gather, will be modeled on Alma-Tadema, if not on James Mont-
gomery Flagg. Official Soviet painting today certainly bears out the inference.

The campaign against the free creation of music is even more notorious.
Stravinsky, Prokofieff, Shostakovich and the others have sinned against the
desired banalities of form and sound. 'This music,' observes the president of
the Association of Soviet Composers, 'openly harks back to the primitive
barbaric cultures of prehistoric society, and extols the eroticism, psychopathic
mentality, sexual perversion, amorality, and shameiessness of the bourgeois hero
of the twentieth century.' Pravda even lashes out periodically against the jazz
bands: 'Instead of the popular Soviet songs . . . they reproduce melodies filled
with tavern melancholy and alien to the Soviet people.' No form of esotericism
is too small to be dangerous to totalitarianism.

The Communist slide rule has similarly produced absolute equations for
literature, for the films, for philosophy, even for drama critics and for clowns.

* * *

Yet the true horror from the western viewpoint lies in the fact that the artist
practically always gives in. For every Mayakovsky, who kills himself, a thousand
exhibit masochistic delight in accepting correction and promising never, never
to do it again. [. . .]

No one should be surprised at the eagerness for personal humiliation. The
whole thrust of totalitarian indoctrination, as we have seen, is to destroy the
boundaries of individual personality. The moral balance of power is always with



SP'



660 The Individual and the Social

the Party as against the person. Those who cave in, as D wight Macdonald
accurately notes, do so not so much because they lack moral courage as because
they lack good conscience. They can never be confident in asserting their own
individuality against the Party; after all, Number One may always be right. The
totalitarian psychosis thus sickens the whole society. [  ]



16 Alfred H. Barr Jr (1902-1981) 'Is Modern Art
Communistic?'

Barr had been prominently involved with the Museum of Modern Art, New York, since
its foundation, and he had early first-hand experience of Stalinist and Nazi pressure on
art. As conservative reaction mounted in post-war America, he was drawn to the defence
of the avant-garde. The principal thrust of the present text, however, is directed against
Communism, seen as the new enemy of victorious liberal capitalism in the wake of the
Nazis' defeat. In its original format Barr's essay was illustrated by avant-garde images
and figurative history paintings captioned respectively as 'Hated and Feared' and
'Admired and Honoured' in Soviet Russia and Nazi Germany. The debate continued until
the final collapse of McCarthyism in the mid-1950s. Barr's article was originally pub-
lished in the New York Sunday Times Magazine, 14 December 1952, pp. 22-3 and
28-30. It was later reprinted in his Selected Writings, Defining Modern Art, New York,
1986.

Modern political leaders, even on our side of the Iron Curtain, feel strongly
and express themselves eloquently against modern art. President Truman calls
it 'merely the vaporings of half-baked lazy people' and believes 'the ability to
make things look as they are is the first requisite of an artist.' After looking at
an abstract mural at the United Nations building, General Eisenhower remarked:
'To be modern you don't have to be nuts.' Prime Minister Churchill has been
quoted as proposing assault, hypothetical but violent, on Picasso. Many others
go further. Because they don't like and don't understand modern art they call
it communistic. They couldn't be more mistaken.

Whatever a Western leader's point of view on artistic matters may be, he
would not want to impose his taste upon his countrymen or interfere with their
creative freedom. The totalitarian dictators of Nazi Germany and Soviet Russia,
on the contrary, did want to: the modern artist's non-conformity and love of
freedom cannot be tolerated within a monolithic tyranny and modern art is
useless for the dictators' propaganda, because while it is still modern, it has
little popular appeal. The dictators wanted to impose their artistic convictions.
They could. They did and the Russians still do. Let's look at the record in
Russia and Germany.
* * *

... in 1932, the dogma of Socialist Realism was proclaimed by Pravda and
the formation of the Union of Soviet Artists was decreed by the Central
Committee of the Communist party. The critic Milyutin wrote: 'Art, the object
of which is to serve the masses, cannot be other than realistic. The attention



Vc Art and Society 661



the




of artists is concentrated on socialist construction . . . our struggles
enemies of the people ... the heroes of the Soviet land. . . . '

Abstraction or stylization of form, idealism or fantasy of subject were anath-
ematized with such terms as formalism, Western decadence, leftist estheticism,
petty-bourgeois degeneracy. Even realism that was too honestly factual was
damned as naturalism. To practice these vices was to risk denunciation, isolation
and starvation. To defend them involved more overt dangers.

One of the most frightening and shameful documents of our time is quoted
at length in Kurt London's 'Seven Soviet Arts.' It records the inquisition
conducted by a committee of fellow-painters upon the young artist Nikritin after
he had submitted his canvas 'Old and New' to the Art Commission for the
annual exhibition. The picture was not a great work but it was a sincere,
thoughtful and loyal effort to paint an allegory of a changing world. Two of
Nikritin's friends, subway workers, posed for the youthful figures and had
admired it. They had even made suggestions about the composition. But to
Gerassimov, Deineka and the other successful artists on the jury the picture
was a 'defamation,' 'derived from the Italian Fascists,' 'deeply erotic, pathologi-
cal,' 'individualistic,' a 'nightmare,' a 'catastrophe,' a 'terrible picture.' The
painter Lecht disclosed the jury's feelings: 'Comrades, we have here a sample
of the works about which Pravda warned us. . . . What we see here is a calumny
... a class attack, inimical to Soviet power. The picture must be removed and
the appropriate measures taken.'

Nikritin's reply was courageous, even desperate. He rejected the jury's attacks
and expressed his belief that shortly there would be a demand for paintings
'actually realistic and contemporary and not photography like those which you
assessed yesterday. . . . Those works follow the line of least resistance. I confess
what I think - perhaps I am speaking for the last time.'

The Committee did, however, approve another girl-and-boy-worker picture,
Ryangina's 'Higher and Higher' of 1934, which shows an artist's acceptance of
Milyutin's assertion: 'Life in the USSR is full of purpose, bright hopes, obvious
progress, growth of culture and security for the masses. ... All this makes for
buoyancy and cheerfulness and brightness in the creative work of Soviet artists.'
By 1934 the objective, unsmiling realism of Katzman's 'Lace-makers' of 1928
would have been accused of naturalism. Ryangina, six years later, was insistently
bright and cheerful and so was Deineka (one of Nikritin's accusers) in his
'Future Flyers' of 1937. He had made commendable progress since his 'formal-
istic' 'Textile Workers' of 1927.

The heroism of the Red Army during the Civil Wars and, later, World War
U, has been a very popular theme.

During the first twenty years of the USSR, pre-revolutionary triumphs of
Russian arms were generally ignored but since the late Thirties Alexander
Nevsky, Ivan the Terrible, Peter the Great, Suvarov and other imperial victors
have often been celebrated by painters as well as in films. The patriotic painter,
however, wisely found his favorite subject in the dictator himself. Every year,
*n the big exhibitions, Stalin appears in scores of paintings, Lenin in dozens,
the two together in half-dozens. Alexander Gerassimov's twelve-foot-long 'Stalin



662 The Individual and the Social

and Voroshilov on the Walls of the Kremlin' of 1938 is characteristic. Three
years earlier the painter had served as one of Nikritin's inquisitors. Favorite
painter of the Red Army, Gerassimov is today perhaps the most influential artist
in the USSR.

Russian artists who accommodate their art to the dictates of authority are
well-paid and greatly honored. Their exhibitions are attended, we hear, by vast
crowds and many of their works are bought for museums, factory club rooms,
town halls, railroad stations, army barracks and museums.

Museums of historic art are also much visited and paintings of the past studied
and admired, particularly such realistic history paintings of the late nineteenth
century as Repin's 'Cossacks Sending a Jeering Message to the Sultan.' Colossal,
quasi-photographic canvases by Repin and Surikov are held up as models to
young painters.

Yet the most famous museum in Moscow is closed. The Museum of Modern
Western Art comprises the collections of Morosov and Shchukin, assembled by
those two great enthusiasts before 1914. Expropriated in 1919, it remains the
greatest collection in the world of French painting of the post impressionist and
early twentieth century schools. During the Twenties and Thirties the museum
served as bait for foreign tourists. But apparently such formalistic canvases as
Cezanne's still lifes, Gauguin's Tahitian scenes, and van Gogh's 'Walk in Aries,'
not to mention a hundred Matisses and Picassos, seemed too powerfully
subversive. The museum is barred, but Pravda continues to rage against the
persistence of 'worshipers of bourgeois decaying art who regard as their spiritual
teachers, Picasso and Matisse, cubists and artists of the formalist group.'
* * *

Modern art was to fare no better in Nazi Germany. Though the Nazi
revolution of 1933 was anti-Communist and anti-Slav, Goebbels had made a
careful study of Soviet techniques; and by 1939 the Nazi-Soviet pact suggested that
even their ideological differences might not be too irreconcilable. Now, in 1952,
the nationalistic arrogance of the Russians and the imperialistic achievements of the
USSR might well make Hitler writhe in his grave with envy and chagrin.

Lenin personally disliked modern art, and so does Stalin, but Soviet art
policies are based more on a dialectic of power than on personal feeling. Hitler
did not merely dislike modern art, he hated it as only a frustrated academic
artist could. And he found plenty of company among his brown-shirted batta-
lions and considerable numbers of the general public who were smugly delighted
to hear that the new art (which they had never troubled to study or understand)
had, in fact, been foisted on them by a conspiracy involving an international
cartel of Jewish dealers, corrupt art critics, irresponsible museum officials and
artists who were spiritually un-German, bolshevistic, Jewish and degenerate.
The fact that none of the dozen foremost German artists were Jews and only
two were Communists made no difference. The Big Lie triumphed.

Immediately after the revolution the Nazis took action. The Kampfbund fur
deutsche Kultur, which already had its skeleton corps of academic artists well-
posted throughout Germany, now formed local committees with power to act.
Modern painters and sculptors were everywhere denounced, their exhibitions



Si'



Vc Art and Society 663

closed, their works removed from museums, their teaching positions forfeited
10 reactionary successors. Critics and museum officials who had favored their
^ork lost their jobs. A few were retained on evidence of good behavior.

Not only the works of the living 'degenerate' artists but also those of the
dead were banned. Van Goghs . , . , Gauguins, Ensors, Lautrecs, Munchs were
stripped from museum walls and sold abroad. And so were the works of Matisse,
Beckmann, Kokoschka, Feininger, Picasso, Klee, Barlach and many others,
including Chagall and Kandinsky, who were already exiles from Moscow.
Probably the most famous of all German sculptures, Lehmbruck's 'Kneeling
Woman,' passed from the National Gallery in Berlin to the Museum of Modern
Art in New York. Meanwhile Hitler himself was collecting dozens of elaborate
and vulgar historical paintings by the nineteenth centurv artist Hans Makart.

... the Nazi academicians painted idealized figures of Luftwaffe and S.A.
troopers such as Eber's 'The Call to Arms,' heroic scenes of German wars, old
and recent, gemutlich German peasants such as Baumgartner's canvas, tempting
Nordic nudes, Aryan allegories, pretty German landscapes, generals, the Nazi
ringleaders, and above all the Fuehrer. [. . .]

Nazi art had a history only one-third as long as has its Soviet counterpart.
During their coincident period - that is, 1933 to 1945 - they grew more and
more alike in subject-matter, thanks largely to increasing Russian nationalism.

At the Haus der Kunst there was more slick, academic neo-classicism in
evidence, at the All-Russian Artists' Annual more of the huge, incredibly
elaborate, historical paintings of, say, Stalin proposing a toast at a party banquet,
or Ivan the Terrible entering a conquered Polish town. Nazi architects at least
knew clearly what Hitler wanted but 'Socialist Realism' has not proved a very
clear beacon for Soviet architects no matter how eager they may be to conform
to the party line.

It is obvious that those who equate modern art with totalitarianism are ignorant
of the facts. To call modern art communistic is bizarre as well as very damaging
to modern artists; yet it is an accusation frequently made. Most people are merely
expressing a common dislike by means of a common prejudice. But this is a
point of view which is encouraged by the more reckless and resentful academic
artists and their political mouthpieces in Congress and elsewhere. It was given
voice in the recent attack on the Metropolitan Museum by the National Sculpture
Society, in the ridiculous but sinister debate in the Los Angeles City Council
late in 1951, and in the well-coached speeches of Representative George A.
Dondero of Michigan. Those who assert or imply that modern art is a subversive
instrument of the Kremlin are guilty of fantastic falsehood.



17 David Smith (1906-1965) 'Economic Support of
Art in America Today'

Smith had produced a series of explicitly anti-Fascist medallions in the late 1930s and
early 1940s, but by the end of the war his sculpture was exclusively abstract. In this



664 The Individual and the Social

text he represents the artist as someone essentially alone in a society which can help
him, if at all, only by offering basic support for the solitary task. It is the independence
and privacy of the artist's work that he is now concerned to defend. Originally delivered as
a talk at the American Federation of Arts conference, Corning, New York, 30 October 1953.
Printed in McCoy, op. cit, pp. 107-110, from which the present extracts are taken.

The artist has been told by almost everybody what art is, what the artist's
function is, most often by people who do not perceive, love or make art, but
who nonetheless presume the right, because they are laymen, historians or critics
or figure somewhere in the art fringe, to make definition. [. . .J

According to certain self-appointed oracles, the artist should be the illustrator
of church fable, the servant of religion. To others, the so-called socially
conscious group, the artist should serve Marxist realism. Official art of any
country is largely government advertising specializing in photo-gloria with no
thought of the inherent values of art. Then there are those negative minds which
insist that the concept of art was finished with Courbet or Monet or Cubism
or Matisse. Finally there are those who make no bones about their hostility to
art by telling us that the real art of our time is architecture or the machine.

None of these opinions is anything more than a side-tracking of the real issue,
which is the identity of the artist.

The contemporary painter or sculptor sees his identity simply as the producer
of the work of art, himself in direct relation to it without any intermediaries.
His identity as an artist is concerned with his heritage - his by visual choice
and filial position - and the entirely personal nature of what he produces, subject
to no outside authority.

The truly creative substance in the work of art is the artist's identity. How
he comes about this is personal. It is internal, secret and slow-growing.

The artist develops his identity by self-confidence. [. . .]
* * *

Once identity is made it is stronger than all other authority. The artist is
prepared to make his way alone. Aloneness is the condition of the artist's creative
life most of the time. The true artist projects into realms that have not been
seen and can have only his identity for company. The adventure is alone, and
the act of projection is itself actuality. It is himself and the work. He has left
behind what was once the subject, as well as other problems of the past, while
the people of distinction are still heavily involved in mass form, perspective,
beauty, dimension, design, communication, chiaroscuro, social responsibility, and
their own limitations of nature.

At maturity, confidence and identity merge. It is not necessarily the opinion
of others that cause it. It is the development of the artist in his own mind, by
the steps of realization in his works.

This identity must be pure and undivided. Identity can never be two things. It
can serve only one master. If the artist is forced to teach or dig ditches for survival,
he is the artist who labors temporarily. He does not yield his identity. He does not
become the teacher or ditch digger who makes art. He must know that the work
of art is the product of one identity created for the great cause of visual response.




Vc Art and Society 665

Identity determines the artist's finished work before ability. Ability is but one of
the attributes and acts only as a degree of identity. Ability might produce a work,
but identity makes the works before and the works after. [. . .]
* * *

To hold this identity the artist must survey acutely the forces which act for and
against him. He must select and reject.

He sees that the great public is beyond his hope. Like Pavlov's dog, they are
trained to look only when the bell rings. He needs the public on his terms. They
have no need of him.

He knows that no artist lives from museums and that no artist creates art with
the conclusions of philosophers and opinions of officials. The museum can com-
pliment the artist's identity if the relationship is one of mutual respect. The artist
cannot ask for his recognition, nor will he accept being tolerated.

The artist's only defense is to withdraw from those museums and agencies with
whom he is at odds.

The museums and aestheticians will always find among the anxious and unidenti-
fied followers who gratefully accept their dogma and tradition, custom and charity.
But a growing identity is within the forward movement which will not accept unless
the hierarchy responds to the artist's needs instead of determining them.

This position is not new. It is all in the artist's filial heritage, but it is an identity
beginning to form and to act.



18 Ben Shahn (1898-1969) The Artist and the
Politician'

Shahn had been cited in Dondero's attack on the Left in American art. In the 1930s he had
produced a well-known series of paintings of the contemporary martyrdom of Sacco and
Vanzetti, two Italian immigrants, both anarchists, framed and subsequently executed for the
murder of a security guard. The case had provoked world-wide protest. By the 1950s,
however, Shahn had come to embrace a liberal, albeit still socially engaged, perspective
in the arts, opposed to both Communism and American conservatism. In 1954 he repre-
sented the United States, alongside Willem de Kooning, at the Venice Biennale. Shahn's text
was originally presented as part of anti-McCarthy protests at a conference of the Emergency
Civil Liberties Committee in January 1953, and was then printed in Rights, the Commit-
tee's journal, in May 1953. It was reprinted for wider circulation in Art News, New York,
September 1953, pp. 35 and 67. As a prelude to the Biennale it was published in Italian
in the journal Seie Arte, November-December 1953.

The liberal of today - the altruist - the humanitarian - any citizen who feels his
responsibility toward the public good - finds himself caught midway between two
malignant forces.

To the right of him stands the force of reaction, that has always opposed reform
or progress, and that always will oppose reform or progress with whatever
weapons it can lay its hands upon, including slander and calumny.

To the left of the liberal stands the Communist contingent, ever alert to move



666 The Individual and the Social

in upon his good works, always ready to supply him with its little packages of
shopworn dogma, to misappropriate his words, his acts and intentions. The
liberal has long suffered such Communist invasion of his organizations. It has
been his cross, and it has, over a period of years, thoroughly demoralized the
great American liberal tradition.

Together, these two forces have constituted an unholy team. The accusation
of Communism is the most powerful scourge that has fallen into the hands of
reaction since heresy ceased to be a public crime. And the liberal might better
be able to silence this charge were it not for a constant and unwelcome espousal
of his works by Communist groups and press - plus the uneasy fear that perhaps
the charge may be true.

In addition to his resentment at being called 'Communist,' our humanitarian
American is often bitterly aware that his accusers are cynically indifferent to
the real nature of Communism, or to the kind of threat that it actually is. The
word is used to mask a variety of purposes. It is used by the philistine to vilify
art or music or literature that is foreign to his understanding. The political
reactionary applies the word to all views that he dislikes, or any movements
toward reform. The unreconstructed industrialist terms all labor unions 'Com-
munistic.' And then there was the amusing instance, during the Kefauver
investigation, of the waterfront racketeer who appealed for some measure of
sympathy on the ground that, anyway, he wasn't a Communist.

When the radio commentator or performer goes off the air because of the
'Communism' charge, the public is immediately aware of the fact. When the
artist or writer is dropped very few people know about it. But there has been
a constant stream of such instances of boycott and suppression of individuals
who have no possible recourse to fair trial and judgment, and not even any
access to public sympathy.

Then there have been the recent crusades against whole areas of art expression,
not on aesthetic grounds, but on those of 'Communist infiltration.' Before going
into some of these, let me just note here that the art process, like that of science,
literature or philosophy, lies within the realm of ideas. The painter is engaged
in a search for certain forms of truth, and it hardly needs be pointed out here
that in such an exploration, freedom of mind is axiomatic. The artist will carry
on his work in any area where he feels real values may lie, or may be created.
This activity is not subversive; it is the procedure of art. When Congressman
Dondero made his ugly, and thoroughly unfounded attack against a number of
artists, art critics and museum directors some time ago, an interesting and
illuminating fact came to light. The Congressman had been supplied with his
ammunition by a group of conservative illustrators whose work was, to a large
extent, being replaced by more experimental forms of art - by points of view
which were held by just those artists and museum directors who were accused
of subversiveness.

Mr Dondero referred to the artists in such terms as 'germ-carrying art
vermin,' as 'human art termites,' as 'international art thugs,' and professed to
see in their work - even in abstract painting - a complicated plot to undermine
Democracy, and substitute Communism. He spread the names of individual



w



Vc Art and Society 667

artists and museum people across the pages of the Congressional Record, coupled
with misinformed statements, against which, as usual, there was no redress.

And it might just be noted here that Mr Dondero's remarks almost duplicated,
epithet for epithet, an abusive essay against 'decadent Western art 1 that had
appeared some months earlier in an official Soviet publication, Voks Bulletin.

In Los Angeles another great hubbub was raised against a city-wide art
exhibition on the grounds of Communism. The Los Angeles City Council
investigated. The President of the Council reported: 'This art is a replica of
what appears in Communist newspapers. There's no doubt but that this is
another instance of Communist infiltration.' Another comment from the same
investigation runs: 'The art exhibit carries a definite Communist motif. Some
people say they could do better painting blindfolded, with brushes tied to their
elbows!' And a third: [this exhibition is] 'a collection of lines and daubs, with
nothing that is uplifting, or spiritual.'

Another assault upon art occurred when the State Department, some time
ago, was urged by members of the diplomatic corps abroad to get together a
really good representative group of American pictures. They were to be exhibited
in several foreign capitals, the object being to improve our cultural standing
among our European friends.

The pictures were assembled with the expert advice of a number of museum
officials. They were duly shipped, but were stopped in mid-Atlantic and
returned home. The New York Journal-American had excoriated the collection
- I daresay devoting to it more lineage than it had ever before granted to a
single group of pictures. The protests of several congressmen put an end to the
project.

By far the most sinister attack against art - against the arts - comes by way
of a subrosa magazine called Counter- Attack. This sheet gathers material, much
of it inaccurate and libelous, against individuals. It is circulated among adver-
tisers, as well as the magazines and radio stations through which they advertise.
It demands the boycotting of the individuals whom it has named, always with
an implied threat of boycott of the magazine or radio station itself by advertisers
if the artist, writer or performer is not dropped. Counter-Attack has its claque
of letter-writers to finish off the threat and so far as I can learn, no one has
had the courage to challenge it. One additional fillip is added to the infamy of
this sheet by its being 'confidential.' The artist who is singled out for treatment
does not even know that he has been attacked unless some kind friend whispers
it to him. He is just dropped, and that without any sort of open accusation,
or any opportunity to answer the charges made. And, like the Los Angeles
City Council, or like Congressman Dondero, Counter-Attack often adds its
few judicious words of critical appraisal to the report of Communist connec-
tions.

The really shocking fact that we must face is this: that, throughout the
country, people of the basest ignorance are sitting in judgment upon art, upon
the universities, upon the very meaning of thinking itself. What tragic buf-
foonery lies in the investigation by an FBI man - any FBI man, even the best
of them - into the meaning of art, into the motives of any humanist or liberal



668 The Individual and the Social

in politics, into whether education is or is not subversive, or whether a poem,
or a piece of music, or a novel is a Communist threat!

Aside from the incalculable damage that such investigation and suppression
do to our own culture, we might consider some of their international implica-
tions. It is conceded, even by generals, that however great may be our military
prowess, our ultimate victory or defeat in the struggle with Communism will
be a victory or defeat of ideas.

Our idea is Democracy. And I believe that it is the most appealing idea that
the world has yet known. But if we, by official acts of suppression, play the
hypocrite toward our own beliefs, strangle our own liberties, then we can hardly
hope to win the world's unqualified confidence.

The need to reassure our friends is not a fancied one. Fortune magazine, some
time ago, undertook a survey of European attitudes toward America and
American culture, and turned up some interesting opinions. I will repeat a few:

From Francois Mauriac, French Catholic leader, this opinion: 'It is not what
separates the United States and the Soviet Union that should frighten us, but
what they have in common . . . those two technocracies that think themselves
antagonists, are dragging humanity in the same direction of dehumanization . . .
Man is treated as a means, and no longer as an end . . . This is the indispensable
condition of the two cultures that face each other.'

And from Jean-Paul Sartre: 'Thus, if France allows herself to be influenced
by the whole of American culture, a living and livable situation there will come
here and completely shatter our cultural tradition.'

Or, from Martin Cooper in England (and over a BBC broadcast): 'American
influence has been harmful, for it has already begun the scaling down of aesthetic
values, so as to be within the grasp of the average city dweller . . . [it] will end,
not with the debasement of taste, but with the disappearance of the word from
our vocabulary.'

These are but a few samplings from a body of opinions, some of them much
more violent. We may justly take exception to them, because they reveal, above
all things, misunderstanding of us, and ignorance of our arts and literature.

But we cannot ignore the fact that such misunderstanding holds very real
dangers for us. If writers, actors, artists, educators - the national custodians of
our culture - continue to be semiofficially purged; if research foundations,
universities, fellowships are to be combed through for dissident opinion, that
process cannot remain a national secret. Indeed, it will probably be exaggerated
in the telling! And it will increase European mistrust a thousandfold.

I wonder whether even the most intransigent national egotist in Congress
really believes that we can live in a world alone, or that we can ignore the
opinions of mankind, or that we can buy our way, or threaten our way into the
affections and confidence of the free nations.

The time is here - perhaps it's past due - for a reassertion of Democracy, a
reawakening of freedom. The Emergency Civil Liberties Committee has been
formed to stand by, to invoke, when necessary, those laws that were written to
protect freedom. The rest of us are here resolved to confront intimidation, and
the half-legalized infringement of our liberties with some stubborn resistance.




Vc Art and Society 669

To take such a stand is not just a matter of self-interest. It transcends that; it's
a matter of much needed, and much wanting, patriotism.



19 Henry Moore (1898-1986) 'The Sculptor in
Modern Society'

Moore had become a prominent public figure during and after the Second World War,
having been a somewhat isolated avant-gardist for most of the 1930s. He publicly
embraced a liberal humanism, which related domestically to the post-war Welfare State
in Britain, and internationally to the ethos of the United Nations. In a manner charac-
teristic of this position Moore tried to steer a course between complete state control
of the arts as in the Stalinist Soviet Union, and laissez-faire capitalism which would
leave the artist at the mercy of the market. The present text originally took the form
of an address given to an international conference of artists at the Venice Biennale,
organized by Unesco (the United Nations Educational, Cultural and Scientific Organiza-
tion), 22-28 September 1952. It was first published in Art News, vol. 5, no. 6, New
York, November 1952; reprinted in Philip James (ed.), Henry Moore on Sculpture,
London, 1966, from which the present extracts are taken.

[. . .] Sculpture, even more than painting (which generally speaking, is re-
stricted to interiors) is a public art, and for that reason I am at once involved
in those problems which we have met here to discuss - the relation of the artist
to society - more particularly, the relation of the artist to the particular form
of society which we have at this moment of history.

There have been periods - periods which we would like to regard as ideal
prototypes of society - in which that relationship was simple. Society had a
unified structure, whether communal or hierarchic, and the artist was a member
of that society with a definite place and a definite function. There was a universal
faith, and an accepted interplay of authority and function which left the artist
with a defined task, and a secure position. Unfortunately our problems are not
simplified in that way. We have a society which is fragmented, authority which
resides in no certain place, and our function as artists is what we make it by
our individual efforts. We live in a transitional age, between one economic
structure of society which is in dissolution and another economic order of society
which has not yet taken definite shape. As artists we do not know who is our
master; we are individuals seeking patronage, sometimes from another individual,
sometimes from an organization of individuals - a public corporation, a museum,
an educational authority - sometimes from the State itself. This very diversity
of patronage requires, on the part of the modern artist, an adaptability or agility
{ hat was not required of the artist in a unified society.

But that adaptability is always in a vertical direction, always within a particular
craft. One of the features of our industrialized society is specialization - the
division of labour. [. . .] We know now that there are specific kinds of sensi-
bility, belonging to distinct psychological types, and for that reason alone a
certain degree of specialisation in the arts is desirable.



670 The Individual and the Social

The specialization, due to psychological factors in the individual artist, may
conflict with the particular economic structure of society in which the artist
finds himself. Paintings and sculpture, for example, might be regarded as
unnecessary trimmings in a society committed by economic necessity to an
extreme utilitarian form of architecture. The artist might then have to divert
his energies to other forms of production - to industrial design, for example.
No doubt the result would be the spiritual impoverishment of the society
reduced to such extremes, but I only mention this possibility to show the
dependence of art on social and economic factors. The artist should realize how
much he is involved in the changing social structure, and how necessary it is
to adapt himself to that changing structure.

From this some might argue that the artist should have a conscious and
positive political attitude. Obviously some forms of society are more favourable
to art than others, and it would be argued the artist should on that account
take up a position on the political front. I would be more certain of his duty
in this respect if we could be scientifically certain in our political analysis, but
it must be obvious to the most superficial observer, that the relation between
art and society has always been a very subtle one, and never of the kind that
could be consciously planned. One can generalize about the significant relation-
ship between art and society at particular points in history, but beyond
describing such relationships in vague terms such as 'organic' and 'integrated',
one cannot get near to the secret. We know that the Industrial Revolution has
had a detrimental effect on the arts, but we cannot tell what further revolution
or counter-revolution would be required to restore the health of the arts. We
may have our beliefs, and we may even be actively political on the strength of
those beliefs; but meanwhile we have to work, and to work within the contem-
porary social structure.

That social structure varies from country to country, but I think that broadly
speaking we who are participating in this conference are faced with mixed or
transitional economies. In my own country, at any rate, the artist has to satisfy
two or three very different types of patron. In the first place there is the private
patron, the connoisseur or amateur of the arts, who buys a painting or a piece
of sculpture to indulge his own taste, to give himself a private and exclusive
pleasure. In addition there are now various types of public patron, the museums,
or art galleries that buy in the name of the people: the people of a particular
town, or the people of the county as a whole. Quite different from such patrons
are those architects, town-planners, organizations of various sorts who buy either
from a sense of public duty, or to satisfy some sense of corporate pride.

This diversity of patronage must be matched by a certain flexibility in the
artist. [. . .] It is usually assumed that if sufficient commissions were forth-
coming from public authorities, all would be well with the arts. It is an
assumption that takes no account of the fact that the tradition of modern art
is an individualistic one, a craft tradition passing from artist to artist. We have
only to look eastwards, beyond the Iron Curtain, to see that State patronage on
an authoritarian basis requires quite a different tradition - a tradition in which
the State that pays the artist calls the tune, in other words, determines the




Vc Art and Society 671

style. I am not making any judgment of the relative merits of the two traditions,
but I think it should be made quite clear that the transition from private
patronage to public patronage would mean a radical reorganisation of the ideals
and practice of art. We have to choose between a tradition which allows the
artist to develop his own world of formal inventions, to express his own vision
and sense of reality; and one which requires the artist to conform to an
orthodoxy, to express a doctrinaire interpretation of reality. It may be that in
return for his loss of freedom the artist will be offered economic security; it
may be that with such security he will no longer feel the need to express a
personal philosophy, and that a common philosophy will still allow a sufficient
degree of flexibility in interpretation to satisfy the artist's aesthetic sensibility.
I think most artists, however, would prefer to feel their way towards a solution
of this problem, and not have a solution imposed on them by dictation. The
evolution of art cannot be forced, nor can it be retarded by an obstinate
adherence to outworn conventions.

We already have considerable experience in the State patronage of art, even
in countries which are still predominantly individualistic in their economy. [ . . . ]
But can we rely on such courage and initiative in public bodies in a democratic
society? Isn't there a primary duty in such a society to make sure that the
people have the interest and eagerness that demand the best art just as surely
as they demand the best education or the best housing? It is a problem beyond
the scope of this address, but not beyond the scope of Unesco - the renewal
of the sources of artistic inspiration among the people at large.
* * *

... nothing is such a symptom of our disunity, of our cultural fragmentation,
as this divorce of the arts. The specialization characteristic of the modern artist
seems to have as its counterpart the atomization of the arts. If a unity could
be achieved, say in the building of a new town, and planners, architects,
sculptors, painters and all other types of artist could work together from the
beginning, that unity, one feels, would nevertheless be artificial and lifeless
because it would have been consciously imposed on a group of individuals, and
not spontaneously generated by a way of life. That is perhaps the illusion
underlying all our plans for the diffusion of culture. One can feed culture to
the masses, but that does not mean that they will absorb it. In the acquisition
of culture there must always be an element of discovery, of self-help; otherwise
culture remains a foreign element, something outside the desires and necessities
of everyday life. For these reasons I do not think we should despise the private
collector and the dealer who serves him; their attitude to the work of art, though
*t may include in the one case an element of possessiveness or even selfishness
and in the other case an element of profit-making, of parasitism, nevertheless
such people circulate works of art in natural channels, and in the early stages
of an artist's career they are the only people who are willing to take a risk, to
back a young artist with their personal judgment and faith. The State patronage
of art is rarely given to young and unknown artists, and I cannot conceive any
scheme, outside the complete communization of the art profession such as exists
*n Russia, which will support the artist in his early career. The present system



672 The Individual and the Social

in Western Europe is a very arbitrary system, and entails much suffering and
injustice. The artist has often to support himself for years by extra artistic work,
usually by teaching, but this, it seems to me is preferable to a complete
subordination of the artist to some central authority, which might dictate his
style and otherwise interfere with his creative freedom. It is not merely a
question of freedom. With the vast extension of means of communication, the
growth of internationalism, the intense flare of publicity which falls on the artist
once he has reached any degree of renown, he is in danger of losing a still more
precious possession - his privacy. The creative process is in some sense a secret
process. The conception and experimental elaboration of a work of art is a very
personal activity, and to suppose that it can be organized and collectivized like
any form of industrial or agricultural production, is to misunderstand the very
nature of art. The artist must work in contact with society, but that contact
must be an intimate one. [. . .]

I believe that much can be done, by Unesco and by organizations like the
Arts Council in my own country, to provide the external conditions which favour
the emergence of art. I have said - and it is the fundamental truth to which
we must always return - that culture (as the word implies) is an organic process.
There is no such thing as a synthetic culture, or if there is, it is a false and
impermanent culture. Nevertheless, on the basis of our knowledge of the history
of art, on the basis of our understanding of the psychology of the artist, we
know that there are certain social conditions that favour the growth and
flourishing of art, others that destroy or inhibit that growth. An organization
like Unesco, by investigating these laws of cultural development, might do much
to encourage the organic vitality of the arts, but I would end by repeating that
by far the best service it can render to the arts is to guarantee the freedom and
independence of the artist.



20 David A. Siqueiros (1896-1974) 'Open Letter to
the Painters, Sculptors and Engravers of the
Soviet Union'

Siqueiros had remained a committed Communist since the 1920s. This had brought
him into conflict with his fellow Mexican muralist Diego Rivera, especially during the
period of the latter's Trotskyism. Despite his political orthodoxy Siqueiros maintained
a critical purchase on what he saw as the decline of Socialist Realism as practised in
the Soviet Union. For him it had become a formulaic art rooted in nineteenth-century
academicism. His paper was read out as an address to the Soviet Academy of Art on
17 October 1955 during a visit to Russia. The present extract is taken from the
translation by Sylvia Calles published in Siqueiros, Art and Revolution, London, 1975,
pp. 176-82.



I know that your art fulfils a political function of a magnitude unmatched in
the history of the world. All your work is at the service of a social movement




Vc Art and Society 673

which has opened a new era for humanity, and you have the unlimited support
of the first proletarian State. It is quite evident that with your painting,
sculpture, engraving, posters, illustrations, stage design, etc., you have made the
backward Russia of the Tsars into a country which leads in agriculture, industry,
science, education, sport, in everything which makes men happy. There is no
city great or small, no village, no factory, no railway station, recreational centre,
school, theatre, where you have not expressed socialist ideology, and eulogized
your great men and your heroes in work of all sizes. Both in the public squares
and on the walls and interiors of hundreds of thousands of blocks of flats you
have contributed to their ornamentation. You are repeating in a free society
what others did in the condition of slavery; public art. Your art is an art of the
state, ideologically committed, eloquently purposeful, and for this reason real-
istic. It is a heroic art, an epic art. And this helps you to find technical solutions,
for example the varnished tiles you are manufacturing. Of course, there is still
a lot more to be done and this is what I would like to say something about.

I have been a member of the Mexican Communist Party since 1924, and we
communists never limit ourselves to the analysis of positive facts; we examine
every aspect of a problem, and criticise each other and ourselves. And this is
what I propose to do with you.

In Mexico, where our painting is partly financed by the state, it is ideologically
committed, realistic and interested in new techniques. We have been contami-
nated by formalism which is the natural product of bourgeois economy and
submission to imperialism. Your own art has not been affected by this leprosy
which has degraded the art of the capitalist world; but your art suffers from
another form of cosmopolitanism: formalistic academism and mechanical realism.
Between French formalism and academism, we can find an element of similarity:
they both denationalise art and make it impersonal. The formalists in the manner
of the School of Paris and the academicians in the manner of the Academy of
Rome are as alike as two drops of water, whatever their nationality. [. . .]

I am sure you will agree with me that realism cannot be a fixed formula, an
immutable law; the whole of the history of art, which shows the development
of increasingly realistic forms, proves this. If we run quickly over the history
of painting, from cave paintings, through Antiquity, the Middle Ages and the
Renaissance, we shall find that this is absolutely true. We might agree with
those who say that no work of art is superior to another work of art, and that
therefore no period of art is superior to any other period of art, but this is not
to deny the uninterrupted process of ever enriched forms in the direction of a
realistic idiom ever richer, more civilised and more eloquent. Every period of
art which has not been stifled by immovable formulas has striven to make its
art more real. Realism can never be anything but a means of creation in constant
progress, [ . . . ]

That you have forgotten this fact in the Soviet Union is evident in the
perpetuation of old realistic styles which belong to the immediate past, rather like
the realism of American commercial advertising at the beginning of the century; and
I find this influence present also in the work of the Polish painters and in those
of the other popular democracies. If we observe the process of your work over



674 The Individual and the Social

the last thirty-eight years, we shall find that your formal language has not
progressed at all, you have merely improved your technique. But you must not
forget that it is precisely the constant perfection of style in a limited, repetitious
realistic area of creation which has always led to decadence. The painters who
came immediately after the Renaissance were much more skilful than their
predecessors, but their work is infinitely inferior. Raphael was formidable, but
the Raphaelists who came after him were detestable - and this is just one example.
It is certainly not true that every exaltation of form is formalism, because in
that case we should not be able to understand any of the great Venetian painters,
nor Michelangelo, El Greco, Goya, Daumier, etc., or, in the case of Mexico,
Orozco. The formalists worship form for its own sake, in a purely plastic exercise,
and the true realists have always used form to achieve greater plastic eloquence,
to give greater eloquence to their subject; when all is said and done, the realist
speaks in a plastic idiom. Were it not so, however true and beautiful the political
content of our work, it would nevertheless be a poor artistic expression of which
everyone would soon tire.

A study of the history of art will show us that art has always tended towards
realism, while constantly perfecting its materials and tools. If we look at the
four centuries of great Italian art, it is easy to see that the artists of each period
were never satisfied with the materials and tools of their predecessors; on the
contrary, they were always searching passionately for new processes. Their
progress was not only parallel to the development of science, technique and
industry, it was often ahead of them. They perfected tempera and oils, were
always finding new and better pigments and - why should we not say so? -
broadening the range of their professional 'tricks' so as to perfect their work.
In Mexico we have had people who did the same thing and others who resolutely
opposed them, and this is the reason that much of our painting uses age-old
techniques, which renders it less politically eloquent. Painting, like all the plastic
arts, is material and physical, and must therefore express itself in terms of its
vehicle. In your case, Soviet comrades, it is even more serious, because none
of you are interested in finding new material techniques, although you have a
State more able than any other which has ever existed to provide you with the
effective and moral means to achieve this transformation.

While all the great painters, at every period of history, systematically enriched
the principles of composition and perspective, the painters of the School of
Paris have not only not contributed anything in this sense but they have also
lost all the discoveries of the previous twenty centuries. In our contemporary
Mexican movement, although we were systematically opposed by those who
clung to traditional formulae, we have tried to find solutions to this problem,
as can be seen in much of our work. Soviet painters, on the other hand, have
remained dominated by the methods of composition and perspective used by
academics all over the world. And this has happened in the only country in the
world where science has been placed at the service of the people and could give
them enormous help.

No, neither the forms of realism nor its material means are static. It would be
absurd to think that the masters of the past knew all there was to know about




Vc Art and Society 675

realism (they might have thought the same of their immediate predecessors),
and it would be equally ridiculous to think that materials and tools discovered
thousands of years ago are the last word.

Apart from the painting produced by the School of Paris (the greatest fiction
in the bourgeois world of culture, because this type of art suppressed public
art, denied ideological art and excluded the image of man and his environment,
in favour of pseudo-libertarian geometric forms), there are only two important art
expressions in the world today: the Mexican experience, today operating under
increasingly adverse conditions, and the Soviet experience, operating under
increasingly favourable conditions. There has recently been a collective move in
the right direction in the popular democracies and in Italy and France, but this
is still very new.

These two tendencies, through criticism and self-criticism, could help each
other to eliminate their negative aspects and strengthen their positive ones.

Mexico has a great tradition of painting and an artistically gifted people; but
Soviet painters are no less richly endowed in this respect, their tradition is
magnificent and their painters very capable. Soviet painters have a professional
discipline which we lack and a faculty for expressing psychological phenomena
which, in my opinion, is unequalled in the whole world. They are producing
really monumental art, their art is intimately integrated with their architecture,
but they must shake off the routine forms which are tying them down. [ . . . ]



21 Georg Lukacs (1857-1971) 'The Ideology of
Modernism'

This essay is Lukacs's most developed critique of Modernism. It forms the first chapter
of his book The Meaning of Contemporary Realism, perhaps the major intellectual
defence of a Socialist Realism in literature and art. Its composition spanned the moment
of the Soviet Communist Party's 20th Congress in February 1956, at which Khrushchev
denounced Stalin, and the Hungarian Revolution later in the same year. Lukacs became
a member of Imre Nagy's independent government and was fortunate to escape with
his life after the Russian invasion. The critique of Modernism which Lukacs makes is
thus inseparable from the criticism he was also able to make of Stalinist policy in the
arts. In his preface to the English edition of 1962 he wrote of the 'disastrous legacy
of Stalinism'. For Lukacs the critique of what he called 'dogmatism' had to parallel the
critique of Western Modernism and revisionism in order to arrive at a properly Marxist
understanding of art. First published in Hungarian in Budapest in 1957, Lukacs's book
was issued in German in 1958; translated by John and Necke Mander as The Meaning
of Contemporary Realism, London 1963, from which the present extracts are taken.

What determines the style of a given work of art? How does the intention deter-
mine the form? (We are concerned here, of course, with the intention realized
in the work; it need not coincide with the writer's conscious intention.) The
distinctions that concern us are not those between stylistic 'techniques' in the
formalistic sense. It is the view of the world, the ideology or Weltanschauung



676 The Individual and the Social

underlying a writer's work, that counts. And it is the writer's attempt to
reproduce this view of the world which constitutes his intention 1 and is the
formative principle underlying the style of a given piece of writing. Looked at
in this way, style ceases to be a formalistic category. Rather, it is rooted in
content; it is the specific form of a specific content.

Content determines form. But there is no content of which man himself is
not the focal point. However various the donnees of literature (a particular
experience, a didactic purpose), the basic question is, and will remain: what is
man?

Here is a point of division: if we put the question in abstract, philosophical
terms, leaving aside all formal considerations, we arrive - for the realist school
- at the traditional Aristotelean dictum (which was also reached by other than
purely esthetic considerations): Man is zoon politikon, a social animal. The
Aristotelean dictum is applicable to all great realistic literature. Achilles and
Werther, Oedipus and Tom Jones, Antigone and Anna Karenina: their individual
existence ~ their Sein an sich, in the Hegelian terminology; their 'ontological
being,' as a more fashionable terminology has it - cannot be distinguished from
their social and historical environment. Their human significance, their specific
individuality, cannot be separated from the context in which they were created.

The ontological view governing the image of man in the work of leading
modernist writers is the exact opposite of this. Man, for these writers, is by
nature solitary, asocial, unable to enter into relationships with other human
beings. [ . . . ]

The latter, of course, is characteristic of the theory and practice of modernism.
I would like, in the present study, to spare the reader tedious excursions into
philosophy. But I cannot refrain from drawing the reader's attention to
Heidegger's description of human existence as a 'thrownness-into-being'
{Geworfenheit ins Dasein). A more graphic evocation of the ontological solitariness
of the individual would be hard to imagine. Man is 'thrown-into-being.' This
implies, not merely that man is constitutionally unable to establish relationships
with things or persons outside himself; but also that it is impossible to determine
theoretically the origin and goal of human existence.

Man, thus conceived, is an ahistorical being. [. . .]

This view of human existence has specific literary consequences. Particularly
in one category, of primary theoretical and practical importance, to which we
must now give our attention: that of potentiality. Philosophy distinguishes
between abstract and concrete (in Hegel, 'real') potentiality. These two categories,
their interrelation and opposition, are rooted in life itself. [ . . . ]
* * *

Abstract potentiality belongs wholly to the realm of subjectivity; whereas
concrete potentiality is concerned with the dialectic between the individual's
subjectivity and objective reality. The literary presentation of the latter thus
implies a description of actual persons inhabiting a palpable, identifiable world.
Only in the interaction of character and environment can the concrete poten-
tiality of a particular individual be singled out from the 'bad infinity' of purely
abstract potentialities, and emerge as the determining potentiality of just this



Vc Art and Society 677

individual at just this phase of his development. This principle alone enables
the artist to distinguish concrete potentiality from a myriad of abstractions.

But the ontology on which the image of man in modernist literature is based
invalidates this principle. If the 'human condition' - man as a solitary being,
incapable of meaningful relationships - is identified with reality itself, the
distinction between abstract and concrete potentiality becomes null and void.
The categories tend to merge. [ . . . ] If the distinction between abstract and
concrete potentiality vanishes, if man's inwardness is identified with an abstract
subjectivity, human personality must necessarily disintegrate.

T. S. Eliot described this phenomenon, this mode of portraying human
personality, as

Shape without form, shade without colour,
Paralysed force, gesture without motion.

The disintegration of personality is matched by a disintegration of the outer
world. In one sense, this is simply a further consequence of our argument. For
the identification of abstract and concrete human potentiality rests on the
assumption that the objective world is inherently inexplicable. Certain leading
modernist writers, attempting a theoretical apology, have admitted this quite
frankly. Often this theoretical impossibility of understanding reality is the point
of departure, rather than the exaltation of subjectivity. But in any case the
connection between the two is plain. [. . .]

Attenuation of reality and dissolution of personality are thus interdependent:
the stronger the one, the stronger the other. Underlying both is the lack of a
consistent view of human nature. Man is reduced to a sequence of unrelated
experiential fragments; he is as inexplicable to others as to himself.
* * *

[. . .] I would maintain - we shall return to this point - that in modern
writing there is a continuity from naturalism to the modernism of our day - a
continuity restricted, admittedly, to underlying ideological principles. What at
first was no more than dim anticipation of approaching catastrophe developed,
after 1914, into an all-pervading obsession. And I would suggest that the
ever-increasing part played by psychopathology was one of the main features of
the continuity. At each period - depending on the prevailing social and historical
conditions - psychopathology was given a new emphasis, a different significance
and artistic function. ... in naturalism the interest in psychopathology sprang
from an esthetic need; it was an attempt to escape from the dreariness of life
under capitalism. . . . Some years later the opposition acquired a moral slant.
The obsession with morbidity had ceased to have a merely decorative function,
bringing color into the grayness of reality, and become a moral protest against
capitalism.

With Musil - and with many other modernist writers - psychopathology
became the goal, the terminus ad quern, of their artistic intention. But there is
a double difficulty inherent in their intention, which follows from its underlying
ideology. There is, first, a lack of definition. The protest expressed by this
flight into psychopathology is an abstract gesture; its rejection of reality is



678 The Individual and the Social

wholesale and summary, containing no concrete criticism. It is "a gesture,
moreover, that is destined to lead nowhere; it is an escape into nothingness.
Thus the propagators of this ideology are mistaken in thinking that such a
protest could ever be fruitful in literature. In any protest against particular social
conditions, these conditions themselves must have the central place. The
bourgeois protest against feudal society, the proletarian against bourgeois society,
made their point of departure a criticism of the old order. In both cases the
protest - reaching out beyond the point of departure - was based on a concrete
terminus ad quern: the establishment of a new order. However indefinite the
structure and content of this new order, the will toward its more exact definition
was not lacking.

How different the protest of writers like Musil! The terminus a quo (the
corrupt society of our time) is inevitably the main source of energy, since the
terminus ad quern (the escape into psychopathology) is a mere abstraction. The
rejection of modern reality is purely subjective. Considered in terms of man's
relation with his environment, it lacks both content and direction. And this lack
is exaggerated still further by the character of the terminus ad quern. For the
protest is an empty gesture, expressing nausea or discomfort or longing. Its
content - or rather lack of content - derives from the fact that such a view of
life cannot impart a sense of direction. These writers are not wholly wrong in
believing that psychopathology is their surest refuge; it is the ideological
complement of their historical position.

This obsession with the pathological is not only to be found in literature.
Freudian psychoanalysis is its most obvious expression. The treatment of the
subject is only superficially different from that in modern literature. As every-
body knows, Freud's starting point was 'everyday life.' In order to explain 'slips'
and daydreams, however, he had to have recourse to psychopathology. In his
lectures, speaking of resistance and repression, he says: 'Our interest in the
general psychology of symptom-formation increases as we understand to what
extent the study of pathological conditions can shed light on the workings of
the normal mind.' Freud believed he had found the key to the understanding
of the normal personality in the psychology of the abnormal. This belief is still
more evident in the typology of Kretschmer, which also assumes that psycho-
logical abnormalities can explain normal psychology. It is only when we compare
Freud's psychology with that of Pavlov, who takes the Hippocratic view that
mental abnormality is a deviation from a norm, that we see it in its true light.

Clearly, this is not strictly a scientific or literary-critical problem. It is an
ideological problem, deriving from the ontological dogma of the solitariness of
man. [ . . . ]

Let us now pursue the argument further. It is clear, I think, that modernism
must deprive literature of a sense of perspective. This would not be surprising;
rigorous modernists such as Kafka, Benn and Musil have always indignantly
refused to provide their readers with any such thing. I will return to the
ideological implications of the idea of perspective later. Let me say here that,
in any work of art, perspective is of overriding importance. It determines the
course and content; it draws together the threads of the narration; it enables



Vc Art and Society 679

the artist to choose between the important and the superficial, the crucial and
the episodic. The direction in which characters develop is determined by
perspective, only those features being described which are material to their
development. The more lucid the perspective - as in Moliere or the Greeks -
the more economical and striking the selection.

Modernism drops this selective principle. It asserts that it can dispense with
it, or can replace it with its dogma of the condition humaine. A naturalistic style
is bound to be the result. This state of affairs - which to my mind characterizes
all modernist art of the past fifty years - is disguised by critics who systemati-
cally glorify the modernist movement. By concentrating on formal criteria, by
isolating technique from content and exaggerating its importance, these critics
refrain from judgment on the social or artistic significance of subject matter.
They are unable, in consequence, to make the aesthetic distinction between
realism and naturalism. This distinction depends on the presence or absence in
a work of art of a 'hierarchy of significance' in the situations and characters
presented. Compared with this, formal categories are of secondary importance.
That is why it is possible to speak of the basically naturalistic character of
modernist literature - and to see here the literary expression of an ideological
continuity. This is not to deny that variations in style reflect changes in society.
But the particular form this principle of naturalistic arbitrariness, this lack of
hierarchic structure, may take is not decisive. We encounter it in the all-deter-
mining 'social conditions' of naturalism, in symbolism's impressionist methods
and its cultivation of the exotic, in the fragmentation of objective reality in
futurism and constructivism and the German Neue Sachlichkeit, or, again, in
surrealism's stream of consciousness.

These schools have in common a basically static approach to reality. This is
closely related to their lack of perspective. [. . .]




Part VI

Modernization and
Modernism



VI

Introduction



The Cold War years from 1950 to 1956 mark a form of watershed in the
development of modern art and its theory. An exhibition of Jackson Pollock's
all-over abstract paintings in the former year marked a high point in the
development of a specifically American form of modern art. By the same time,
the other 'first generation' American painters had all established the canonical
forms of their work. The first substantial representation of this work was
included in a survey of Modern Art in the United States which toured
throughout Europe in 1955-6, to be followed three years later by another
exhibition concentrating on the painting of what was by then established as a
distinct New York School. By 1956 the fact of American dominance in the
international culture of modern art was established as firmly as French domin-
ance had been half a century before.

The view of the early 1950s as a watershed in the development of art is
complicated rather than contradicted by reference to other events at the end of
the period proposed. 1956 was the year of the Suez crisis, of the Russian invasion
of Hungary, and of Nikita Khrushchev's speech to the 20th Communist Party
Congress, which initiated the long process of revision and review of Stalinism.
It was also the year of Elvis Presley's 'Heartbreak Hotel', and of the London
exhibition, 'This Is Tomorrow', the first redolent of the power and vitality of
an emergent popular culture, or rather of a popular culture packaged and
distributed for mass consumption; the second the retrospectively established
occasion of the emergence in Britain of Pop Art.

These coincident moments suggest forms of connection between considerable
historical processes: the impoverishment of the old British empire on the one
hand; the beginning of the long demise of the newer Russian one on the other;
Paris finally displaced as the metropolitan centre of Modernism; New York in
the ascendant; the old Left in crisis; a New Left struggling to distinguish itself
and to define its theoretical ground, with one eye on the long task of de-Stalin-
izing Marxism, the other on the fascinating iconography of the consumer society
(VlAl, 2 and 7).

In fact, even as the work of the Abstract Expressionists was being conscripted
to advertise the power and originality of American liberalism, the avant-garde
representatives of a younger American generation were distancing themselves



684 Modernization and Modernism

from all forms of the rhetoric of power, identifying the point of origin of art
not with the individual struggle for expression in the face of circumstance, but,
more paradoxically and more fatalistically, with individuality as an inescapable
circumstance in which expression is inescapably conventional (VIA8-9). As
Jasper Johns and John Cage variously discovered, to conceive of avant-garde
expression is merely to confront this paradox in its most acute form: 'anything
goes' only in so far as there is a language in which to say it. The continuing
presence of Marcel Duchamp in New York served to recall that there were
precedents in Dadaism for the association of avant-gardism with irony.

The characteristic concerns of the period issue in the later 1950s and early
1960s in works which combine insouciant celebration with sceptical analysis, in
varying proportions. The need to achieve representation of a new sense of
modernity is a clear preoccupation of the art and art theory of these years. The
work of the Pop Artists reminds us that one central if neglected preoccupation
of the modern tradition was to diagnose the character of modernity through the
ephemeral appearances of modern urban life. Were the Baudelairean flaneur
displaced from the Paris of the 1860s to be reincarnated in modernized form
in the New York of the 1960s, he might have recognized his ironic but fascinated
regard in the paintings of a Roy Lichtenstein or an Andy Warhol (VIA 12-1 3).
Their work shares with the theoretical work of Roland Barthes (VlAl) and even
of Guy Debord (VIa2) the tendency to treat the modern as a form of surface,
which is revealing of meaning and value by virtue of its very artificiality.

For other artists, representation of the experience of modernity entailed an
assault on those notions of high art which were predicated on the supposed
centrality of painting and sculpture. In Europe as in America the legacy of
Dadaism was exploited as a resource of avant-garde strategies. For some, an
exploration of different media and of less strictly specialized forms of practice
offered a means of closing the gap between (modern) art and (modern) life
(VIA4, 6 and 8). For others, removal of the privileged status accorded to painting
and sculpture in the Modernist vein was to be the means to open the practices
of art to a more relevant, more modern, social anthropology (VIa3). According
to the theories of Marshall McLuhan, for instance, Modern Man had been
subject to so rapid an evolution in his cognitive capacities that the redundancy
of painting and sculpture could be assumed (VIA 15).

The concept of culture as surface raises the issue of discrimination, and
of the grounds on which differences are perceived, while the application of
social-anthropological methods directs attention to the ways in which forms of
discrimination function. For the artists of the Abstract Expressionist generation,
as for their European contemporaries, the unquestioned significance of certain
themes enabled the notional engagement of painting and sculpture with a
repertoire of myths. This engagement was the guarantee of art's depth of
content. But if myth is viewed rather as ideology, if the themes of mass
communication and advertising can be considered as myths in the making, what
price the claim to fundamental trans-historical significance? It had been an
assumed condition of Modernist aesthetics that meaningful distinctions could
be made between a 'serious' high art and a 'lightweight' mass culture, or between




VI Introduction 685

avant-garde and kitsch (see IVdIO). This assumption was generally shared even
by those intellectuals on the Left who questioned whether or not the mainten-
ance of the relevant differences in practice was the mark of a defensible society.
These latter, that is to say, saw no real prospect of overcoming the relevant
divisions short of a revolutionary transformation of society. If it now transpired
that the ground of the critical distinctions had been seriously eroded, what were
the implications? That what was required for the Good to become Popular -
or vice versa - was not proletarian revolution after all, but the kind of swelling
of the middle class which had occurred in the industrialized nations of the West?
Or that the distinctions had never been better than ideological - that they were
themselves mere functions of a modern mythology? Or were these not the
alternatives they seemed, and had the actual historical process been the necessary
condition for the disparagement of Modernist taste and of its claims? Were these
various forms of scepticism about the concept of high art in fact the terms in
which a different historical constituency now established itself as the arbiter of
value in culture?

To entertain such questions was not simply to be faced with the class-character
of Modernist culture; it was also to confront uncomfortable questions about the
class-allegiances of the artistic and intellectual Left. After all the talk about the
authenticity of working-class culture, how complacent could the Left afford to
be about that which the swelling of the middle class had seemingly effected? A
familiar theme is revived under the new conditions of the early 1960s: a
preoccupation with art as a model of reconciliation, as that resource which allows
us to think through both the problems of class division and the closures of
patrician taste, to a concept of culture as a whole, or rather to the vision of a
whole culture with which all can in theory identify (VIA7).

We have drawn attention to those aspects of the art and theory of the 1950s
and early 1960s in which the nature of the experience of modernity becomes
once again a pressing question. What serves to unite these practices and positions
is their common engagement either with explicitly human themes and materials
or with the identifiable forms of an explicitly contemporary culture, or both.
As in earlier periods this form of engagement is contrasted with another, in
which the experience of modernity is treated more as a limiting condition than
as an essential qualification. This is the position which by the 1950s comes to
be explicitly identified as Modernist, receiving its most forthright exposition in
1961 in Clement Greenberg's 'Modernist Painting' (VIb4). For the critic in the
Modernist tradition the measure of art lies not in the vividness with which it
represents the experience of modern life, but rather in its achievement, under
the contingent conditions of the modern, of a level of quality for which previous
art furnishes the only meaningful standard. It is through engagement with the
demands of a specific medium, and through acceptance of the standards of
achievement specific to that medium, that the artist engages to most enduring
critical effect with historical and social conditions. If the artist's foremost
responsibility is to the demands of a chosen medium, it does not follow that
the problems of social existence are properly ignored. They may appear to be
relegated, however. For the sheer indifference of the medium tends to disqualify



686 Modernization and Modernism

those forms of interest and sentimentality with which such problems are
normally addressed. From this position, the true critical potential of art lies not
in the prospect of its relevance, but rather in the possibility of its autonomy.

There is no reason in principle why those committed to this view of art should
approve forms of abstract art over forms of art treating of explicitly human and
cultural themes. During the 1960s, however, Modernist criticism was generally
written in defence of abstract painting and sculpture, and more specifically in
defence of the form of painting described by Clement Greenberg as 'Post-Paint-
erly Abstraction' (see VIb7) and the form of constructed sculpture practised by
Anthony Caro and his followers (VIB12). It was the enterprise of Greenberg
and subsequently of Michael Fried to argue that the quality they found in such
work was the consequence of its submission to the inescapable demands of the
medium - inescapable, that is to say, if the standards of the art of the past
were to be maintained (VIB8-9). The argument presented was one which
connected the preferred art of the present to the authentic art of the past by
means of a retrospectively perceived logic of development. By this means a
supposedly disinterested judgement could be justified in terms of a supposedly
inexorable historical tendency.

It was a weakness in such theories that they tended to organize evidence in
line with the very preferences the evidence was meant to test. The authority
of Modernist taste, it seemed, was secured by reference to an authoritative
Modernist canon. In the eyes of their opponents, the claim to disinterestedness
of judgement appeared as a form of camouflage for the partiality of an elite.
Such objections notwithstanding, the Modernist criticism of the 1960s was
distinguished by its close attention to the practical character of the art in
question, and by its evident engagement with the effects specific to the given
medium (VIB9 and 13). For a brief period during the mid- to late 1960s there
appeared to be considerable convergence between the historical viewpoint of a
developed form of Modernist criticism and the practical interests of a body of
abstract painting and sculpture produced in America and England. This con-
vergence involved a series of commitments held in common: to the priority of
aesthetic quality over social or political relevance in deciding the function of
art; and to a concomitant belief in the autonomy of the aesthetic; to a further
belief in the continuing centrality of painting and sculpture to the concept of
high art; and finally to the position that the production of a distinctly 'high'
art was still an absolutely defensible aim. For all their apparent indifference to
arguments for the popularization of culture, certain claims for the autonomy of
art had their attendant political defences. Theodor Adorno, for example, was
concerned to argue that the principle of autonomy associated with forms of high
art furnished a base of resistance to political and moral prescription (VIb5).




VIA

Art and Modern Life



1 Roland Barthes (1915-1980) from 'Myth Today'

The essays which composed Barthes's Mythologies were written between 1954 and
1956. Their publication had the effect of opening up whole areas of contemporary
cultural practice to the methods of analysis hitherto confined to Structuralist theories
of the production of meaning in language: films, cars, sports, food, as well as pulp
fiction and photographs. The concluding theoretical essay, 'Myth Today', laid out the
principles of this investigation based on the concept of 'Secondary signification': a
culturally and historically contingent but nonetheless enormously powerful system of
underlying meanings encoded into images, artefacts and practices. This comparatively
early text reveals the roots of Barthes's investigation in an attempt to develop the
Marxist concept of ideology, to see how ideology actually works. It is also of note that
this enterprise simultaneously established a distance from Zhdanovian (that is to say,
orthodox Communist) attempts to relate culture to other areas of social life by reducing
it to the status of a 'reflection'. Originally published Paris, 1957; English translation by
Annette Lavers in Mythologies, London, 1972, pp. 117-74. The present extract con-
stitutes the first two sections of the essay.

What is a myth, today? I shall give at the outset a first, very simple answer,
which is perfectly consistent with etymology: myth is a type of speech}

Myth is a type of speech

Of course, it is not any type: language needs special conditions in order to
become myth: we shall see them in a minute. But what must be firmly
established at the start is that myth is a system of communication, that it is a
message. This allows one to perceive that myth cannot possibly be an object, a
concept, or an idea; it is a mode of signification, a form. Later, we shall have
to assign to this form historical limits, conditions of use, and reintroduce society
mto it: we must nevertheless first describe it as a form.

It can be seen that to purport to discriminate among mythical objects
according to their substance would be entirely illusory: since myth is a type of
speech, everything can be a myth provided it is conveyed by a discourse. Myth
^ not defined by the object of its message, but by the way in which it utters



688 Modernization and Modernism

this message: there are formal limits to myth, there are no 'substantial' ones.
Everything, then, can be a myth? Yes, I believe this, for the universe is infinitely
fertile in suggestions. Every object in the world can pass from a closed, silent
existence to an oral state, open to appropriation by society, for there is no law,
whether natural or not, which forbids talking about things. A tree is a tree.
Yes, of course. But a tree as expressed by Minou Drouet is no longer quite a
tree, it is a tree which is decorated, adapted to a certain type of consumption,
laden with literary self-indulgence, revolt, images, in short with a type of social
usage which is added to pure matter.

Naturally, everything is not expressed at the same time: some objects become
the prey of mythical speech for a while, then they disappear, others take their
place and attain the status of myth. Are there objects which are inevitably a
source of suggestiveness, as Baudelaire suggested about Woman? Certainly not:
one can conceive of very ancient myths, but there are no eternal ones; for it is
human history which converts reality into speech, and it alone rules the life and
the death of mythical language. Ancient or not, mythology can only have an
historical foundation, for myth is a type of speech chosen by history: it cannot
possibly evolve from the 'nature' of things.

Speech of this kind is a message. It is therefore by no means confined to oral
speech. It can consist of modes of writing or of representations; not only written
discourse, but also photography, cinema, reporting, sport, shows, publicity, all
these can serve as a support to mythical speech. Myth can be defined neither
by its object nor by its material, for any material can arbitrarily be endowed
with meaning: the arrow which is brought in order to signify a challenge is also
a kind of speech. True, as far as perception is concerned, writing and pictures,
for instance, do not call upon the same type of consciousness; and even with
pictures, one can use many kinds of reading: a diagram lends itself to signifi-
cation more than a drawing, a copy more than an original, and a caricature more
than a portrait. But this is the point: we are no longer dealing here with a
theoretical mode of representation: we are dealing with this particular image,
which is given for this particular signification. Mythical speech is made of a
material which has already been worked on so as to make it suitable for
communication: it is because all the materials of myth (whether pictorial or
written) presuppose a signifying consciousness, that one can reason about them
while discounting their substance. This substance is not unimportant: pictures,
to be sure, are more imperative than writing, they impose meaning at one stroke,
without analysing or diluting it. But this is no longer a constitutive difference.
Pictures become a kind of writing as soon as they are meaningful: like writing,
they call for a lexis.

We shall therefore take language, discourse, speech, etc., to mean any significant
unit or synthesis, whether verbal or visual: a photograph will be a kind of speech
for us in the same way as a newspaper article; even objects will become speech,
if they mean something. This generic way of conceiving language is in fact
justified by the very history of writing: long before the invention of our alphabet,
objects like the Inca quipu, or drawings, as in pictographs, have been accepted
as speech. This does not mean that one must treat mythical speech like language;




VIa Art and Modern Life 689

myth in fact belongs to the province of a general science, coextensive with
linguistics, which is semiology.

Myth as a semiological system

For mythology, since it is the study of a type of speech, is but one fragment
of this vast science of signs which Saussure postulated some forty years ago
under the name of semiology. Semiology has not yet come into being. But since
Saussure himself, and sometimes independently of him, a whole section of
contemporary research has constantly been referred to the problem of meaning:
psycho-analysis, structuralism, eidetic psychology, some new types of literary
criticism of which Bachelard has given the first examples, are no longer
concerned with facts except inasmuch as they are endowed with significance.
Now to postulate a signification is to have recourse to semiology. I do not mean
that semiology could account for all these aspects of research equally well: they
have different contents. But they have a common status: they are all sciences
dealing with values. They are not content with meeting the facts: they define
and explore them as tokens for something else.

Semiology is a science of forms, since it studies significations apart from their
content. I should like to say one word about the necessity and the limits of
such a formal science. The necessity is that which applies in the case of any
exact language. Zhdanov made fun of Alexandrov the philosopher, who spoke
of i the spherical structure of our plane t\ 'It was thought until now\ Zhdanov said,
'that form alone could be spherical." Zhdanov was right: one cannot speak about
structures in terms of forms, and vice versa. It may well be that on the plane
of 'life', there is but a totality where structures and forms cannot be separated.
But science has no use for the ineffable: it must speak about 'life' if it wants
to transform it. Against a certain quixotism of synthesis, quite Platonic inciden-
tally, all criticism must consent to the ascesis, to the artifice of analysis; and in
analysis, it must match method and language. Less terrorized by the spectre of
'formalism', historical criticism might have been less sterile; it would have
understood that the specific study of forms does not in any way contradict the
necessary principle of totality and History. On the contrary: the more a system
is specifically defined in its forms, the more amenable it is to historical criticism.
To parody a well-known saying, I shall say that a little formalism turns one
away from History, but that a lot brings one back to it. Is there a better example
of total criticism than the description of saintliness, at once formal and historical,
semiological and ideological, in Sartre's Saint-Genet? The danger, on the con-
trary, is to consider forms as ambiguous objects, half-form and half-substance,
to endow form with a substance of form, as was done, for instance, by
Zhdanovian realism. Semiology, once its limits are settled, is not a meta-
physical trap: it is a science among others, necessary but not sufficient. The
important thing is to see that the unity of an explanation cannot be based
n the amputation of one or other of its approaches, but, as Engels said, on
the dialectical co-ordination of the particular sciences it makes use of. This
is the case with mythology: it is a part both of semiology inasmuch as it is



690 Modernization and Modernism

a formal science, and of ideology inasmuch as it is an historical science: it studies
ideas-in-forms. 2

Let me therefore restate that any semiology postulates a relation between two
terms, a signifier and a signified. This relation concerns objects which belong
to different categories, and this is why it is not one of equality but one of
equivalence. We must here be on our guard for despite common parlance which
simply says that the signifier expresses the signified, we are dealing, in any
semiological system, not with two, but with three different terms. For what we
grasp is not at all one term after the other, but the correlation which unites
them: there are, therefore, the signifier, the signified and the sign, which is the
associative total of the first two terms. Take a bunch of roses: I use it to signify
my passion. Do we have here, then, only a signifier and a signified, the roses
and my passion? Not even that: to put it accurately, there are here only
'passionified' roses. But on the plane of analysis, we do have three terms; for
these roses weighted with passion perfectly and correctly allow themselves to
be decomposed into roses and passion: the former and the latter existed before
uniting and forming this third object, which is the sign. It is as true to say that
on the plane of experience I cannot dissociate the roses from the message they
carry, as to say that on the plane of analysis I cannot confuse the roses as
signifier and the roses as sign: the signifier is empty, the sign is full, it is a
meaning. Or take a black pebble: I can make it signify in several ways, it is a
mere signifier; but if I weigh it with a definite signified (a death sentence, for
instance, in an anonymous vote), it will become a sign. Naturally, there are
between the signifier, the signified and the sign, functional implications (such
as that of the part to the whole) which are so close that to analyse them may
seem futile; but we shall see in a moment that this distinction has a capital
importance for the study of myth as semiological schema.

Naturally these three terms are purely formal, and different contents can be
given to them. Here are a few examples: for Saussure, who worked on a
particular but methodologically exemplary semiological system - the language
or langue - the signified is the concept, the signifier is the acoustic image (which
is mental) and the relation between concept and image is the sign (the word,
for instance), which is a concrete entity. 3 For Freud, as is well known, the
human psyche is a stratification of tokens or representatives. One term (I refrain
from giving it any precedence) is constituted by the manifest meaning of
behaviour, another, by its latent or real meaning (it is, for instance, the
substratum of the dream); as for the third term; it is here also a correlation of
the first two: it is the dream itself in its totality, the parapraxis (a mistake in
speech or behaviour) or the neurosis, conceived as compromises, as economies
effected thanks to the joining of a form (the first term) and an intentional
function (the second term). We can see here how necessary it is to distinguish
the sign from the signifier: a dream, to Freud, is no more its manifest datum
than its latent content: it is the functional union of these two terms. In Sartrean
criticism, finally (I shall keep to these three well-known examples), the signified
is constituted by the original crisis in the subject (the separation from his mother
for Baudelaire, the naming of the theft for Genet); Literature as discourse forms




VIa Art and Modern Life 691

the signifier; and the relation between crisis and discourse defines the work,
which is a signification. Of course, this tri-dimensional pattern, however constant
in its form, is actualized in different ways: one cannot therefore say too often
that semiology can have its unity only at the level of forms, not contents; its
field is limited, it knows only one operation: reading, or deciphering.

In myth, we find again the tri-dimensional pattern which I have just described:
the signifier, the signified and the sign. But myth is a peculiar system, in that
it is constructed from a semiological chain which existed before it: it is a
second-order semiological system. That which is a sign (namely the associative total
of a concept and an image) in the first system, becomes a mere signifier in the
second. We must here recall that the materials of mythical speech (the language
itself, photography, painting, posters, rituals, objects, etc.), however different at
the start, are reduced to a pure signifying function as soon as they are caught
by myth. Myth sees in them only the same raw material; their unity is that
they all come down to the status of a mere language. Whether it deals with
alphabetical or pictorial writing, myth wants to see in them only a sum of signs,
a global sign, the final term of a first semiological chain. And it is precisely
this final term which will become the first term of the greater system which it
builds and of which it is only a part. Everything happens as if myth shifted
the formal system of the first significations sideways. As this lateral shift is
essential for the analysis of myth, I shall represent it in the following way, it
being understood, of course, that the spatialization of the pattern is here only
a metaphor:



Language
MYTH



It can be seen that in myth there are two semiological systems, one of which
is staggered in relation to the other: a linguistic system, the language (or the
modes of representation which are assimilated to it), which I shall call the
language-object, because it is the language which myth gets hold of in order to
build its own system; and myth itself, which I shall call metalanguage, because
it is a second language, in which one speaks about the first. When he reflects
on a metalanguage, the semiologist no longer needs to ask himself questions
about the composition of the language-object, he no longer has to take into
account the details of the linguistic schema; he will only need to know its total
term, or global sign, and only inasmuch as this term lends itself to myth. This
is why the semiologist is entitled to treat in the same way writing and pictures:
what he retains from them is the fact that they are both signs, that they both
reach the threshold of myth endowed with the same signifying function, that
they constitute, one just as much as the other, a language-object.



1. Signifier


2. Signified




3. Sign
I SIGNIFIER


II SIGNIFIED


III SIGN



692 Modernization and Modernism

It is now time to give one or two examples of mythical speech. I shall borrow
the first from an observation by Valery. 4 I am a pupil in the second form in a
French lycee. I open my Latin grammar, and I read a sentence, borrowed from
Aesop or Phaedrus: quia ego nominor leo. I stop and think. There is something
ambiguous about this statement: on the one hand, the words in it do have a
simple meaning: because my name is lion. And on the other hand, the sentence
is evidently there in order to signify something else to me. Inasmuch as it is
addressed to me, a pupil in the second form, it tells me clearly: I am a
grammatical example meant to illustrate the rule about the agreement of the
predicate. I am even forced to realize that the sentence in no way signifies its
meaning to me, that it tries very little to tell me something about the lion and
what sort of name he has; its true and fundamental signification is to impose
itself on me as the presence of a certain agreement of the predicate. I conclude
that I am faced with a particular, greater, semiological system, since it is
co-extensive with the language: there is, indeed, a signifier, but this signifier is
itself formed by a sum of signs, it is in itself a first semiological system {my
name is lion). Thereafter, the formal pattern is correctly unfolded: there is a
signified (/ am a grammatical example) and there is a global signification, which
is none other than the correlation of the signifier and the signified; for neither
the naming of the lion nor the grammatical example are given separately.

And here is now another example: I am at the barber's, and a copy of
Paris-Match is offered to me. On the cover, a young Negro in a French uniform
is saluting, with his eyes uplifted, probably fixed on a fold of the tricolour. All
this is the meaning of the picture. But, whether naively or not, I see very well
what it signifies to me: that France is a great Empire, that all her sons, without
any colour discrimination, faithfully serve under her flag, and that there is no
better answer to the detractors of an alleged colonialism than the zeal shown
by this Negro in serving his so-called oppressors. I am therefore again faced
with a greater semiological system: there is a signifier, itself already formed
with a previous system {a black soldier is giving the French salute); there is a
signified (it is here a purposeful mixture of Frenchness and militariness); finally,
there is a presence of the signified through the signifier.

Before tackling the analysis of each term of the mythical system, one must
agree on terminology. We now know that the signifier can be looked at, in
myth, from two points of view: as the final term of the linguistic system, or as
the first term of the mythical system. We therefore need two names. On the
plane of language, that is, as the final term of the first system, I shall call the
signifier: meaning (my name is lion, a Negro is giving the French salute); on
the plane of myth, I shall call it: form. In the case of the signified, no ambiguity
is possible: we shall retain the name concept. The third term is the correlation
of the first two: in the linguistic system, it is the sign; but it is not possible to
use this word again without ambiguity, since in myth (and this is the chief
peculiarity of the latter), the signifier is already formed by the signs of the
language. I shall call the third term of myth the signification. This word is here
all the better justified since myth has in fact a double function: it points out
and it notifies, it makes us understand something and it imposes it on us.




via Art and Modern Life 693

1 Innumerable other meanings of the word 'myth 1 can be cited against this. But I have tried to
define things, not words.

2 The development of publicity, of a national press, of radio, of illustrated news, not to speak of
the survival of a myriad rites of communication which rule social appearances, makes the
development of a semiological science more urgent than ever. In a single day, how manv reallv
non-signifying fields do we cross? Very few, sometimes none. Here I am, before the sea; it is
true that it bears no message. But on the beach, what material for semiology! Flags, slogans,
signals, sign-boards, clothes, suntan even, which are so many messages to me.

3 The notion of word is one of the most controversial in linguistics. I keep it here for the sake of
simplicitv.

4 Tel Quel] II, p. 191.



2 Guy Debord (b. 1931) Writings from the
Situationist International

A thread runs through the French avant-garde from Baudelaire to Surrealism which
focuses on the unexpected, the bizarre, the magical aspects of the condition of
modernity; these aspects are supposedly experienced as revelations by those who know
how to read the modern city. Always incipiently revolutionary, after the effective demise
of Surrealism in the post-war period, this cultural tradition was developed by the
Situationist International: an organization formed in 1957, reaching a high point of
effectiveness in the May Events of 1968, and disbanding in 1972. The SI emerged as
a synthesis of the Movement for an Imaginist Bauhaus (itself descended from Cobra,
and including Asger Jorn as a leading member), and the Lettrist International (involving
Guy Debord). Twelve issues of the International Situationist bulletin were issued. Texts
represented here embody the movement's key concepts: the derive; detournement; and
centrally, the concept of the spectacle. All extracts were written by Debord and are
taken from the Situationist International Anthology, edited and translated by Ken Knabb,
California, 1981, pp. 50-4, 55, 307-8, and 74-5. (Individual titles and dates of
composition and publication are given with the selections.)



/ Report on the Construction of Situations . . .

Revolution and Counterrevolution in Modern Culture

First of all we think the world must be changed. We want the most liberating
change of the society and life in which we find ourselves confined. We know
that this change is possible through appropriate actions.

Our specific concern is the use of certain means of action and the discovery
of new ones, means more easily recognizable in the domain of culture and mores,
but applied in the perspective of an interaction of all revolutionary changes.

What is termed culture reflects, but also prefigures, the possibilities of organiz-
ation of life in a given society. Our era is fundamentally characterized by the lagging
of revolutionary political action behind the development of modern possibilities of
production which call for a superior organization of the world. [ . . . ]

One of the contradictions of the bourgeoisie in its phase of liquidation is that
while it respects the abstract principle of intellectual and artistic creation, it at



694 Modernization and Modernism

first resists actual creations, then eventually exploits them. This is because it
must maintain a sense of criticality and experimental research among a minority,
but must channel this activity toward strictly compartmentalized utilitarian
disciplines and avert any concerted overall critique and research. In the domain
of culture the bourgeoisie strives to divert the taste for innovation, which is
dangerous for it in our era, toward certain degraded, innocuous and confused
forms of novelty. Through the commercial mechanisms that control cultural
activity, avant-garde tendencies are cut off from the segments of society that
could support them, segments already limited because of the general social
conditions. [. . .]

The very notion of a collective avant-garde, with the militant aspect it implies,
is a recent product of historical conditions that are simultaneously giving rise
to the necessity for a coherent revolutionary program in culture and to the
necessity to struggle against the forces that impede the development of such a
program. Such groups are led to transpose into their sphere of activity organ-
izational methods created by revolutionary politics, and their action is henceforth
inconceivable without some connection with a political critique.



Toward a Situationist International

Our central idea is that of the construction of situations, that is to say, the
concrete construction of momentary ambiances of life and their transformation
into a superior passional quality. We must develop a methodical intervention
based on the complex factors of two components in perpetual interaction: the
material environment of life and the comportments which it gives rise to and
which radically transform it.

Our perspectives of action on the environment ultimately lead us to the notion
of unitary urbanism. Unitary urbanism is defined first of all by the use of the
ensemble of arts and technics as means contributing to an integral composition
of the milieu. This ensemble must be envisaged as infinitely more far-reaching
than the old domination of architecture over the traditional arts, or than the
present sporadic application to anarchic urbanism of specialized technology or
of scientific investigations such as ecology. Unitary urbanism must, for example,
dominate the acoustic environment as well as the distribution of different
varieties of food and drink. It must include the creation of new forms and the
detournement of previous forms of architecture, urbanism, poetry and cinema.
Integral art, which has been talked about so much, can only be realized at the
level of urbanism. But it can no longer correspond to any of the traditional
aesthetic categories, f . . . ]

Our action on behavior, linked with other desirable aspects of a revolution in
mores, can be briefly defined as the invention of games of an essentially new
type. The most general goal must be to extend the nonmediocre part of life, to
reduce the empty moments of life as much as possible. One could thus speak
of our action as an enterprise of quantitatively increasing human life, an
enterprise more serious than the biological methods currently being investigated.




VIa Art and Modern Life 695

This automatically implies a qualitative increase whose developments are unpre-
dictable. The situationist game is distinguished from the classic conception of
the game by its radical negation of the element of competition and of separation
from everyday life. The situationist game is not distinct from a moral choice,
the taking of one's stand in favor of what will ensure the future reign of freedom
and play. This perspective is obviously linked to the inevitable continual and
rapid increase of leisure time resulting from the level of productive forces our
era has attained. It is also linked to the recognition of the fact that a battle of
leisure is taking place before our eyes whose importance in the class struggle
has not been sufficiently analyzed. So far, the ruling class has succeeded in
using the leisure the revolutionary proletariat wrested from it by developing a
vast industrial sector of leisure activities that is an incomparable instrument for
stupefying the proletariat with by-products of mystifying ideology and bourgeois
tastes. The abundance of televised imbecilities is probably one of the reasons
for the American working class's inability to develop any political consciousness.
By obtaining by collective pressure a slight rise in the price of its labor above
the minimum necessary for the production of that labor, the proletariat not only
extends its power of struggle, it also extends the terrain of the struggle. New
forms of this struggle then arise alongside directly economic and political
conflicts. It can be said that revolutionary propaganda has so far been constantly
overcome in these new forms of struggle in all the countries where advanced
industrial development has introduced them. That the necessary changing of the
infrastructure can be delayed by errors and weaknesses at the level of super-
structures has unfortunately been demonstrated by several experiences of the
twentieth century. It is necessary to throw new forces into the battle of leisure,
and we will take up our position there. [. . .]

The construction of situations begins on the ruins of the modern spectacle.
It is easy to see to what extent the very principle of the spectacle - noninter-
vention - is linked to the alienation of the old world. Conversely, the most
pertinent revolutionary experiments in culture have sought to break the spec-
tator's psychological identification with the hero so as to draw him into activity
by provoking his capacities to revolutionize his own life. The situation is thus
made to be lived by its constructors. The role played by a passive or merely
bit-part playing 'public' must constantly diminish, while that played by those
who cannot be called actors but rather, in a new sense of the term, 'livers,'
must steadily increase.

So to speak, we have to multiply poetic subjects and objects - which are now
unfortunately so rare that the slightest ones take on an exaggerated emotional
importance - and we have to organize games of these poetic objects among these
poetic subjects. This is our entire program, which is essentially transitory. Our
situations will be ephemeral, without a future; passageways. The permanence of
art or anything else does not enter into our considerations, which are serious.
Eternity is the grossest idea a person can conceive of in connection with his
acts. [. . .]

June 1957



696 Modernization and Modernism
// Theory of the Derive

Among the various situationist methods is the derive [literally: 'drifting'], a
technique of transient passage through varied ambiances. The derive entails
playful-constructive behavior and awareness of psycho-geographical effects; which
completely distinguishes it from the classical notions of the journey and the stroll.

In a derive one or more persons during a certain period drop their usual
motives for movement and action, their relations, their work and leisure
activities, and let themselves be drawn by the attractions of the terrain and the
encounters they find there. The element of chance is less determinant than one
might think: from the derive point of view cities have a psychogeographical
relief, with constant currents, fixed points and vortexes which strongly discour-
age entry into or exit from certain zones.

But the derive includes both this letting go and its necessary contradiction:
the domination of psychogeographical variations by the knowledge and calcula-
tion of their possibilities. In this latter regard, ecological science - despite the
apparently narrow social space to which it limits itself - provides psychogeo-
graphy with abundant data.

The ecological analysis of the absolute or relative character of fissures in the
urban network, of the role of microclimates, of the distinct, self-contained character
of administrative districts, and above all of the dominating action of centers of
attraction, must be utilized and completed by psychogeographical methods. The
objective passional terrain of the derive must be defined in accordance both with
its own logic and with its relations with social morphology. [. . .]

Chance plays an important role in derives precisely because the methodology
of psychogeographical observation is still in its infancy. But the action of chance
is naturally conservative and in a new setting tends to reduce everything to an
alternation between a limited number of variants, and to habit. Progress is
nothing other than breaking through a field where chance holds sway by creating
new conditions more favorable to our purposes. We can say, then, that the
randomness of the derive is fundamentally different from that of the stroll, but
also that the first psychogeographical attractions discovered run the risk of
fixating the deriving individual or group around new habitual axes, to which
they will constantly be drawn back.
* * *

The lessons drawn from the derive permit the drawing up of the first surveys
of the psychogeographical articulations of a modern city. Beyond the discovery
of unities of ambiance, of their main components and their spatial localization,
one comes to perceive their principal axes of passage, their exits and their
defenses. One arrives at the central hypothesis of the existence of psychogeo-
graphical pivotal points. One measures the distances that effectively separate
two regions of a city, distances that may have little relation with the physical
distance between them. With the aid of old maps, aerial photographs and
experimental derives, one can draw up hitherto lacking maps of influences, maps
whose inevitable imprecision at this early stage is no worse than that of the first



via Art and Modern Life 697

navigational charts; the only difference is that it is a matter no longer of precisely
delineating stable continents, but of changing architecture and urbanism.

Today the different unities of atmosphere and of dwellings are not precisely
marked off, but are surrounded by more or less extended and indistinct
bordering regions. The most general change that the derive leads to proposing
is the constant diminution of these border regions, up to the point of their
complete suppression.

(1956) Internationale situationniste, no. 2, December 1958



III Detournement As Negation And Prelude

Detournement, the reuse of preexisting artistic elements in a new ensemble, has
been a constantly present tendency of the contemporary avant-garde both before
and since the establishment of the SI. The two fundamental laws of detourne-
ment are the loss of importance of each detourned autonomous element - which
may go so far as to lose its original sense completely - and at the same time
the organization of another meaningful ensemble that confers on each element
its new scope and effect.

Detournement has a peculiar power which obviously stems from the double
meaning, from the enrichment of most of the terms by the coexistence within
them of their old senses and their new, immediate senses. Detournement is
practical because it is so easy to use and because of its inexhaustible potential
for reuse. Concerning the negligible effort required for detournement, we have
already said, 'The cheapness of its products is the heavy artillery that breaks
through all the Chinese walls of understanding' {Methods of Detournement, May
1956). But these points would not by themselves justify recourse to this method,
which the same text describes as 'clashing head-on against all social and legal
conventions. ' Detournement has a historical significance. What is it?

'Detournement is a game made possible by the capacity of devaluation,' writes
Jorn in his study Detourned Painting (May 1959), and he goes on to say that
all the elements of the cultural past must be 'reinvested' or disappear. Detour-
nement is thus first of all a negation of the value of the previous organization
of expression. It arises and grows increasingly stronger in the historical period
of the decomposition of artistic expression. But at the same time, the attempts
to reuse the 'detournable bloc' as material for other ensembles express the search
for a vaster construction, a new genre of creation at a higher level.

The SI is a very special kind of movement, of a nature different from
preceding artistic avant-gardes. Within culture the SI can be likened to a
research laboratory, for example, or to a party in which we are situationists but
nothing that we do is situationist. This is not a disavowal for anyone. We are
partisans of a certain future of culture, of life. Situationist activity is a definite
craft which we are not yet practicing.



698 Modernization and Modernism

Thus the signature of the situationist movement, the sign of its presence and
contestation in contemporary cultural reality (since we cannot represent any
common style whatsoever), is first of all the use of detournement. [. . .]

At this point in the world's development all forms of expression are losing
all grip on reality and being reduced to self-parody. As the readers of this
journal can frequently verify, present-day writing always has an element of
parody. 4 It is necessary/ states Methods of Detournement, 'to conceive of a
parodic-serious stage where the accumulation of detourned elements, far from
aiming at arousing indignation or laughter by alluding to some original work,
will express our indifference toward a meaningless and forgotten original, and
concern itself with rendering a certain sublimity.'

The parodic-serious expresses the contradictions of an era in which we find
ourselves confronted with both the urgent necessity and the near impossibility
of bringing together and carrying out a totally innovative collective action. An
era in which the greatest seriousness advances masked in the ambiguous interplay
between art and its negation; in which the essential voyages of discovery have
been undertaken by such astonishingly incapable people.

Internationale situationniste, no. 3. December 1959



IV Preliminaries Towards Defining a Unitary
Revolutionary Program




Capitalism: a Society Without Culture



5

Present culture as a whole can be characterized as alienated in the sense that

every activity, every moment of life, every idea, every type of behavior, has a

meaning only outside itself, in an elsewhere which, being no longer in heaven,

is only the more maddening to try and locate: a Utopia, in the literal sense of

the word, dominates the life of the modern world.

6

Having from the workshop to the laboratory emptied productive activity of all

meaning for itself, capitalism strives to place the meaning of life in leisure

activities and to reorient productive activity on that basis. Since production is

hell in the prevailing moral schema, real life must be found in consumption, in

the use of goods.

[...] The world of consumption is in reality the world of the mutual
spectacularization of everyone, the world of everyone's separation, estrangement
and nonparticipation. [ . . . ]
7

Outside of work, the spectacle is the dominant mode through which people
relate to each other. It is only through the spectacle that people acquire a
(falsified) knowledge of certain general aspects of social life, from scientific or




VIa Art and Modern Life 699

technological achievements to prevailing types of conduct and orchestrated
meetings of international statesmen. The relation between authors and spectators
is only a transposition of the fundamental relation between directors and
executants. It answers perfectly to the needs of a reified and alienated culture:
the spectacle/spectator relation is in itself a staunch bearer of the capitalist
order. The ambiguity of all 'revolutionary art' lies in the fact that the revol-
utionary aspect of any particular spectacle is always contradicted and offset by
the reactionary element present in all spectacles.

This is why the improvement of capitalist society means to a great degree
the improvement of the mechanism of spectacularization. This is obviously a
complex mechanism, for if it must be most essentially the propagator of the
capitalist order, it nevertheless must not appear to the public as the delirium
of capitalism; it must involve the public by incorporating elements of repre-
sentation that correspond - in fragments - to social rationality. It must sidetrack
the desires whose satisfaction is forbidden by the ruling order. For example,
modern mass tourism presents cities and landscapes not in order to satisfy
authentic desires to live in such human or geographical milieus; it presents them
as pure, rapid, superficial spectacles (spectacles from which one can gain prestige
by reminiscing about). Similarly, striptease is the most obvious form of the
degradation of eroticism into a mere spectacle.
8

The evolution and the conservation of art have been governed by these lines of
force. At one pole, art is purely and simply recuperated by capitalism as a means
of conditioning the population. At the other pole, capitalism grants art a
perpetual privileged concession: that of pure creative activity, an alibi for the
alienation of all other activities (which thus makes it the most expensive and
prestigious status symbol). But at the same time, this sphere reserved for 'free
creative activity' is the only one in which the question of what we do with life
and the question of communication are posed practically and in all their fullness.
Here, in art, lies the basis of the antagonisms between partisans and adversaries
of the officially dictated reasons for living. The established meaninglessness and
separation give rise to the general crisis of traditional artistic means - a crisis
linked to the experience of alternative ways of living or to the demand for such
experience. Revolutionary artists are those who call for intervention; and who
have themselves intervened in the spectacle to disrupt and destroy it.

20 July 1960



V Perspectives for Conscious Alterations in
Everyday Life

Capitalist civilization has not yet been superseded anywhere, but it continues
to produce its own enemies everywhere. The next rise of the revolutionary
Movement, radicalized by the lessons of past defeats and with .a program
enriched in proportion to the practical powers of modern society (powers already



700 Modernization and Modernism

constituting the potential material basis that was lacking in the so-called Utopian
currents of socialism - this next attempt at a total contestation of capitalism
will know how to invent and propose a different use of everyday life, and will
immediately base itself on new everyday practices, on new types of human
relationships (being no longer unaware that any conserving, within the revol-
utionary movement, of the relations prevailing in the existing society impercep-
tibly leads to a reconstitution of one or another variant of this society).

Just as the bourgeoisie, in its ascending phase, had to ruthlessly liquidate
everything that transcended earthly life (heaven, eternity), so the revolutionary
proletariat - which can never, without ceasing to be revolutionary, recognize
itself in any past or any models - will have to renounce everything that
transcends everyday life. Or rather, everything that claims to transcend it: the
spectacle, the 'historical' act or pronouncement, the 'greatness' of leaders, the
mystery of specializations, the 'immortality' of art and its importance outside
of life. In other words, it must renounce all the by-products of eternity that
have survived as weapons of the world of the rulers.

The revolution in everyday life, breaking its present resistance to the historical
(and to every kind of change), will create the conditions in which the present
dominates the past and the creative aspects of life always predominate over the
repetitive. [. . .]

The critique and perpetual re-creation of the totality of everyday life, before
being carried out naturally by all people, must be undertaken in the present
conditions of oppression, in order to destroy these conditions.

An avant-garde cultural movement, even one with revolutionary sympathies,
cannot accomplish this. Neither can a revolutionary party on the traditional
model, even if it accords a large place to criticism of culture (understanding by
that term the entirety of artistic and conceptual means through which a society
explains itself to itself and shows itself goals of life). This culture and this
politics are worn out and it is not without reason that most people take no
interest in them. The revolutionary transformation of everyday life, which is
not reserved for some vague future but is placed immediately before us by the
development of capitalism and its unbearable demands - the alternative being
the reinforcement of the modern slavery - this transformation will mark the
end of all unilateral artistic expression stocked in the form of commodities, at
the same time as the end of all specialized politics.

This is going to be the task of a new type of revolutionary organization from
its inception.

17 Mav 1961



3 Lawrence Alloway (1926-1990) The Arts and the
Mass Media'

Alloway was a critic who worked in the early 1950s at the Institute of Contemporary
Arts in London, where he was party to the formation of the Independent Group in 1952.







via Art and Modern Life 701

The members of this group, which included Eduardo Paolozzi and Richard Hamilton,
are generally credited with the establishment of Pop Art in Britain. Their typical work
had two principal aspects. They were critical of the idea of an autonomous, disinter-
ested, 'fine' art oriented around an exclusive notion of aesthetic quality, and more
positively they attempted to confront the implications of the new mass media and of
their products, both for an adequate theory of culture and for the practice of art.
Published in Architectural Design, London, February, 1958, pp. 34-5, from which the
present text is taken. (For Greenberg's 'Avant-Garde and Kitsch' see IVdIO.)

Before 1800 the population of Europe was an estimated 180 million; by 1900
this figure had risen to 460 million. The increase of population and the industrial
revolution that paced it has, as everybody knows, changed the world. In the
arts, however, traditional ideas have persisted, to limit the definition of later
developments. As Ortega pointed out in The Revolt of the Masses: 'the masses
are to-day exercising functions in social life which coincide with those which
hitherto seemed reserved to minorities'. As a result the elite, accustomed to set
aesthetic standards, has found that it no longer possesses the power to dominate
all aspects of art. It is in this situation that we need to consider the arts of the
mass media. It is impossible to see them clearly within a code of aesthetics
associated with minorities with pastoral and upper-class ideas because mass art
is urban and democratic. [ . . . ]

If justice is to be done to the mass arts which are, after all, one of the most
remarkable and characteristic achievements of industrial society, some of the
common objections to it need to be faced. A summary of the opposition to mass
popular art is in Avant Garde and Kitsch {Partisan Review, 1939, Horizon, 1940),
by Clement Greenberg, an art critic and a good one, but fatally prejudiced when
he leaves modern fine art. By kitsch he means 'popular, commercial art and
literature, with their chromeotypes, magazine covers, illustrations, advertise-
ments, slick and pulp fiction, comics, Tin Pan Alley music, tap dancing,
Hollywood movies, etc.'. All these activities to Greenberg and the minority he
speaks for are 'ersatz culture . . . destined for those who are insensible to the
value of genuine culture . . . Kitsch, using for raw material the debased and
academic simulacra of genuine culture welcomes and cultivates this insensibility'
(my italics). Greenberg insists that 'all kitsch is academic', but only some of it
is, such as Cecil B. De Mille-type historical epics which use nineteenth-century
history-picture material. In fact, stylistically, technically, and iconographically
the mass arts are anti-academic. Topicality and a rapid rate of change are not
academic in any usual sense of the word, which means a system that is static,
rigid, self-perpetuating. Sensitiveness to the variables of our life and economy
enable the mass arts to accompany the changes in our life far more closely than
the fine arts which are a repository of time-binding values.

The popular arts of our industrial civilization are geared to technical chang es
which occur, no,t gradually, but violently and experimentally. The rise of the
electronics era in communications challenged the cinema. In reaction to the
small TV screen, movie makers spread sideways (CinemaScope) and back into
space (Vista Vision). All the regular film critics opposed the new array of shapes,
but all have been accepted by the audiences. Technical change as dramatized



702 Modernization and Modernism

novelty (usually spurred by economic necessity) is characteristic not only of the
cinema but of all the mass arts. Colour TV, the improvements in colour printing
(particularly in American magazines), the new range of paper back books; all
are part of the constant technical improvements in the channels of mass
communication.

An important factor in communication in the mass arts is high redundancy.
TV plays, radio serials, entertainers, tend to resemble each other (though there
are important and clearly visible differences for the expert consumer). You can
go into the movies at any point, leave your seat, eat an ice-cream, and still
follow the action on the screen pretty well. The repetitive and overlapping
structure of modern entertainment works in two ways: (1) it permits marginal
attention to suffice for those spectators who like to talk, neck, parade; (2) it
satisfies, for the absorbed spectator, the desire for intense participation which
leads to a careful discrimination of nuances in the action.

There is in popular art a continuum from data to fantasy. Fantasy resides in,
to sample a few examples, film stars, perfume ads, beauty and the beast
situations, terrible deaths, sexy women. This is the aspect of popular art which
is most easily accepted by art minorities who see it as a vital substratum of the
folk, as something primitive. This notion has a history since Herder in the
eighteenth century, who emphasized national folk arts in opposition to interna-
tional classicism. Now, however, mass-produced folk art is international: Kim
Novak, Galaxy Science Fiction, Mickey Spillane, are available wherever you go
in the West.

However, fantasy is always given a keen topical edge; the sexy model is shaped
by datable fashion as well as by timeless lust. Thus, the mass arts orient the
consumer in current styles, even when they seem purely, tunelessly erotic and
fantastic. The mass media give perpetual lessons in assimilation, instruction in
role-taking, the use of new objects, the definition of changing relationships, as
David Riesman has pointed out. A clear example of this may be taken from
science fiction. Cybernetics, a new word to many people until 1956, was made
the basis of stories in Astounding Science Fiction in 1950. SF aids the assimilation
of the mounting technical facts of this century in which, as John W. Campbell,
the editor of Astounding, put it, 'A man learns a pattern of behaviour - and in
five years it doesn't work.' Popular art, as a whole, offers imagery and plots to
control the changes in the world; everything in our culture that changes is the
material of the popular arts.

Critics of the mass media often complain of the hostility towards intellectuals
and the lack of respect for art expressed there, but, as I have tried to show,
the feeling is mutual. Why should the mass media turn the other cheek? What
worries intellectuals is the fact that the mass arts spread; they encroach on the
high ground. [. . .]

The definition of culture is changing as a result of the pressure of the great
audience, which is no longer new but experienced in the consumption of its
arts. Therefore, it is no longer sufficient to define culture solely as something
that a minority guards for the few and the future (though such art is uniquely
valuable and as precious as ever). Our definition of culture is being stretched



i



VIa Art and Modern Life 703

beyond the fine art limits imposed on it by Renaissance theory, and refers now,
increasingly, to the whole complex of human activities. Within this definition,
rejection of the mass produced arts is not, as critics think, a defence of culture
but an attack on it. The new role for the academic is keeper of the flame; the
new role for the fine arts is to be one of the possible forms of communication
in an expanding framework that also includes the mass arts.



4 Allan Kaprow (b. 1927) from Assemblages,
Environments and Happenings

During the late 1950s and early 1960s, the author was a leading figure in the production
of Happenings, principally amongst the New York avant-garde. He had earlier sketched
out an interpretation of the legacy of Jackson Pollock' in which he read the implications
of Pollock's work in terms of a move out of painting towards a synthetic art form
involving performances. These were to take place in real space and time, drawing on
the gamut of the products and processes of the modern, urbanized world: The young
artist of today need no longer say "I am a painter" or "a poet" or "a dancer". He is
simply an "artist". All of life will be open to him.' The text from which the present extracts
are taken was published in book form as Assemblages, Environments and Happenings,
New York, 1965. The Preface states that it was 'largely written' in 1959, finished in
1960, and revised in 1961. It was further revised for its eventual publication, when
extra texts by other Happenings artists were added.

A critical turning point has been reached in a major area of avant-garde effort,
which I believe is entirely to the good but which is forcing upon us the possibly
disagreeable task of revising some cherished assumptions regarding the nature
of the plastic arts.

Certain advanced works being done at this moment are rapidly losing their
traditional identities and something else, quite far-reaching in its implications,
is taking their place.

On the one hand, looking broadly at the whole of recent modern art, the
differences which were once so clear between graphic art and painting have
practically been eliminated; similarly, the distinctions between painting and
collage, between collage and construction, between construction and sculpture,
and between some large constructions and a quasi architecture. [. . .]

This continuity is significant, the critical issue in fact; for drawing and
painting, and in a large measure sculpture and the so-called minor arts, have
until now been completely dependent upon the conditions set down by the
structure of the house: one need only imagine a canvas without a flat wall and
the cubic enframement of the room, a chair on an irregular floor. . . . Artists
for at least a century have worked as though the only thing of importance were
the work in front of them, a world unto itself. [ . . . ] But I am saying that it
is important to recognize very clearly how deeply involved with each other on
a primary level the plastic arts have been. Once you change the conditions for
ne, you imply a conflict (a contrast at least, which is enough to call attention



704 Modernization and Modernism

to the change) in the other. And these conditions are without any doubt changing
now.

* * *

[. . .] In short, contemporary art has moved out of its traditional limits.
Painting, which has been without question the most advanced and experimental
of the plastic arts, has over and over provoked the question, 'Should the format
or field always be the closed, flat rectangle?' by utilizing gestures, scribblings,
large scales with no frame, which suggest to the observer that both the physical
and metaphysical substance of the work continue indefinitely in all directions
beyond the canvas. . .

More recently, a large body of diverse compositions referred to as Combines
(Robert Rauschenberg's name for his own work), Neo-Dada, or Assemblage
employs a variety of materials and objects in an equally varied range of formats,
completely departing from the accepted norms required by 'painting' as we have
known it. But this has brought sharply into focus the fact that the room has
always been a frame or format too, and that this shape is inconsistent with the
forms and expression emerging from the work in question.

Of course, some artists find a positive value in this contradiction and make
use of it, as another generation (Pollock's, for example) used the confines of
the canvas as the only limit to an intrinsically limitless form; much the same
is true in jazz, whose beat is the constant which defines the degree of freedom
achieved in improvisation. These relatively unchanging factors are felt to be a
kind of home base. Yet this may be temporary, a transitional value for today,
since a number of younger artists do not find such methods acceptable any
longer; they feel them to be excess baggage at least, which often involves needless
discords with the past, in which these methods originated. If there are to be
measures and limits in art they must be of a new kind. Rather than fight against
the confines of a typical room, many are actively considering working out in
the open. They cannot wait for the new architecture.

It should be evident from the foregoing that this suggests a crisis of sorts.
Quite apart from the aesthetic re-evaluation it forces upon us, its immediate
practical effect is to render the customary gallery situation obsolete. [ . . . ]

* * *

The evolution of this art is bringing us to a quite different notion of what
art is. With the emergence of the picture shop and museum in the last two
centuries as a direct consequence of art's separation from society, art came to
mean a dream world, cut off from real life and capable of only indirect reference
to the existence most people knew. The gallery and museum crystallized this
idea by insisting upon a 'shshsh - don't touch' atmosphere. Traditionally, it is
supposed that art is born entirely from the heart or head and is then brought,
all shiny and finished, to the showplace. Now, however, it is less and less
conceived that way and is instead drawing its substance, appearances, and
enthusiasms from the common world as we know it; and this, without any doubt,
is a hint of how vestigial the gallery-museum situation is. With such a form as
the Environment it is patently absurd to conceive it in a studio and then try
to fit it into an exhibition hall. And it is even more absurd to think that since




via Art and Modern Life 705

the work looks better in the studio because it was conceived there, that is the
best and only place for it. The romance of the atelier, like that of the gallery
and museum, will probably disappear in time. But meanwhile, the rest of the
world has become endlessly available.

Environments are generally quiet situations, existing for one or for several
persons to walk or crawl into, lie down, or sit in. One looks, sometimes listens,
eats, drinks, or rearranges the elements as though moving household objects
around. Other Environments ask that the visitor-participant recreate and con-
tinue the work's inherent processes. For human beings at least, all of these
characteristics suggest a somewhat thoughtful and meditative demeanor.

Though the Environments are free with respect to media and appeals to the
senses, the chief accents to date have been visual, tactile, and manipulative.
Time (compared with space), sound (compared with tangible objects), and the
physical presence of people (compared with the physical surroundings), tend to
be subordinate elements. Suppose, however, one wanted to amplify the poten-
tialities of these subordinates. The objective would be a unified field of
components in which all were theoretically equivalent and sometimes exactly
equal. It would require scoring the components more conscientiously into the
work, giving people more responsibility, and the inanimate parts roles more in
keeping with the whole. Time would be variously weighted, compressed, or
drawn out, sounds would emerge forthrightly, and things would have to be set
into greater motion. The event which has done this is increasingly called a
'Happening.'

Fundamentally, Environments and Happenings are similar. They are the
passive and active sides of a single coin, whose principle is extension. Thus an
Environment is not less than a Happening. It is not a movie set which has not
yet seen action (like the blank canvas-arena of the 'action' painter). It is quite
sufficient in its quieter mode even though, in the point of evolution, the
Happening grew out of it. [ . . . ]
* * *

Although the Assemblages' and Environments' free style was directly carried
into the Happenings, the use of standard performance conventions from the
very start tended to truncate the implications of the art. The Happenings were
presented to small, intimate gatherings of people in lofts, classrooms, gymna-
siums, and some of the offbeat galleries, where a clearing was made for the
activities. The watchers sat very close to what took place, with the artists and
their friends acting along with assembled environmental constructions. The
audience occasionally changed seats as in a game of musical chairs, turned around
to see something behind it, or stood without seats in tight but informal clusters.
Sometimes, too, the event moved in and amongst the crowd, which produced
some movement on the latter's part. But, however flexible these techniques were
in practice, there was always an audience in one (usually static) space and a
show given in another.

This proved to be a serious drawback, in my opinion, to the plastic morpho-
logy of the works. [. . .]



706 Modernization and Modernism

Unfortunately, the fact that there was a tough nut to crack in the Happenings
seems to have struck very few of its practitioners. Even today, the majority
continues to popularize an art of 'acts' which often is well-done enough but
fulfills neither its implications nor strikes out in uncharted territory.

But for those who sensed what was at stake, the issues began to appear. It
would take a number of years to work them out by trial and error, for there is
sometimes, though not always, a great gap between theory and production. But
gradually a number of rules-of-thumb could be listed:

A The line between art and life should be kept as fluid, and perhaps indistinct,
as possible. The reciprocity between the man made and the ready-made will be
at its maximum potential this way. Something will always happen at this
juncture, which, if it is not revelatory, will not be merely bad art - for no one
can easily compare it with this or that accepted masterpiece. I would judge this
a foundation upon which may be built the specific criteria of the Happenings . . .

B Therefore, the source of themes, materials, actions, and the relationships between
them are to be derived from any place or period except from the arts, their
derivatives, and their milieu. When innovations are taking place it often becomes
necessary for those involved to treat their tasks with considerable severity. In
order to keep their eyes fixed solely upon the essential problem, they will decide
that there are certain 'don'ts' which, as self-imposed rules, they will obey
unswervingly. [ . . . ] Artistic attachments are still so many window dressings,
unconsciously held on to to legitimize an art that otherwise might go unrecog-
nized.

Thus it is not that the known arts are 'bad' that causes me to say 'Don't get
near them'; it is that they contain highly sophisticated habits. By avoiding the
artistic modes there is the good chance that a new language will develop that
has its own standards. The Happening is conceived as an art, certainly, but this
is for lack of a better word, or one that would not cause endless discussion. I,
personally, would not care if it were called a sport. But if it is going to be
thought of in the context of art and artists, then let it be a distinct art which
finds its way into the art category by realizing its species outside of 'culture.'
A United States Marine Corps manual on jungle-fighting tactics, a tour of a
laboratory where polyethylene kidneys are made, the daily traffic jams on the
Long Island Expressway, are more useful than Beethoven, Racine, or Michel-
angelo.

C The performance of a Happening should take place over several widely spaced,
sometimes moving and changing locales. A single performance space tends toward
the static and, more significantly, resembles conventional theater practice. It is
also like painting, for safety's sake, only in the center of a canvas. Later on,
when we are used to a fluid space as painting has been for almost a century,
we can return to concentrated areas, because then they will not be considered
exclusive. It is presently advantageous to experiment by gradually widening the
distances between the events within a Happening. First along several points on




VIa Art and Modern Life 707

a heavily trafficked avenue; then in several rooms and floors of an apartment
house where some of the activities are out of touch with each other; then on
more than one street; then in different but proximate cities; finally all around
the globe. On the one hand, this will increase the tension between the parts,
as a poet might by stretching the rhyme from two lines to ten. On the other,
it permits the parts to exist more on their own, without the necessity of intensive
coordination. Relationships cannot help being made and perceived in any human
action, and here they may be of a new kind if tried-and-true methods are given
up.
Even greater flexibility can be gotten by moving the locale itself [. . .]

D Time, which follows closely on space considerations, should be variable and
discontinuous. It is only natural that if there are multiple spaces in which
occurrences are scheduled, in sequence or even at random, time or 'pacing' will
acquire an order that is determined more by the character of movements within
environments than by a fixed concept of regular development and conclusion.
There need be no rhythmic coordination between the several parts of a Hap-
pening unless it is suggested by the event itself: such as when two persons must
meet at a train departing at 5:47 P.M.

Above all, this is 'real' or 'experienced' time as distinct from conceptual time.
If it conforms to the clock used in the Happening, as above, that is legitimate,
but if it does not because a clock is not needed, that is equally legitimate. All
of us know how, when we are busy, time accelerates, and how, conversely, when
we are bored it can drag almost to a standstill. Real time is always connected
with doing something, with an event of some kind, and so is bound up with
things and spaces. [. . .]

Feeling this, why shouldn't an artist program a Happening over the course
of several days, months, or years, slipping it in and out of the performers' daily
lives? There is nothing esoteric in such a proposition, and it may have the
distinct advantage of bringing into focus those things one ordinarily does every
day without paying attention - like brushing one's teeth.

On the other hand, leaving taste and preference aside and relying solely on
ehance operations, a completely unforeseen schedule of events could result, not
merely in the preparation but in the actual performance; or a simultaneously
performed single moment; or none at all. (As for the last, the act of finding
this out would become, by default, the 'Happening.*)

But an endless activity could also be decided upon, which would apparently
transcend palpable time - such as the slow decomposition of a mountain of
sandstone. ... In this spirit some artists are earnestly proposing a lifetime
Happening . . .

The common function of these alternatives is to release an artist from
conventional notions of a detached, closed arrangement of time-space. A picture,
a piece of music, a poem, a drama, each confined within its respective frame,
fixed number of measures, stanzas, and stages, however great they may be in
their own right, simply will not allow for breaking the barrier between art and
We. And this is what the objective is.



708 Modernization and Modernism

E Happenings should be performed once only. At least for the time being, this
restriction hardly needs emphasis, since it is in most cases the only course
possible. Whether due to chance, or to the lifespan of the materials (especially
the perishable ones), or to the changeableness of the events, it is highly unlikely
that a Happening of the type I am outlining could ever be repeated. Yet many
of the Happenings have, in fact, been given four or five times, ostensibly to
accommodate larger attendances, but this, I believe, was only a rationalization
of the wish to hold on to theatrical customs. In my experience, I found the
practice inadequate because I was always forced to do that which could be
repeated, and had to discard countless situations which I felt were marvelous
but performable only once. Aside from the fact that repetition is boring to a
generation brought up on ideas of spontaneity and originality, to repeat a
Happening at this time is to accede to a far more serious matter: compromise
of the whole concept of Change. When the practical requirements of a situation
serve only to kill what an artist has set out to do, then this is not a practical
problem at all; one would be very practical to leave it for something else more
liberating. [. . .]

In the near future, plans may be developed which take their cue from games
and athletics, where the regulations provide for a variety of moves that make
the outcome always uncertain. A score might be written, so general in its
instructions that it could be adapted to basic types of terrain such as oceans,
woods, cities, farms, and to basic kinds of performers such as teenagers, old
people, children, matrons, and so on, including insects, animals, and the weather.
This could be printed and mail-ordered for use by anyone who wanted it. [. . .]

F It follows that audiences should be eliminated entirely. All the elements -
people, space, the particular materials and character of the environment, time
- can in this way be integrated.

* * *

[. . .] This short essay has been in one sense an account of an avant-garde. It
has also been an analysis of a world view. It has proceeded on the assumption
that at present any avant-garde art is primarily a philosophical quest and a
finding of truths, rather than purely an aesthetic activity; for this latter is
possible, if at all, only in a relatively stable age when most human beings can
agree upon fundamental notions of the nature of the universe. If it is a truism
that ours is a period of extraordinary and rapid change, with its attendant
surprises and sufferings, it is no less true that in such a day all serious thought
(discursive or otherwise) must try to find in it a pattern of sense. In its own
fashion a truly modern art does just that.

Thus, for us now, the idea of a 'perfect work of art' is not only irrelevant
because we do not know what are the conditions for such a phantasm, but it
is, if desired, presumptuous and unreal. Though great works are surely possible
and may be looked forward to, it is in the sense that they may be moments of
profound vision into the workings of things, an imitation of life, so to speak,
rather than artistic tours de force, i.e., cosmetics.




VIa Art and Modern Life 709

I have focused upon this concept of the real, suggesting a course of action
in art that is related to what is likely our experience today, as distinct from
what are our habits from the past. I have considered important those aspects
of art which have been consciously intended to replace habit with the spirit of
exploration and experiment. If some of the past is still meaningful, as it assuredly
is, then what is to be retained in the present work is not archaistic mannerisms,
easily recognized and praised for this reason, but those qualities of personal
dignity and freedom always championed in the West. In respecting these, the
ideas of this book are deeply traditional.



5 Piero Manzoni (1933-1963) Tree Dimension'

By the end of the 1950s a disparate series of currents had emerged in the international
avant-garde, in America, England and throughout Europe various younger artists were
becoming critical of the conventional division of the arts, principally of what were seen
as the restrictions and growing irrelevance of painting. What painting was held to be
irrelevant to was the experience of the modern world. The anguished individualism of
the post-war period was being replaced by a consciousness of, and frequently an
anarchic alienation from, the new norm of the consumer society which was being rapidly
established by the post-war economic boom. The resulting artistic stance frequently
involved the re-appropriation of Dada strategies which had been occluded by decades
of struggle against Fascism, a linked commitment to Communism, and resistance to
the dominance of a Modernist mainstream focused on painting. Manzoni was one of the
younger artists interested by Fontana's work (see Vc8). In 1957 he exhibited the first of
his Achromes, monochromatic white paintings made by dipping canvas in kaolin. He also
drew Lines of varying lengths on long rolls of paper, and in 1960 exhibited containers
for Bodies of Air. His text instances the emergence of an anti-conventionalist tendency
in Italy. It was originally issued on 4 January 1960 at the Galerie Azimut, Milan, of which
he was a founder. It is reprinted in the exhibition catalogue Identite Italienne, Paris
(Centre Pompidou), 1981, p. 46, from which the present translation is made.

New conditions and problems imply different methods and standards and the
necessity of finding original solutions. One cannot leave the ground just by
running and jumping: one needs wings. Changes are not sufficient; the trans-
formations must be total.

This is why I do not understand painters who, whilst declaring themselves
receptive to contemporary problems, still stand in front of a canvas as if it were
a surface needing to be filled in with colours and forms, in a more or less
personalized and conventional style. They draw a line, step back, stare compla-
cently at their work with their head to one side, closing one eye. They approach
it once again, draw another line, apply another stroke. This exercise continues
until the canvas is covered: the painting is complete. A surface with limitless
possibilities has been reduced to a sort of receptacle in which inauthentic colours,
artificial expressions, press against each other. Why not empty the receptacle,
liberate this surface? Why not try to make the limitless sense of total space, of
a pure and absolute light, appear instead?



710 Modernization and Modernism

To suggest, to express, to represent: these are not problems today. I wrote
about this some years ago; whether or not a painting is a representation of an
object, of a fact, of an idea, or of a dynamic phenomenon, it is uniquely valuable
in itself. It does not have to say anything, it only has to be. Two matched
colours, or two tones of the same colour are already an alien element in
the concept of a single, limitless, totally dynamic surface. Infinity is strictly
monochromatic, or better still, colourless. Strictly speaking, does not a mono-
chrome, in the absence of all rapport between colours, eventually become
colourless?

The artistic problematic which has recourse to composition, to form, is
deprived of all value; in total space, form, colour and dimensions have no sense.
Here, the artist has achieved total freedom: pure matter is transformed into
pure energy. Blue on blue or white on white to compose or to express oneself;
both obstacles of space, and subjective reactions cease to exist; the entire artistic
problematic is surpassed.

This is why I cannot understand artists of today who scrupulously fix the
limits in which they place forms and colours, according to a rigorous balance.
Why worry about the position of a line in space? Why determine this space?
Why limit it? The composition of forms, their position in space, spatial depth,
are all problems that do not concern us. A line can only be drawn, however
long, to the infinite; beyond all problems of composition or of dimensions.
There are no dimensions in total space.

Furthermore, the questions concerning colour, chromatic relations (even if
this only involves nuances) are shown to be useless. We can only open out a
single colour or present a continuous and uninterrupted surface (excluding all
interference of the superfluous, all possibility of interpretation). It is not a
question of painting the contrary of everything. My intention is to present a
completely white surface (or better still, an absolutely colourless or neutral one)
beyond all pictorial phenomena, all intervention alien to the sense of the surface.
A white surface which is neither a polar landscape, nor an evocative or beautiful
subject, nor even a sensation, a symbol or anything else: but a white surface
which is nothing other than a colourless surface, or even a surface which quite
simply 'is'. Being (the total being which is pure Becoming).

This undefined surface, uniquely living, which in the material contingency of
the work cannot be infinite, can on the other hand be multiplied to the infinite,
without the solution of continuity.

This appears more clearly in the Lines; in this case, no doubt remains. The
line develops in length uniquely, to the infinite. Its only dimension is time. It
goes without saying that a line is neither a horizon nor a symbol and its value
is not linked to the fact that it is more or less beautiful, but rather to the fact
that it is a line, that it exists, like a work which counts for what it is and not
for its beauty or for what it evokes. But in this case the surface only retains
its value as a vehicle. The same is true of the Bodies of Air (pneumatic
sculptures) that one can let down or fill at leisure (from nothingness to the
infinite); they are absolutely undefined spheres, because all intervention destined
to give them a form (even formlessness) is illegitimate and illogical.



VIa Art and Modern Life 711

There is no question of forming, articulating; one cannot have recourse to
complicated, parascientific solutions, to graphic compositions, to ethnographic
fantasies, etc. Each discipline possesses in itself elements of solution. Expression,
imagination, abstraction, are they not in themselves empty inventions? There is
nothing to explain: just be, and live.



6 Pierre Restany (b. 1930) The New Realists'

The group 'Nouveau Realisme' was formed in Paris on 27 October 1960 on the basis
of a manifesto written the previous April by the critic Restany. Original members included
Yves Klein (see VIIaI), who functioned as leader of the group, Arman, Daniel Spoerri
and Jean Tinguely, Niki de Saint-Phalle, Cesar and Christo joined later. Their aim was
to overcome the so-called 'gap between art and life' by dealing directly with reality. This
'reality' was principally the world of modern consumption and the mass media. The
main areas of their practice included Action-spectacle, involving performances and
Happening-like activities; decollage, involving the manipulation of torn advertising pos-
ters; and assemblage, involving the fixing and subsequent display of items randomly
chosen from the world, such as all the items on a table at a given moment. The
manifesto was originally issued on 16 April 1960 at the Galerie Apollinaire, Milan. It is
reproduced in the catalogue identite Itaiienne (op. cit.) r p. 51, from which the present
translation is made.

It is in vain that sober academics or honest people alarmed by the acceleration
of the history of art, and the extraordinary debilitation of our modern period,
have tried to stop the sun or to suspend the advance of time by following the
opposite direction to that taken by the hands of a watch.

We are witnessing today the exhaustion and the ossification of all established
vocabularies, of all languages, of all styles. Because of this deficiency - through
exhaustion - of traditional means, individual initiatives, still scattered in Europe
and America, confront each other; but they all tend, no matter what the range
of their investigations, to define the normative bases of a new expressivity.

It is not just another formula in the medium of oil or enamel. Easel painting
(like every other type of classical means of expression in the domain of painting
or sculpture) has had its day. At the moment it lives on in the last remnants,
still sometimes sublime, of its long monopoly.

What do we propose instead? The passionate adventure of the real perceived
in itself and not through the prism of conceptual or imaginative transcription.
What is its mark? The introduction of a sociological continuation of the essential
phase of communication. Sociology comes to the assistance of consciousness and
of chance, whether this be at the level of choice or of the tearing up of posters,
f the allure of an object, of the household rubbish or the scraps of the
dining-room, of the unleashing of mechanical susceptibility, of the diffusion of
sensibility beyond the limits of its perception.

All of these initiatives (there are some, and there will be others) abolish the
excessive distance created by categorical understanding between general, objec-
tive contingency and urgent individual expression. It is sociological reality in



712 Modernization and Modernism

its entirety, the common good of all human activity, the great republic of our
social exchanges, of our commerce in society, which is called to appear. Its
artistic vocation must leave no doubt, if there are so many people who believe
in the eternal immanence of allegedly noble genres and of painting in particular.
At the stage, most essential in its urgency, of full affective expression and of
the externalization of the individual creator, and through the naturally Baroque
appearances of certain experiences, we are on the way to a new realism of pure
sensibility. There, to say the least, is one of the paths of the future. With Yves
Klein and Tinguely, Hains and Arman, Dufrene and Villegle, very diverse
beginnings are thus poised around Paris. The ferment will be rich, still unknown
in its full consequences, certainly iconoclastic (in consequence of the fault of
icons and the stupidity of their admirers).

We are thus bathed in direct expressivity up to our necks, at forty degrees
above the Dada zero, without aggressiveness, without a downright polemical
intent, without any other justificatory itch than our realism. And that works
positively. Man, if he shares in reintegrating himself in reality, identifies it with
his own transcendence, which is emotion, feeling and finally, once again, poetry.



7 Raymond Williams (1921-1988) 'The Analysis of
Culture'

Williams's intellectual origins were twofold. He embodied the characteristic left-wing
interest in popular culture rather than merely the canon of high culture. But because of
the crippling limitations on Marxist cultural theory after the years of Stalin, Williams's
methods were initially drawn more from the academic literary-critical tradition of F. R.
Leavis and the journal Scrutiny. These interests were amalgamated in two innovatory
works of the late 1950s/early 1960s: Culture and Society and The Long Revolution.
Williams's central contribution was to reorientate the concept of 'culture' away from its
specialized, even elitist connotation as an index of aesthetic quality, towards a definition
of culture as something lived, as a 'whole way of life'. The present extracts are taken
from Part 1 of Chapter Two of The Long Revolution, London, 1961, pp. 57-70.

There are three general categories in the definition of culture. There is, first,
the 'ideal', in which culture is a state or process of human perfection, in terms
of certain absolute or universal values. The analysis of culture, if such a
definition is accepted, is essentially the discovery and description, in lives and
works, of those values which can be seen to compose a timeless order, or to
have permanent reference to the universal human condition. Then, second, there
is the 'documentary', in which culture is the body of intellectual and imaginative
work, in which, in a detailed way, human thought and experience are variously
recorded. The analysis of culture, from such a definition, is the activity of
criticism, by which the nature of the thought and experience, the details of the
language, form and convention in which these are active, are described and
valued. Such criticism can range from a process very similar to the ideal'
analysis, the discovery of 'the best that has been thought and written in the



VIa Art and Modern Life 713

world', through a process which, while interested in tradition, takes as its
primary emphasis the particular work being studied (its clarification and valu-
ation being the principal end in view) to a kind of historical criticism which,
after analysis of particular works, seeks to relate them to the particular traditions
and societies in which they appeared. Finally, third, there is the 'social'
definition of culture, in which culture is a description of a particular way of
life, which expresses certain meanings and values not only in art and learning
but also in institutions and ordinary behaviour. The analysis of culture, from
such a definition, is the clarification of the meanings and values implicit and
explicit in a particular way of life, a particular culture. Such analysis will include
the historical criticism already referred to, in which intellectual and imaginative
works are analysed in relation to particular traditions and societies, but will also
include analysis of elements in the way of life that to followers of the other
definitions are not 'culture' at all: the organization of production, the structure
of the family, the structure of institutions which express or govern social
relationships, the characteristic forms through which members of the society
communicate. Again, such analysis ranges from an 'ideal' emphasis, the discovery
of certain absolute or universal, or at least higher and lower, meanings and
values, through the 'documentary' emphasis, in which clarification of a particular
way of life is the main end in view, to an emphasis which, from studying
particular meanings and values, seeks not so much to compare these, as a way
of establishing a scale, but by studying their modes of change to discover certain
general 'laws' or 'trends', by which social and cultural development as a whole
can be better understood. [. . .]

The variations of meaning and reference, in the use of culture as a term,
must be seen . . . not simply as a disadvantage, which prevents any kind of neat
and exclusive definition, but as a genuine complexity, corresponding to real
elements in experience. There is a significant reference in each of the three
main kinds of definition, and, if this is so, it is the relations between them that
should claim our attention. It seems to me that any adequate theory of culture
must include the three areas of fact to which the definitions point, and
conversely that any particular definition, within any of the categories, which
would exclude reference to the others, is inadequate. Thus an 'ideal' definition
which attempts to abstract the process it describes from its detailed embodiment
and shaping by particular societies - regarding man's ideal development as
something separate from and even opposed to his 'animal nature' or the satisfaction
of material needs - seems to me unacceptable. A 'documentary' definition which
sees value only in the written and painted records, and marks this area off from
the rest of man's life in society, is equally unacceptable. Again, a 'social'
definition, which treats either the general process or the body of art and learning
as a mere by-product, a passive reflection of the real interests of the society,
seems to me equally wrong. However difficult it may be in practice, we have
to try to see the process as a whole, and to relate our particular studies, if not
explicitly at least by ultimate reference, to the actual and complex organization.

[. . .] If we study real relations, in any actual analysis, we reach the point
where we see that we are studying a general organization in a particular example,



714 Modernization and Modernism

and in this general organization there is no element that we can abstract and
separate from the rest. It was certainly an error to suppose that values or
art-works could be adequately studied without reference to the particular society
within which they were expressed, but it is equally an error to suppose that the
social explanation is determining, or that the values and works are mere
by-products. We have got into the habit, since we realized how deeply works
or values could be determined by the whole situation in which they are
expressed, of asking about these relationships in a standard form: 'what is the
relation of this art to this society?' But 'society', in this question, is a specious
whole. If the art is part of the society, there is no solid whole, outside it, to
which, by the form of our question, we concede priority. The art is there, as
an activity, with the production, the trading, the politics, the raising of families.
To study the relations adequately we must study them actively, seeing all the
activities as particular and contemporary forms of human energy. If we take any
one of these activities, we can see how many of the others are reflected in it,
in various ways according to the nature of the whole organization. It seems
likely, also, that the very fact that we can distinguish any particular activity, as
serving certain specific ends, suggests that without this activity the whole of
the human organization at that place and time could not have been realized.
Thus art, while clearly related to the other activities, can be seen as expressing
certain elements in the organization which, within that organization's terms,
could only have been expressed in this way. It is then not a question of relating
the art to the society, but of studying all the activities and their interrelations,
without any concession of priority to any one of them we may choose to abstract.
If we find, as often, that a particular activity came radically to change the whole
organization, we can still not say that it is to this activity that all the others
must be related; we can only study the varying ways in which, within the
changing organization, the particular activities and their interrelations were
affected. Further, since the particular activities will be serving varying and
sometimes conflicting ends, the sort of change we must look for will rarely be
of a simple kind: elements of persistence, adjustment, unconscious assimilation,
active resistance, alternative effort, will all normally be present, in particular
activities and in the whole organization.

The analysis of culture, in the documentary sense, is of great importance
because it can yield specific evidence about the whole organization within which
it was expressed. We cannot say that we know a particular form or period of
society, and that we will see how its art and theory relate to it, for until we
know these, we cannot really claim to know the society. This is a problem of
method, and is mentioned here because a good deal of history has in fact been
written on the assumption that the bases of the society, its political, economic,
and 'social' arrangements, form the central core of facts, after which the art and
theory can be adduced, for marginal illustration or 'correlation'. There has been
a neat reversal of this procedure in the histories of literature, art, science, and
philosophy, when these are described as developing by their own laws, and then
something called the 'background' (what in general history was the central core)
is sketched in. Obviously it is necessary, in exposition, to select certain activities




VIa Art and Modern Life 715

for emphasis, and it is entirely reasonable to trace particular lines of development
in temporary isolation. But the history of a culture, slowly built up from such
particular work, can only be written when the active relations are restored, and
the activities seen in a genuine parity. Cultural history must be more than the
sum of the particular histories, for it is with the relations between them, the
particular forms of the whole organization, that it is especially concerned. I
would then define the theory of culture as the study of relationships between
elements in a whole way of life. The analysis of culture is the attempt to discover
the nature of the organization which is the complex of these relationships.
Analysis of particular works or institutions is, in this context, analysis of their
essential kind of organization, the relationships which works or institutions
embody as parts of the organization as a whole. A key-word, in such analysis,
is pattern: it is with the discovery of patterns of a characteristic kind that any
useful cultural analysis begins, and it is with the relationships between these
patterns, which sometimes reveal unexpected identities and correspondences in
hitherto separately considered activities, sometimes again reveal discontinuities
of an unexpected kind, that general cultural analysis is concerned.

It is only in our own time and place that we can expect to know, in any
substantial way, the general organization. We can learn a great deal of the life
of other places and times, but certain elements, it seems to me, will always be
irrecoverable. Even those that can be recovered are recovered in abstraction,
and this is of crucial importance. We learn each element as a precipitate, but
in the living experience of the time every element was in solution, an inseparable
part of a complex whole. The most difficult thing to get hold of, in studying
any past period, is this felt sense of the quality of life at a particular place and
time: a sense of the ways in which the particular activities combined into a way
i)f thinking and living. [ . . . ] Almost any formal description would be too crude
to express this nevertheless quite distinct sense of a particular and native style.
And if this is so, in a way of life we know intimately, it will surely be so when
we ourselves are in the position of the visitor, the learner, the guest from a
different generation: the position, in fact, that we are all in, when we study any
past period. Though it can be turned to trivial account, the fact of such a
characteristic is neither trivial nor marginal; it feels quite central.
; The term I would suggest to describe it is structure of feeling: it is as firm
and definite as 'structure' suggests, yet it operates in the most delicate and least
tangible parts of our activity. In one sense, this structure of feeling is the culture
f a period: it is the particular living result of all the elements in the general
organization. And it is in this respect that the arts of a period, taking these to
include characteristic approaches and tones in argument, are of major import-
ance. For here, if anywhere, this characteristic is likely to be expressed; often
n ot consciously, but by the fact that here, in the only examples we have of
recorded communication that outlives its bearers, the actual living sense, the
<kep community that makes the communication possible, is naturally drawn
Upon. I do not mean that the structure of feeling, any more than the social
character, is possessed in the same way by the many individuals in the
community. But I think it is a very deep and very wide possession, in all actual



716 Modernization and Modernism

communities, precisely because it is on it that communication depends. And
what is particularly interesting is that it does not seem to be, in any formal
sense, learned. One generation may train its successor, with reasonable success,
in the social character or the general cultural pattern, but the new generation
will have its own structure of feeling, which will not appear to have come 'from'
anywhere. For here, most distinctly, the changing organization is enacted in the
organism: the new generation responds in its own ways to the unique world it
is inheriting, taking up many continuities, that can be traced, and reproducing
many aspects of the organization, which can be separately described, yet feeling
its whole life in certain ways differently, and shaping its creative response into
a new structure of feeling.

Once the carriers of such a structure die, the nearest we can get to this vital
element is in the documentary culture, from poems to buildings and dress-
fashions, and it is this relation that gives significance to the definition of culture
in documentary terms. This in no way means that the documents are autono-
mous. It is simply that, as previously argued, the significance of an activity
must be sought in terms of the whole organization, which is more than the sum
of its separable parts. What we are looking for, always, is the actual life that
the whole organization is there to express. The significance of documentary
culture is that, more clearly than anything else, it expresses that life to us in
direct terms, when the living witnesses are silent. At the same time, if we reflect
on the nature of a structure of feeling, and see how it can fail to be fully
understood even by living people in close contact with it, with ample material
at their disposal, including the contemporary arts, we shall not suppose that
we can ever do more than make an approach, an approximation, using any
channels.

We need to distinguish three levels of culture, even in its most general
definition. There is the lived culture of a particular time and place, only fully
accessible to those living in that time and place. There is the recorded culture,
of every kind, from art to the most everyday facts: the culture of a period.
There is also, as the factor connecting lived culture and period cultures, the
culture of the selective tradition. [ . . . ]

It is very important to try to understand the operation of a selective tradition.
[ . . . ] In a society as a whole, and in all its particular activities, the cultural
tradition can be seen as a continual selection and re-selection of ancestors.
Particular lines will be drawn, often for as long as a century, and then suddenly
with some new stage in growth these will be cancelled or weakened, and new
lines drawn. In the analysis of contemporary culture, the existing state of the
selective tradition is of vital importance, for it is often true that some change
in this tradition - establishing new lines with the past, breaking or re-drawing
existing lines - is a radical kind of contemporary change. We tend to under-
estimate the extent to which the cultural tradition is not only a selection but
also an interpretation. We see most past work through our own experience,
without even making the effort to see it in something like its original terms.
What analysis can do is not so much to reverse this, returning a work to its
period, as to make the interpretation conscious, by showing historical alternat-



VIa Art and Modern Life 717

ives; to relate the interpretation to the particular contemporary values on which
it rests; and, by exploring the real patterns of the work, confront us with the
real nature of the choices we are making. We shall find, in some cases, that we
are keeping the work alive because it is a genuine contribution to cultural
growth. We shall find, in other cases, that we are using the work in a particular
way for our own reasons, and it is better to know this than to surrender to the
mysticism of the 'great valuer, Time'. To put on to Time, the abstraction, the
responsibility for our own active choices is to suppress a central part of our
experience. The more actively all cultural work can be related, either to the
whole organization within which it was expressed, or to the contemporary
organization within which it is used, the more clearly shall we see its true values.
Thus 'documentary' analysis will lead out to 'social' analysis, whether in a lived
culture, a past period, or in the selective tradition which is itself a social
organization. And the discovery of permanent contributions will lead to the
same kind of general analysis, if we accept the process at this level, not as
human perfection (a movement towards determined values), but as a part of
man's general evolution, to which many individuals and groups contribute. Every
element that we analyse will be in this sense active: that it will be seen in certain
real relations, at many different levels. In describing these relations, the real
cultural process will emerge.



8 John Cage (1912-1992) 'On Robert Rauschenberg,
Artist, and his Work'

Cage had met the dancer and choreographer Merce Cunningham before the Second
World War. Shortly after, they formed their own dance company. Together they worked
at the experimental Black Mountain College summer school in North Carolina in 1948,
1952 and 1953. There they came into contact with Robert Rauschenberg who by 1952
functioned as de facto artist in residence to the school. Rauschenberg became artistic
adviser to the dance company in 1954. Jasper Johns met Rauschenberg, and through
him Cage and Cunningham, also in 1954, in New York. This loose grouping came to
constitute a significant departure in the New York avant-garde from the then dominant
Abstract Expressionism. Instead of a hermetic art, Rauschenberg in particular aspired
to re-introduce fragments from the outside world into his 'Combine Paintings'. The
present essay was originally published in Metro, Milan, May 1961. It is reprinted in John
Cage, S/7ence, Cambridge, Mass., 1969, pp. 98-107, from which the present extracts
are taken. (Passages in italics are quotations from Rauschenberg.)

Beauty is now underfoot wherever we take the trouble to look. (This is an
American discovery.) Is when Rauschenberg looks an idea? Rather it is an
entertainment in which to celebrate unfixity. f. . .]

As the paintings changed the printed material became as much of a subject as the
paint (I began using newsprint in my work) causing changes of focus: A third palette.
There is no poor subject (Any incentive to paint is as good as any other.). Dante
is an incentive, providing multiplicity, as useful as a chicken or an old shirt.
The atmosphere is such that everything is seen clearly, even in the dark night



718 Modernization and Modernism

or when thumbing through an out-of-date newspaper or poem. This subject is
unavoidable (A canvas is never empty.); it fills an empty canvas. And if, to
continue history, newspapers are pasted onto the canvas and on one another
and black paints are applied, the subject looms up in several different places at
once like magic to produce the painting. If you don't see it, you probably need
a pair of glasses. But there is a vast difference between one oculist and another,
and when it is a question of losing eyesight the best thing to do is to go to the
best oculist (i.e., the best painter: he'll fix you up). Ideas are not necessary. It
is more useful to avoid having one, certainly avoid having several (leads to
inactivity). [. . .]

There are three panels taller than they are wide fixed together to make a
single rectangle wider than it is tall. Across the whole thing is a series of colored
photos, some wider than tall, some taller than wide, fragments of posters, some
of them obscured by paint. Underneath these, cutting the total in half, is a
series of rectangular color swatches, all taller than wide. Above, bridging two
of the panels, is a dark blue rectangle. Below and slightly out of line with the
blue one, since it is on one panel only, is a gray rectangle with a drawing on
it about halfway up. There are other things, but mostly attached to these two
'roads' which cross: off to the left and below the swatches is a drawing on a
rectangle on a rectangle on a rectangle (its situation is that of a farm on the
outskirts of a mainstreet town). This is not a composition. It is a place where
things are, as on a table or on a town seen from the air: any one of them could
be removed and another come into its place through circumstances analogous
to birth and death, travel, housecleaning, or cluttering. He is not saying; he is
painting. (What is Rauschenberg saying?) The message is conveyed by dirt
which, mixed with an adhesive, sticks to itself and to the canvas upon which
he places it. Crumbling and responding to changes in weather, the dirt unceas-
ingly does my thinking. He regrets we do not see the paint while it's dripping.

Rauschenberg is continually being offered scraps of this and that, odds and
ends his friends run across, since it strikes them: This is something he could
use in a painting. Nine times out of ten it turns out he has no use for it. Say
it's something close to something he once found useful, and so could be recognized
as his. Well, then, as a matter of course, his poetry has moved without one's
knowing where it's gone to. He changes what goes on, on a canvas, but he does
not change how canvas is used for paintings - that is, stretched flat to make
rectangular surfaces which may be hung on a wall. These he uses singly, joined
together, or placed in a symmetry so obvious as not to attract interest (nothing
special). We know two ways to unfocus attention: symmetry is one of them; the
other is the over-all where each small part is a sample of what you find elsewhere.
In either case, there is at least the possibility of looking anywhere, not just
where someone arranged you should. You are then free to deal with your
freedom just as the artist dealt with his, not in the same way but, nevertheless,
originally. This thing, he says, duplication of images, that is symmetry. All it
means is that, looking closely, we see as it was everything is in chaos still.

To change the subject: 'Art is the imitation of nature in her manner of
operation.' Or a net. [. . .]



via Art and Modern Life 719

[. . .] Now that Rauschenberg has made a painting with radios in it, does
that mean that even without radios, I must go on listening even while I'm
looking, everything at once, in order not to be run over?

Would we have preferred a pig with an apple in its mouth? That too, on
occasion, is a message and requires a blessing. These are the feelings Rauschen-
berg gives us: love, wonder, laughter, heroism (I accept), fear, sorrow, anger,
disgust, tranquillity.

There is no more subject in a combine than there is in a page from a newspaper.
Each thing that is there is a subject. It is a situation involving multiplicity. (It
is no reflection on the weather that such-and-such a government sent a note to
another.) (And the three radios of the radio combine, turned on, which provides
the subject?) Say there was a message. How would it be received? And what if
it wasn't? Over and over again I've found it impossible to memorize Rauschen-
berg's paintings. I keep asking, 'Have you changed it?' And then noticing while
I'm looking it changes. I look out the window and see the icicles. There,
dripping water is frozen into object. The icicles all go down. Winter more than
the others is the season of quiescence. There is no dripping when the paint is
squeezed from a tube. But there is the same acceptance of what happens and
no tendency towards gesture or arrangement. This changes the notion of what
is beautiful. By fixing papers to canvas and then painting with black paint, black
became infinite and previously unnoticed. [ . . . ]

There is in Rauschenberg, between him and what he picks up to use, the quality
of encounter. For the first time. If, as happens, there is a series of paintings
containing such and such a material, it is as though the encounter was extended
into a visit on the part of the stranger (who is divine). (In this way societies
uninformed by artists coagulate their experiences into modes of communication in
order to make mistakes.) Shortly the stranger leaves, leaving the door open.

Having made the empty canvases (A canvas is never empty.), Rauschenberg
became the giver of gifts. Gifts, unexpected and unnecessary, are ways of saying
Yes to how it is, a holiday. The gifts he gives are not picked up in distant
lands but are things we already have (with exceptions, of course: I needed a
goat and the other stuffed birds, since I don't have any, and I needed an attic
in order to go through the family things [since we moved away, the relatives
write to say: Do you still want them?]), and so we are converted to the enjoyment
of our possessions. Converted from what? From wanting what we don't have,
art as pained struggle. Setting out one day for a birthday party, I noticed the
streets were full of presents. Were he saying something in particular, he would
have to focus the painting; as it is he simply focuses himself, and everything,
a pair of socks, is appropriate, appropriate to poetry, a poetry of infinite
possibilities. [ . . . ] The technique consists in having a plan: Lay out stretcher on
floor match markings and join. Three stretchers with the canvas on them no
doubt already stretched. Fulfilling this plan put the canvas in direct contact
with the floor, the ground thereby activated. This is pure conjecture on my
part but would work. More important is to know exactly the size of the door
and techniques for getting a canvas out of the studio. (Combines don't roll up.)
Anything beyond that size must be suitably segmented. [ . . .]




720 Modernization and Modernism

The message changes in the combine-drawings, made with pencil, water color,
and photographic transfer: (a) the work is done on a table, not on a wall; (b)
there is no oil paint; (c) because of a + b, no dripping holds the surface in one
plane; (d) there is not always the joining of rectangles since when there is, it
acts as reminiscence of stretchers; (e) the outlines appear vague as in water or
air (our feet are off the ground); (0 I imagine being upside down; (g) the pencil
lines scan the images transferred from photographs; (h) it seems like many
television sets working simultaneously all tuned differently. How to respond to
this message? (And I remember the one in Dante with the outline of the toes
of his foot above, the changed position and another message, the paper absorbing
the color and spreading it through its wet tissues.) He has removed the why of
asking why and you can read it at home or in a library. (These others are poems
too.) Perhaps because of the change in gravity {Monument 1958), the project
arose of illustrating a book. (A book can be read at a table; did it fall on the
floor?) As for me, I'm not so inclined to read poetry as I am one way or another
to get myself a television set, sitting up nights looking.

Perhaps after all there is no message. In that case one is saved the trouble of
having to reply. As the lady said, 'Well, if it isn't art, then I like it.' Some (a)
were made to hang on a wall, others (b) to be in a room, still others (a + b).
By now we must have gotten the message. It couldn't have been more explicit.
Do you understand this idea? Painting relates to both art and life. Neither can be
made. (I try to act in that gap between the two.) The nothingness in between is
where for no reason at all every practical thing that one actually takes the time
to do so stirs up the dregs that they're no longer sitting as we thought on the
bottom. All you need do is stretch canvas, make markings, and join. You have
then turned on the switch that distinguishes man, his ability to change his mind:
If you do not change your mind about something when you confront a picture you
have not seen before, you are either a stubborn fool or the painting is not very good.
Is there any need before we go to bed to recite the history of the changes and
will we in that bed be murdered? And how will our dreams, if we manage to
go to sleep, suggest the next practical step? Which would you say it was: wild,
or elegant, and why? Now as I come to the end of my rope, I noticed the color
is incredibly beautiful. And that embossed box.

/ am trying to check my habits of seeing, to counter them for the sake of greater
freshness. I am trying to be unfamiliar with what I'm doing.

[ . . . ] Where does beauty begin and where does it end? Where it ends is
where the artist begins. In this way we get our navigation done for us. If you
hear that Rauschenberg has painted a new painting, the wisest thing to do is
to drop everything and manage one way or another to see it. That's how to
learn the way to use your eyes, sunup the next day. If I were teaching, would
I say Caution Watch Your Step or Throw yourself in where the fish are thickest?
Of course, there are objects. Who said there weren't? The thing is, we get the
point more quickly when we realize it is we looking rather than that we may
not be seeing it. (Why do all the people who are not artists seem to be more
intelligent?) And object is fact, not symbol. If any thinking is going to take
place, it has to come out from inside the Mason jar which is suspended in



VIa Art and Modern Life 721

Talisman, or from the center of the rose (is it red?) or the eyes of the pitcher
(looks like something out of a movie) or - the farther one goes in this direction
the more one sees nothing is in the foreground: each minute point is at the
center. Did this happen by means of rectangles (the picture is 'cut' through the
middle)? Or would it happen given this point of view? Not ideas but facts.



9 Jasper Johns (b. 1930) Interview with David
Sylvester

Johns launched his career in art in 1954 with the painting Flag, having destroyed as
much of his previous work as it was possible for him to trace. In addition to extending
the series of Flags, in the later 1950s he painted Targets and Numbers, and some
works including casts of fragments of the human body. Johns' output, and particularly
his early work, has often been interpreted as a sustained meditation on meaning, its
construction and its elusiveness. Thus interpreted, his work presents a marked contrast
to the American avant-garde's then dominant preoccupation with self-expression. How-
ever, recent research has tended to imply that a complex range of self-reference is
encoded into even these apparently impenetrable and enigmatic works. The present
interview was recorded by the BBC in the spring of 1965, and was broadcast on 10
October 1965. It was printed in the exhibition catalogue Jasper Johns: Drawings,
London, Arts Council of Great Britain, 1974, from which the present extracts are taken.

DS: What was it first made you use things such as flags, targets, maps, numbers
and letters and so on as starting-points?

JJ: They seemed to me pre-formed, conventional, depersonalized, factual,
exterior elements.

DS: And what was the attraction of depersonalized elements?

JJ: I'm interested in things which suggest the world rather than suggest the
personality. I'm interested in things which suggest things which are, rather
than in judgments. The most conventional thing, the most ordinary thing -
it seems to me that those things can be dealt with without having to judge
them; they seem to me to exist as clear facts, not involving aesthetic hierarchy.
[. . .] But one also thinks of things as having a certain quality, and in time
these qualities change. The Flag, for instance, one thinks it has forty-eight
stars and suddenly it has fifty stars; it is no longer of any great interest. The
Coke bottle, which seemed like a most ordinary untransformable object in
our society, suddenly some years ago appeared quart-sized: the small bottle
had been enlarged to make a very large bottle which looked most peculiar
except the top of the bottle remained the same size - they used the same cap
on it. The flashlight: I had a particular idea in my mind what a flashlight
looked like - I hadn't really handled a flashlight, since, I guess, I was a child
- and I had this image of a flashlight in my head and I wanted to go and
buy one as a model. I looked for a week for what I thought looked like an
ordinary flashlight, and I found all kinds of flashlights with red plastic shields,



722 Modernization and Modernism



wings on the sides, all kinds of things, and I finally found one that I wanted.
And it made me very suspect of my idea, because it was so difficult to find
this thing I had thought was so common. And about that old ale can which
I thought was very standard and unchanging, not very long ago they changed
the design of that,

DS: So the flashlight you wanted was an ideal flashlight, without particular
excrescences, a kind of universal flashlight, and in reality it was peculiarly
elusive.

JJ: Yes, it turns out that actually the choice is quite personal and is not really
based on one's observations at all. [. . .]

DS: Obviously each new move is determined by what is already on the canvas;
what else is it determined by?

JJ: By what is not on the canvas.

DS: But there is a great number of possibilities of what might go on the canvas.

JJ: That is true, but one's thinking, just the process of thinking, excludes many
possibilities. And the process of looking excludes many possibilities, because
from moment to moment as we look we see what we see, at another moment
in looking we might see differently. At any one moment one can't see all the
possibilities. And one proceeds as one proceeds, one does something and then
one does something else.

DS: But the marks you make are not made automatically?

JJ: But how are they made?

DS: That is what I would like to know. Are you conscious of the different
ways in which you are making them?

JJ: At times, yes. At times I am conscious of making a mark with some
directional idea which I've got from the painting. Sometimes I am conscious
of making a mark to alter what seems to me the primary concern of the
painting, to force it to be different, to strengthen, to weaken, in purely
academic terms. At times I will attempt to do something which seems quite
uncalled-for in the painting, so that the work won't proceed so logically from
where it is, but will go somewhere else. At a certain moment, a configuration
of marks on the canvas may suggest one type of organization or one type of
academic idea or one type of emotional idea or whatever. And at that moment
one may decide to do two things - to strengthen it, by proceeding to do
everything you can do to reinforce it, or to deny it, by introducing an element
which is not called for in that situation, and then to proceed from there
towards a greater complexity.

DS: So you are aware that the painting has taken on a certain dominant
emotional idea?

JJ: Emotional or visual or technical - one's awareness can be focussed on any
kind of idea. I guess it's an idea: it is a suggestion.

DS: You are conscious that the painting might have a certain mood?

JJ: Certainly.

DS: Is it often a mood that you intended it to have in the first place or one
that has simply evolved?

})\ I think in my paintings it has evolved, because I'm not interested in any



VIA Art and Modern Life 723

particular mood. Mentally my preference would be the mood of keeping your
eyes open and looking, without any focussing, without any constricted view-
point. I think paintings by the time they are finished tend to take on a
particular characteristic. That is one of the reasons they are finished, because
everything has gone in that direction, and there is no recovery. The energy,
the logic, everything which you do takes a form in working; the energy tends
to run out, the form tends to be accomplished or finalized. Then either it is
what one intended (or what one is willing to settle for) or one has been
involved in a process which has gone in a way that perhaps one did not
intend, but has been done so thoroughly that there is no recovery from that
situation. You have to leave that situation as itself, and then proceed with
something else, begin again, begin a new work.

* * *

DS: You were saying before that you wanted to make something that somebody
might find it interesting to look at. But what you are making is not simply
an aesthetic object.

JJ: Did I say that?

DS: I think so, though you weren't sure of it.

JJ: If I said it, I would like now to deny it and say something else. I think
when one is working, generally, one is not concerned with that sort of result.
One goes about one's business and does what one has to do and one's energy
runs out. And one isn't looking throughout, but then one looks at it as an
object. It's no longer part of one's life process. At that moment, none of us
being purely anything, you become involved with looking, judging, etc. I
don't think it's a purposeful thing to make something to be looked at, but I
think the perception of the object is through looking and through thinking.
And I think any meaning we give to it comes through our looking at it.

DS: By the object you mean the work of art?

JJ: Yes, yes.

DS: But what of the objects you begin with?

JJ: The empty canvas?

DS: No. Not only the empty canvas; well, the motif, if you like, such as the
letters, the Flag and so on, or whatever it may be.

JJ: I think it's just a way of beginning.

DS: In other words the painting is not about the elements with which you
have begun.

JJ: No more than it is about the elements which enter it at any moment. Say,
the painting of a flag is always about a flag, but it is no more about a flag
than it is about a brush-stroke or about a colour or about the physicality of
the paint, I think.

DS: Which is why you might as well use again and again such things as
numbers or letters as the elements with which to begin, because the painting
is not about those elements.

JJ: It is about them, but it is not only about them.

DS: But the process which is recorded as it were in the finished object, this
process has an analogy to certain processes outside painting?



724 Modernization and Modernism



JJ: You said it.

DS: I'm asking you.

JJ: Well, it has this analogy: you do one thing and then you do another thing.
If you mean that it pictures your idea of a process that is elsewhere I think
that's more questionable. I think that at times one has the idea that that is
true, and I think at times one has the idea that that is not true. Whatever
idea one has, it's always susceptible to doubt, and to the possibility that
something else has been or might be introduced to that arrangement which
would alter it. What I think this means is, that, say in a painting, the processes
involved in the painting are of greater certainty and of, I believe, greater
meaning, than the referential aspects of the painting. I think the processes
involved in the painting in themselves mean as much or more than any
reference value that the painting has.

DS: And what would their meaning be?

JJ: Visual, intellectual activity, perhaps: 'recreation'.

DS: But, for example, I don't, in looking at your painting, have the sense that
I can pin down references, but I feel there are references there, and that these
are what give the paintings their intensity, and their sense that something
important is happening or has happened. Is it possible that what has happened
in the painting can be analogous to certain processes outside painting, for
example, on the one hand, psychological processes, such as concentrating
either one's vision or one's mind on something, attention wandering, return-
ing, the process of clarifying, of losing, of remembering or of recalling, of
clarifying again, or that again there might be an analogy to certain processes
in nature, such as the process of disintegration and re-integration, the idea
of something falling apart, the idea of something being held together?

JJ: I think it is quite possible that the painting can suggest those things. I
think as a painter one cannot proceed to suggest those things, that, when you
begin to work with the idea of suggesting, say, a particular psychological state
of affairs, you have eliminated so much from the process of painting that you
make an artificial statement which is, I think, not desirable. I think one has
to work with everything and accept the kind of statement which results as
unavoidable, or as a helpless situation. I think that most art which begins to
make a statement fails to make a statement because the methods used are too
schematic or too artificial. I think that one wants from painting a sense of
life. The final suggestion, the final statement, has to be not a deliberate
statement but a helpless statement. It has to be what you can't avoid saying,
not what you set out to say. I think one ought to use everything one can
use, all of the energy should be wasted in painting it, so that one hasn't the
reserve of energy which is able to use this thing. One shouldn't really know
what to do with it, because it should match what one is already; it shouldn't
just be something one likes. [ . . . ]

DS: Apart from any particular suggestion that the paint may make, are you
conscious of the total texture of the paint's having a total general reference
to something else? To be specific, do you feel that paint is in some way the
embodiment of the quality of your sensations? What is the relation between



VIa Art and Modern Life 725

what is in a painting and what you see when you look about you?

jj: The relation is that there is always something to see and anywhere one
looks one sees something.

DS: What is the difference between seeing when you look about you and seeing
when you look at a painting?

jj: At its best there is no difference.

DS: So that the painting is then in some way a crystallization or a trapping of
the sensation you have when you look about you?

jj: Perhaps, but I wouldn't want to push that idea. I think one likes to think
there is no difference between the experience of looking at a work of art and
looking at not a work of art. There probably is some difference, but I don't
know what it is. In the work of art there is probably a more directed sense
of seeing, but that is questionable too, because one can face a work and not
have that sense.

DS: Of course the way a painting exists is nothing like the way reality exists,
so what you are really trying to do is to invest the canvas and the paint with
a life that does make the sensation of looking at it resemble the sensation of
looking at reality. Is that what you are saying?

JJ: Well, that has perhaps been said, but I wouldn't like to exaggerate that
idea, that the painting is a language which is separated from one's general
experience. I think it is in part, but I don't think that it should be made too
strong an idea.

DS: But the paint is more than the result of your making certain marks and
arriving at an order which sometimes satisfies you?

JJ: What is it the result of, if it is not that?

DS: Well it is that. But is that all it is?

JJ: Well all it is is whatever you are willing to say - all it is is whatever you
say it is; however you can use it, that's what it is. I think the experience of
looking at painting involves putting the paint to use, taking the painting as
something which exists. Then, what one sees one tends to suppose was
intended by the artist. I don't know that that is so. I think one works and
makes what one makes and then one looks at it and sees what one sees. And
I think that the picture isn't pre-formed, I think it is formed as it is made;
and might be anything. I think it resembles life, in that in any, say, ten-year
period in one's life, anything one may intend might be something quite
different by the time the time is up - that one may not do what one had in
mind, and certainly one would do much more than one had in mind. But,
once one has spent that time, then one can make some statement about it;
but that is a different experience from the experience of spending the time.
And I think the experience of looking at a painting is different from the
experience of planning a painting or of painting a painting. And I think the
statements one makes about finished work are different from the statements
one can make about the experience of making it.

DS: Again and again you return to the way in which something is posed and
then contradicted or departed from, so that you are constantly interested in
the way in which intention and improvisation work together. In other words,



726 Modernization and Modernism

it seems to me your constant pre-occupation is the interplay between affir-
mation and denial, expectation and fulfilment, the degree in which things
happen as one would expect and the degree in which things happen as one
would not expect.

JJ: Well, intention involves such a small fragment of our consciousness and of
our mind and of our life. I think a painting should include more experience
than simply intended statement. I personally would like to keep the painting
in a state of 'shunning statement', so that one is left with the fact that one
can experience individually as one pleases; that is, not to focus the attention
in one way, but to leave the situation as a kind of actual thing, so that the
experience of it is variable.

DS: In other words, if your painting says something that could be pinned down,
what it says is that nothing can be pinned down, that nothing is pure, that
nothing is simple.

JJ: I don't like saying that it says that. I would like it to be that.



10 Richard Hamilton (b. 1922) Tor the Finest Art,
Try Pop'

Hamilton had been involved with the Independent Group at the Institute of Contemporary
Arts, London, since the early 1950s. He designed and organized the exhibition 'Man,
Machine and Motion' shown in 1955, a pictorial review of machines expanding human
capacities for movement. In 1956 he collaborated with other members of the Inde-
pendent Group on a contribution to the exhibition This Is Tomorrow' held at the
Whitechapel Art Gallery, London. The exhibition aimed to demonstrate the possibilities
of integrating different art forms and consisted of twelve environments, each produced
by the collaboration of a painter, a sculptor and an architect. Hamilton's contribution
prominently featured publicity material from the mass media. From 1956 onwards, he
began to produce paintings, collages and objects drawing on the artefacts of contem-
porary consumer society. This range of work was accompanied by writing addressing
the same characteristic concerns. The present text originally appeared in Gazette, no.
1, London, 1961. Reprinted in Richard Hamilton, Collected Words 1953-1982, London,
1982.

In much the way that the invention of photography cut away for itself a chunk
of art's prerogative - the pictorial recording of visual facts - trimming the scope
of messages which Fine Art felt to lie within its true competence, so has popular
culture abstracted from Fine Art its role of mythmaker. The restriction of his
area of relevance has been confirmed by the artist with smug enthusiasm so
that decoration, one of art's few remaining functions, has assumed a ridiculously
inflated importance.

It isn't surprising, therefore, to find that some painters are now agog at the
ability of the mass entertainment machine to project, perhaps more pervasively
than has ever before been possible, the classic themes of artistic vision and to
express them in a poetic language which marks them with a precise cultural
date-stamp.




via Art and Modern Life 727

It is the Playboy 'Playmate of the month' pull-out pin-up which provides us
^ith the closest contemporary equivalent of the odalisque in painting. Auto-
mobile body stylists have absorbed the symbolism of the space age more
successfully than any artist. Social comment is left to TV and comic strip. Epic
has become synonymous with a certain kind of film and the heroic archetype
is now buried deep in movie lore. If the artist is not to lose much of his ancient
purpose he may have to plunder the popular arts to recover the imagery which
is his rightful inheritance.

Two art movements of the early part of this century insisted on their
commitment to manifest the image of a society in flux: Dada, which denied the
then current social attitudes and pressed its own negative propositions, and
Futurism with its positive assertion of involvement. Both were fiercely, aggress-
ively propagandist. Both were rebellious, or at least radical, movements. Dada
anarchically seditious and Futurism admitting to a core of authoritarian dogma
- each was vigorous and historically apposite.

A new generation of Dadaists has emerged today, as violent and ingenious as
their forebears, but Son of Dada is accepted, lionized by public and dealers,
certified by state museums - the act of mythmaking has been transferred from
the subject-matter of the work to the artist himself as the content of his art.

Futurism has ebbed and has no successor, yet to me the philosophy of
affirmation seems susceptible to fruition. The long tradition of bohemianism
which the Futurists made their bid to defeat is anachronic in the atmosphere
of conspicuous consumption generated by the art rackets.

Affirmation propounded as an avant-garde aesthetic is rare. The history of
art is that of a long series of attacks upon social and aesthetic values held to
be dead and moribund, although the avant-garde position is frequently nostalgic
and absolute. The Pop-Fine-Art standpoint, on the other hand - the expression
of popular culture in fine art terms - is, like Futurism, fundamentally a
statement of belief in the changing values of society. Pop-Fine-Art is a profes-
sion of approbation of mass culture, therefore also antiartistic. It is positive
Dada, creative where Dada was destructive. Perhaps it is Mama - a cross-fer-
tilization of Futurism and Dada which upholds a respect for the culture of the
masses and a conviction that the artist in twentieth century urban life is
inevitably a consumer of mass culture and potentially a contributor to it.



11 Claes Oldenburg (b. 1929) 'I Am for an Art . . .'

In New York in the late 1950s Oldenburg came into contact with the generation of
younger artists reacting against Abstract Expressionism, and participated in various
Happenings and other manifestations centred on the Judson Gallery. In 1960-1 he
planned and executed the complex environmental work The Store'. This utilized com-
monly available commercial products and advertising imagery, its components being
largely constructed from burlap, cardboard and plaster. It had its origins in objects and
reliefs based on everyday items such as food and advertisements. The first version of
the present text was initially composed for the catalogue of the exhibition 'Environments,



728 Modernization and Modernism

Situations and Spaces' at the Martha Jackson Gallery, May-June 1961. The text was
revised when Oldenburg opened The Store in his studio on East Second Street in
December 1961. It was republished in the exhibition catalogue Oldenburg, Arts Council
of Great Britain, London, 1970, from which the present text is taken.

I am for an art that is political-erotical-mystical, that does something other
than sit on its ass in a museum.

I am for an art that grows up not knowing it is art at all, an art given the
chance of having a starting point of zero.

I am for an art that embroils itself with the everyday crap & still comes out
on top.

I am for an art that imitates the human, that is comic, if necessary, or violent,
or whatever is necessary.

I am for an art that takes its form from the lines of life itself, that twists and
extends and accumulates and spits and drips, and is heavy and coarse and blunt
and sweet and stupid as life itself.

I am for an artist who vanishes, turning up in a white cap painting signs or
hallways.

I am for art that comes out of a chimney like black hair and scatters in the
sky.

I am for art that spills out of an old man's purse when he is bounced off a
passing fender.

I am for the art out of a doggy's mouth, falling five stories from the roof.

I am for the art that a kid licks, after peeling away the wrapper.

I am for an art that joggles like everyones knees, when the bus traverses an
excavation.

I am for art that is smoked, like a cigarette, smells, like a pair of shoes.

I am for art that flaps like a flag, or helps blow noses, like a handkerchief.

I am for art that is put on and taken off, like pants, which develops holes,
like socks, which is eaten, like a piece of pie, or abandoned with great contempt,
like a piece of shit.

I am for art covered with bandages, I am for art that limps and rolls and
runs and jumps. I am for art that comes in a can or washes up on the shore,

I am for art that coils and grunts like a wrestler. I am for art that sheds hair.

I am for art you can sit on. I am for art you can pick your nose with or stub
your toes on.

I am for art from a pocket, from deep channels of the ear, from the edge of
a knife, from the corners of the mouth, stuck in the eye or worn on the wrist.

I am for art under the skirts, and the art of pinching cockroaches.

I am for the art of conversation between the sidewalk and a blind mans metal
stick.

I am for the art that grows in a pot, that comes down out of the skies at
night, like lightning, that hides in the clouds and growls. I am for art that is
flipped on and off with a switch.



via Art and Modern Life 729

I am for art that unfolds like a map, that you can squeeze, like your sweetys
arm, or kiss, like a pet dog. Which expands and squeaks, like an accordion,
which you can spill your dinner on, like an old tablecloth.

I am for an art that you can hammer with, stitch with, sew with, paste with,
file with.

I am for an art that tells you the time of day, or where such and such a
street is.

I am for an art that helps old ladies across the street.

I am for the art of the washing machine. I am for the art of a government
check. I am for the art of last wars raincoat.

I am for the art that comes up in fogs from sewer-holes in winter. I am for
the art that splits when you step on a frozen puddle. I am for the worms art
inside the apple. I am for the art of sweat that develops between crossed legs.

I am for the art of neck-hair and caked tea-cups, for the art between the tines
of restaurant forks, for the odor of boiling dishwater.

I am for the art of sailing on Sunday, and the art of red and white gasoline pumps.

I am for the art of bright blue factory columns and blinking biscuit signs.

I am for the art of cheap plaster and enamel. I am for the art of worn marble
and smashed slate. I am for the art of rolling cobblestones and sliding sand. I
am for the art of slag and black coal. I am for the art of dead birds.

I am for the art of scratchings in the asphalt, daubing at the walls. I am for
the art of bending and kicking metal and breaking glass, and pulling at things
to make them fall down.

I am for the art of punching and skinned knees and sat-on bananas. I am for
the art of kids' smells. I am for the art of mama-babble.

I am for the art of bar-babble, tooth-picking, beerdrinking, egg-salting,
in-suiting. I am for the art of falling off a barstool.

I am for the art of underwear and the art of taxicabs. I am for the art of
ice-cream cones dropped on concrete. I am for the majestic art of dog-turds,
rising like cathedrals.

I am for the blinking arts, lighting up the night. I am for art falling, splashing,
wiggling, jumping, going on and off.

I am for the art of fat truck-tires and black eyes.

I am for Kool-art, 7-UP art, Pepsi-art, Sunshine art, 39 cents art, 15 cents
art, Vatronol art, Dro-bomb art, Vam art, Menthol art, L & M art, Ex-lax art,
Venida art, Heaven Hill art, Pamryl art, San-o-med art, Rx art, 9.99 art, Now
art, New art, How art, Fire sale art, Last Chance art, Only art, Diamond art,
Tomorrow art, Franks art, Ducks art, Meat-o-rama art.

I am for the art of bread wet by rain. I am for the rat's dance between floors.

I am for the art of flies walking on a slick pear in the electric light. I am for
the art of soggy onions and firm green shoots. I am for the art of clicking
among the nuts when the roaches come and go. I am for the brown sad art of
rotting apples.

I am for the art of meowls and clatter of cats and for the art of their dumb
electric eyes.



730 Modernization and Modernism

I am for the white art of refrigerators and their muscular openings and
closings.

I am for the art of rust and mold. I am for the art of hearts, funeral hearts
or sweetheart hearts, full of nougat. I am for the art of worn meathooks and
singing barrels of red, white, blue and yellow meat.

I am for the art of things lost or thrown away, coming home from school. I
am for the art of cock-and-ball trees and flying cows and the noise of rectangles
and squares. I am for the art of crayons and weak grey pencil-lead, and grainy
wash and sticky oil paint, and the art of windshield wipers and the art of the
finger on a cold window, on dusty steel or in the bubbles on the sides of a
bathtub.

I am for the art of teddy-bears and guns and decapitated rabbits, exploded
umbrellas, raped beds, chairs with their brown bones broken, burning trees,
firecracker ends, chicken bones, pigeon bones and boxes with men sleeping in
them.

I am for the art of slightly rotten funeral flowers, hung bloody rabbits and
wrinkly yellow chickens, bass drums & tambourines, and plastic phonographs.

I am for the art of abandoned boxes, tied like pharaohs. I am for an art of
watertanks and speeding clouds and flapping shades.

I am for U.S. Government Inspected Art, Grade A art, Regular Price art,
Yellow Ripe art, Extra Fancy art, Ready-to-eat art, Best-for-less art, Ready-to-
cook art, Fully cleaned art, Spend Less art, Eat Better art, Ham art, pork art,
chicken art, tomato art, banana art, apple art, turkey art, cake art, cookie art.

add:

I am for an art that is combed down, that is hung from each ear, that is laid
on the lips and under the eyes, that is shaved from the legs, that is brushed
on the teeth, that is fixed on the thighs, that is slipped on the foot.

square which becomes blobby



12 Andy Warhol (1930-1987) Interview with Gene
Swenson

Born in Pittsburg, Warhol had moved to New York in 1949. For most of the 1950s he
was a successful graphic designer, particularly in the field of shoe illustration. In the
later 1950s he began to exhibit his own drawings, and in 1960 produced his first
canvases depicting comic strip characters. The canonical repeated Soup Cans, Disas-
ters, Elvises and Marilyns followed in 1962. Throughout this period of his transition
from graphic designer to full-blown avant-garde artist Warhol was able to purchase
works by contemporaries such as Jasper Johns and Frank Stella, as well as by Marcel
Duchamp. 'Pop Art' became established as the latest vanguard movement in 1962. The
present interview was initially published as 'What Is Pop Art? Interviews with Eight
Painters (Part 1)', Art News, New York, November 1963. Reprinted in John Russell and



VIa Art and Modern Life 731

, r Suzi Gablik (eds.), Pop Art Redefined, London, 1969, pp. 116-19, from which the
present text is taken.

AW: Someone said that Brecht wanted everybody to think alike. I want
everybody to think alike. But Brecht wanted to do it through Communism,
in a way. Russia is doing it under government. It's happening here all by
itself without being under a strict government; so if it's working without
trying, why can't it work without being Communist? Everybody looks alike
and acts alike, and we're getting more and more that way.
I think everybody should be a machine.
I think everybody should like everybody.
Is that what Pop Art is all about?

AW: Yes. It's liking things.

And liking things is like being a machine?

AW: Yes, because you do the same thing every time. You do it over and over
again.

And you approve of that?

AW: Yes, because it's all fantasy. It's hard to be creative and it's also hard not
to think what you do is creative or hard not to be called creative because

* everybody is always talking about that and individuality. Everybody's always
being creative. And it's so funny when you say things aren't, like the shoe I
would draw for an advertisement was called a 'creation' but the drawing of
it was not. But I guess I believe in both ways. All these people who aren't
very good should be really good. Everybody is too good now, really. Like,
how many actors are there? There are millions of actors. They're all pretty
good. And how many painters are there? Millions of painters and all pretty
good. How can you say one style is better than another? You ought to be
able to be an Abstract-Expressionist next week, or a Pop artist, or a realist,
without feeling you've given up something. I think the artists who aren't very
good should become like everybody else so that people would like things that
aren't very good. It's already happening. All you have to do is read the
magazines and the catalogues. It's this style or that style, this or that image
of man - but that really doesn't make any difference. Some artists get left
out that way, and why should they?
Is Pop Art a fad?

AW: Yes, it's a fad, but I don't see what difference it makes. I just heard a
rumor that G. quit working, that she's given up art altogether. And everyone
is saying how awful it is that A. gave up his style and is doing it in a different
way. I don't think so at all. If an artist can't do any more, then he should
just quit; and an artist ought to be able to change his style without feeling
- bad. I heard that Lichtenstein said he might not be painting comic strips a
year or two from now - I think that would be so great, to be able to change
styles. And I think that's what's going to happen, that's going to be the whole
new scene. That's probably one reason I'm using silk screens now. I think
somebody should be able to do all my paintings for me. I haven't been able
to make every image clear and simple and the same as the first one. I think



732 Modernization and Modernism

it would be so great if more people took up silk screens so that no one would
know whether my picture was mine or somebody else's.
It would turn art history upside down?

AW: Yes.

Is that your aim?

AW: No. The reason I'm painting this way is that I want to be a machine, and
I feel that whatever I do and do machine-like is what I want to do.
Was commercial art more machine-like?

AW: No, it wasn't. I was getting paid for it, and did anything they told me
to do. If they told me to draw a shoe, Pd do it, and if they told me to correct
it, I would - Fd do anything they told me to do, correct it and do it right.
I'd have to invent and now I don't; after all that 'correction', those commercial
drawings would have feelings, they would have a style. The attitude of those
who hired me had feeling or something to it; they knew what they wanted,
they insisted; sometimes they got very emotional. The process of doing work
in commercial art was machine-like, but the attitude had feeling to it.
Why did you start painting soup cans?

AW: Because I used to drink it. I used to have the same lunch every day, for
twenty years, I guess, the same thing over and over again. Someone said my
life has dominated me; I liked that idea. I used to want to live at the Waldorf
Towers and have soup and a sandwich, like that scene in the restaurant in
Naked Lunch. . . .

We went to see Dr No at Forty-second Street. It's a fantastic movie, so
cool. We walked outside and somebody threw a cherry bomb right in front
of us, in this big crowd. And there was blood. I saw blood on people and all
over. I felt like I was bleeding all over. I saw in the paper last week that
there are more people throwing them - it's just part of the scene - and
hurting people. My show in Paris is going to be called 'Death in America'.
I'll show the electric-chair pictures and the dogs in Birmingham and car
wrecks and some suicide pictures.

Why did you start these 'Death ' pictures?

AW: I believe in it. Did you see the Enquirer this week? It had 'The Wreck that

Made Cops Cry' - a head cut in half, the arms and hands just lying there. It's

sick, but I'm sure it happens all the time. I've met a lot of cops recently. They

take pictures of everything, only it's almost impossible to get pictures from them.

When did you start with the 'Death' series?

AW: I guess it was the big plane crash picture, the front page of a newspaper:
129 DIE. I was also painting the Marilyns. I realized that everything I was
doing must have been Death. It was Christmas or Labor Day - a holiday -
and every time you turned on the radio they said something like, '4 million
are going to die'. That started it. But when you see a gruesome picture over
and over again, it doesn't really have any effect.
But you're still doing 'Elizabeth Taylor' pictures.

AW: I started those a long time ago, when she was so sick and everybody said
she was going to die. Now I'm doing them all over, putting bright colors on
her lips and eyes.



VIa Art and Modern Life 733

My next series will be pornographic pictures. They will look blank; when
you turn on the black lights, then you see them - big breasts and. ... If a
cop came in, you could just flick out the lights or turn to the regular lights

- how could you say that was pornography? But I'm still just practising with
these yet. Segal did a sculpture of two people making love, but he cut it all
up, I guess because he thought it was too pornographic to be art. Actually
it was very beautiful, perhaps a little too good, or he may feel a little protective
about art. When you read Genet you get all hot, and that makes some people
say this is not art. The thing I like about it is that it makes you forget about
style and that sort of thing; style isn't really important.

Is 'Pop' a bad name?
AW: The name sounds so awful. Dada must have something to do with Pop

- it's so funny, the names are really synonyms. Does anyone know what
they're supposed to mean or have to do with, those names? Johns and
Rauschenberg - Neo-Dada for all these years, and everyone calling them
derivative and unable to transform the things they use - are now called
progenitors of Pop. It's funny the way things change. I think John Cage has
been very influential, and Merce Cunningham, too, maybe. Did you see that
article in the Hudson Review ['The End of the Renaissance?', Summer, 1963]?
It was about Cage and that whole crowd, but with a lot of big words like
radical empiricism and teleology. Who knows? Maybe Jap and Bob were
Neo-Dada and aren't any more. History books are being rewritten all the
time. It doesn't matter what you do. Everybody just goes on thinking the
same thing, and every year it gets more and more alike. Those who talk about
individuality the most are the ones who most object to deviation, and in a
few years it may be the other way around. Some day everybody will think
just what they want to think, and then everybody will probably be thinking
alike; that seems to be what is happening.



13 Roy Lichtenstein (b. 1923) Lecture to the College
Art Association

A native of New York, Lichtenstein was educated and began his career as a designer
in Ohio. Returning to New York in the late 1950s, he taught painting at New York State
University, initially in an Abstract Expressionist vein. His first paintings based on comic
strips were exhibited at the Leo Castelli Gallery in 1961, where they were seen by Andy
Warhol, who was then privately working on similar themes. The present text was
originally delivered as a lecture to the College Art Association, Philadelphia, January
1964. It was first printed in Ellen H. Johnson, American Artists on Art from 1940-1980,
New York, 1982, pp. 102-4, from which the present text is taken.



Although there was never an attempt on the part of Pop artists to form a
movement (in fact in 1961 very few of these artists knew each other or were



734 Modernization and Modernism

familiar with each other's work), there does seem to have been some critical
point demanding expression which brought us to depart from whatever direc-
tions we were pursuing and to move toward some comment involving the
commercial aspect of our environment.

There are many ways of looking at a phenomenon, of course, particularly a
phenomenon as amorphous as an art movement, and there are many levels on
which it can be discussed. Fm not sure an artist would have any more insight,
that he could express in words, than a critic or an historian. But let me discuss
one aspect that comes to my mind.

Aside from all of the influences which one can think of, and I have in mind
movements and actual art products such as the three-dimensional Absinthe-Glass
of Picasso, the Purist painting of Ozenfant and Le Corbusier, the use of actual
common objects in collage, the Dada movement, the paintings of Stuart Davis,
the paintings of Leger, the beer cans, targets and flags of Jasper Johns, the
collages of Rauschenberg, the use of American objects in the happenings of
Kaprow, Oldenburg, Dine, Whitman, Samaras and others. Aside from all these
decided influences, and influences they were - particularly the happenings and
environments, since both Oldenburg and Dine proceeded directly from happen-
ings to Pop Art - it is at another level that I wish to describe the emergence
of Pop Art.

Pop may be seen as a product of two twentieth-century tendencies: one from
the outside - the subject matter; and the other from within - an esthetic
sensibility. The subject matter, of course, is commercialism and commercial art;
but its contribution is the isolation and glorification of 'Thing.' Commercial art
is not our art, it is our subject matter and in that sense it is nature; but it is
considered completely at odds with the major direction of art during and since
the Renaissance and particularly at odds with our directly preceding movement
- Abstract Expressionism. Commercial art runs contrary to a major art current
in the sense that it concentrates on thing rather than environment: on figure rather
than ground.

The esthetic sensibility to which I refer is anti-sensibility - apparent anti-sen-
sibility. Anti-sensibility obviously is at odds with such concurrent and friendlier
attitudes as contemplation, nuance, mystery and Zen, etc. Historical examples
of anti-sensibility art - even recent examples - are hard to point to. The
anti-sensibility facade fades and the sensibilities prevail. But if we can remember
our first confrontation with certain modern works, the newer work seems
cheapened, insensitive, brash and barbarous. It is not the rougher paint handling
I refer to, but apparent lack of nuance and adjustment: for instance, our first
look at Les Demoiselles d* Avignon of Picasso, or our first look at Mondrian or
Pollock, or if we compare a Cubist collage or a Franz Kline with almost any
old master painting. Compare a Daumier with a Botticelli. Courbet's audience
saw him as brash and artless in the mid-nineteenth century and van Gogh and
the Fauves of course were seen in this light. But the modern works referred to
here are not primarily anti-sensibility art - they represent many other qualities;
but they do contain a bit of this element which is more strongly represented
in Pop Art.




VIa Art and Modern Life 735

But works of art cannot really be the product of blunted sensibilities - it is
only a style or posture. It is, however, the real quality of our subject matter -
the particular awkward, bizarre and expedient commercial art styles which Pop
Art refers to and amplifies. Since works of art cannot really be the product of
blunted sensibilities, what seems at first to be brash and barbarous turns in time
to daring and strength, and the concealed subtleties soon become apparent.

Anti-sensibility is the stance most characteristic, I think, of recent art in the
sense that it is most unlike the Renaissance tendencies of transition, logical
unfolding, purposeful nuance, and elegance. Although the anti-sensibilities
stance appears as mindless, mechanical, gross and abrupt or as directed by prior
or non-art decisions, its real meaning, I feel, lies in the artist's personal sensation
of performing a difficult feat of bravado while really respecting all of the
sensibilities. This is its meaning if it is successful - in Pop Art or any other
style.

It may also have other meanings: Brassy courage, competition with the visual
objects of modern life, naive American freshness, and so on.

In a strained analogous way perhaps we can see the twentieth-century tendency
toward anti-sensibility in art joining the readymade real insensibility of our
commercial environment to form Pop Art.



14 George Kubler (b. 1912) from The Shape of Time



The author was a Yale University academic. Though his work grew out of research
initiated before the Second World War, it struck a chord among artists of a younger
generation in the 1960s. Kubler argues the need to broaden the conception of art to
include a much wider range of human artefacts over a much longer time-span than has
been normal within the discipline of art history. In art-historical terms, he is critical of
the Wolfflinian conception of evolving styles which lay behind much Modernist theory,
and he invokes instead the precedent of Riegl. Robert Morris and Robert Smithson
were among the artists who found in Kubler's arguments a stimulus for their own critique
of the autonomous Modernist work, and for their desire to move art beyond the
confines of the gallery. In their attempts to relate art to the large-scale technologies of
the modern world, they invoked links with the often massive works of ancient cul-
tures to which Kubler had helped draw attention. First published New Haven, 1962;
the present extracts are taken from the third printing of 1965, pp. 1-3, 8-9, 31
and 32.



Let us suppose that the idea of art can be expanded to embrace the whole range
of man-made things, including all tools and writing in addition to the useless,
beautiful, and poetic things of the world. By this view the universe of man-made
things simply coincides with the history of art. It then becomes an urgent
H requirement to devise better ways of considering everything men have made.
This we may achieve sooner by proceeding from art rather than from use, for




736 Modernization and Modernism

if we depart from use alone, all useless things are overlooked, but if we take
the desirableness of things as our point of departure, then useful objects are
properly seen as things we value more or less dearly.

In effect, the only tokens of history continually available to our senses are
the desirable things made by men. Of course, to say that man-made things are
desirable is redundant because man's native inertia is overcome only by desire,
and nothing gets made unless it is desirable.

Such things mark the passage of time with far greater accuracy than we know,
and they fill time with shapes of a limited variety. Like crustaceans we depend
for survival upon an outer skeleton, upon a shell of historic cities and houses
filled with things belonging to definable portions of the past. Our ways of
describing this visible past are still most awkward. The systematic study of
things is less than five hundred years old, beginning with the description
of works of art in the artists' biographies of the Italian Renaissance. The method
was extended to the description of all kinds of things only after 1750. Today
archaeology and ethnology treat of material culture in general. The history of
art treats of the least useful and most expressive products of human industry.
The family of things begins to look like a smaller family than people once
thought.

The oldest surviving things made by men are stone tools. A continuous series
runs from them to the things of today. The series has branched many times,
and it has often run out into dead ends. Whole sequences of course ceased wrien
families of artisans died out or when civilizations collapsed, but the stream of
things never was completely stilled. Everything made now is either a replica or
a variant of something made a little time ago and so on back without break to
the first morning of human time. This continuous connection in time must
contain lesser divisions.

The narrative historian always has the privilege of deciding that continuity
cuts better into certain lengths than into others. He never is required to defend
his cut, because history cuts anywhere with equal ease, and a good story can
begin anywhere the teller chooses.

For others who aim beyond narration the question is to find cleavages in
history where a cut will separate different types of happening. Many have
thought that to make the inventory would lead toward such an enlarged
understanding. The archaeologists and anthropologists classify things by their
uses, having first separated material and mental culture, or things and ideas.
The historians of art, who separate useful and aesthetic products, classify these
latter by types, by schools, and by styles.

Schools and styles are the products of the long stock-taking of the nineteenth-
century historians of art. This stock-taking, however, cannot go on endlessly;
in theory it comes to an end with irreproachable and irrefutable lists and tables.
In practice certain words, when they are abused by too common use, suffer
in their meaning as if with cancer or inflation. Style is one of these. [. . .J
* * *

[. . .] However useful it is for pedagogical purposes, the biological metaphor



VIA Art and Modern Life 737

of style as a sequence of life-stages was historically misleading, for it bestowed
upon the flux of events the shapes and the behavior of organisms. Bv the
metaphor of the life-cycle a style behaves like a plant. Its first leaves are small
and tentatively shaped; the leaves of its middle life are fully formed; and the
last leaves it puts forth are small again but intricately shaped. All are sustained
by one unchanging principle of organization common to all members of that
species, with variants of race occurring in different environments. By the
biological metaphor of art and history, style is the species, and historical stvles
are its taxonomic varieties. As an approximation, nevertheless, this metaphor
recognized the recurrence of certain kinds of events, and it offered at least a
provisional explanation of them, instead of treating each event as an unpre-
cedented, never-to-be-repeated unicum.

The biological model was not the most appropriate one for a history of things.
Perhaps a system of metaphors drawn from physical science would have clothed
the situation of art more adequately than the prevailing biological metaphors:
especially if we are dealing in art with the transmission of some kind of energy;
with impulses, generating centers, and relay points; with increments and losses
in transit; with resistances and transformers in the circuit. In short, the language
of electrodynamics might have suited us better than the language of botany; and
Michael Faraday might have been a better mentor than Linnaeus for the study
of material culture.

Our choice of the 'history of things' is more than a euphemism to replace
the bristling ugliness of 'material culture.' This term is used by anthropologists
to distinguish ideas, or 'mental culture,' from artifacts. But the 'history of things'
is intended to reunite ideas and objects under the rubric of visual forms: the
term includes both artifacts and works of art, both replicas and unique examples,
both tools and expressions - in short all materials worked by human hands
under the guidance of connected ideas developed in temporal sequence. From
all these things a shape in time emerges. [ . . . ]
* * *

Only a few art historians have sought to discover valid ways to generalize upon
the immense domain of the experience of art. These few have tried to establish
principles for architecture, sculpture, and painting upon an intermediate ground
partly in the objects and partly in our experience of them, by categorizing the
types of organization we perceive in all works of art.

One strategy requires enlarging the unit of historical happening. At the
beginning of the century F. Wickhoff and A. Riegl moved in this direction
when they replaced the earlier moralizing judgment of 'degeneracy' that had
been passed upon Late Roman art, with the hypothesis that one system or
organization was being replaced by a new and different system of equal value.
In Riegl's terms, one 'will-to-form' gave way to another. Such a division of
history, along the structural lines marked by the frontiers between types of
formal organization, has had reserved approval from almost all twentieth-century
students of art and archaeology.

These proposals differed altogether from the notions of necessary sequence
first advanced by the Swiss historian of art, Heinrich Wolfflin. [. . .]



738 Modernization and Modernism

The shapes of time are the prey we want to capture. The time of history i s
too coarse and brief to be an evenly granular duration such as the physicists
suppose for natural time; it is more like a sea occupied by innumerable forms
of a finite number of types. A net of another mesh is required, different from
any now in use. [ . . . ]




15 Marshall McLuhan (b. 1911) 'Introduction' and
'Challenge and Collapse: The Nemesis of
Creativity' from Understanding Media

The author, who began the 1960s as a relatively anonymous Canadian professor of
literature, had by the middle of the decade become ubiquitous. His claims about the
impact of the new mass media and the qualitative change in human consciousness
which they supposedly brought about resulted in his own placement at the forefront of
an international publicity machine. His first major statement of this theme, The Guten-
berg Galaxy, appeared as early as 1952. The previous year he had published The
Mechanical Bride, a study of the social effects of the motor car. McLuhan's key slogan
that The Medium is The Message' and his claim that electronic communications were
bringing about a return to a 'global village' implanted themselves in the thought of a
period conscious of its own modernity. McLuhan's ideas became particularly influential
in the arts. His claims about the immediacy of the image proposed an important role
for a new generation eager to regard themselves as technically sophisticated visual
communicators. The present extracts are from Understanding Media, London, 1964,
pp. 3-6 and 64-6.



Introduction

After three thousand years of explosion, by means of fragmentary and mechanical
technologies, the Western world is imploding. During the mechanical ages we
had extended our bodies in space. Today, after more than a century of electric
technology, we have extended our central nervous system itself in a global
embrace, abolishing both space and time as far as our planet is concerned.
Rapidly, we approach the final phase of the extensions of man - the technological
simulation of consciousness, when the creative process of knowing will be
collectively and corporately extended to the whole of human society, much as
we have already extended our senses and our nerves by the various media.
Whether the extension of consciousness, so long sought by advertisers for
specific products, will be 4 a good thing' is a question that admits of a wide
solution. There is little possibility of answering such questions about the
extensions of man without considering all of them together. Any extension,
whether of skin, hand, or foot, affects the whole psychic and social complex.



via Art and Modern Life 739

In the mechanical age now receding, many actions could be taken without too
much concern. Slow movement insured that the reactions were delayed for
considerable periods of time. Today the action and the reaction occur almost
at the same time. We actually live mythically and integrally, as it were, but we
continue to think in the old, fragmented space and time patterns of the
pre-electric age.

Western man acquired from the technology of literacy the power to act
without reacting. The advantages of fragmenting himself in this way are seen
in the case of the surgeon who would be quite helpless if he were to become
humanly involved in his operation. We acquired the art of carrying out the most
dangerous social operations with complete detachment. But our detachment was
a posture of noninvolvement. In the electric age, when our central nervous
system is technologically extended to involve us in the whole of mankind and
to incorporate the whole of mankind in us, we necessarily participate, in depth,
in the consequences of our every action. It is no longer possible to adopt the
aloof and dissociated role of the literate Westerner.

The Theater of the Absurd dramatizes this recent dilemma of Western man,
the man of action who appears not to be involved in the action. Such is the
origin and appeal of Samuel Beckett's clowns. After three thousand years of
specialist explosion and of increasing specialism and alienation in the techno-
logical extensions of our bodies, our world has become compressional by
dramatic reversal. As electrically contracted, the globe is no more than a village.
Electric speed in bringing all social and political functions together in a sudden
implosion has heightened human awareness of responsibility to an intense
degree. It is this implosive factor that alters the position of the Negro, the
teen-ager, and some other groups. They can no longer be contained, in the
political sense of limited association. They are now involved in our lives, as we
in theirs, thanks to the electric media.

This is the Age of Anxiety for the reason of the electric implosion that compels
commitment and participation, quite regardless of any 'point of view.' The
partial and specialized character of the viewpoint, however noble, will not serve
at all in the electric age. At the information level the same upset has occurred
with the substitution of the inclusive image for the mere viewpoint. If the
nineteenth century was the age of the editorial chair, ours is the century of the
psychiatrist's couch. As extension of man the chair is a specialist ablation of
the posterior, a sort of ablative absolute of backside, whereas the couch extends
the integral being. The psychiatrist employs the couch, since it removes the
temptation to express private points of view and obviates the need to rationalize
events.

The aspiration of our time for wholeness, empathy and depth of awareness
is a natural adjunct of electric technology. The age of mechanical industry that
preceded us found vehement assertion of private outlpok the natural mode of
expression. Every culture and every age has its favorite model of perception
and knowledge that it is inclined to prescribe for everybody and everything.
The mark of our time is its revulsion against imposed patterns. We are suddenly
eager to have things and people declare their beings totally. There is a deep



740 Modernization and Modernism

faith to be found in this new attitude - a faith that concerns the ultimate
harmony of all being.



Challenge and Collapse: The Nemesis of Creativity

(...) The new media and technologies by which we amplify and extend
ourselves constitute huge collective surgery carried out on the social body with
complete disregard for antiseptics. If the operations are needed, the inevitability
of infecting the whole system during the operation has to be considered. For
in operating on society with a new technology, it is not the incised area that is
most affected. The area of impact and incision is numb. It is the entire system
that is changed. The effect of radio is visual, the effect of the photo is auditory.
Each new impact shifts the ratios among all the senses. What we seek today is
either a means of controlling these shifts in the sense-ratios of the psychic and
social outlook, or a means of avoiding them altogether. To have a disease without
its symptoms is to be immune. No society has ever known enough about its
actions to have developed immunity to its new extensions or technologies. Today
we have begun to sense that art may be able to provide such immunity.

In the history of human culture there is no example of a conscious adjustment
of the various factors of personal and social life to new extensions except in the
puny and peripheral efforts of artists. The artist picks up the message of cultural
and technological challenge decades before its transforming impact occurs. He,
then, builds models or Noah's arks for facing the change that is at hand. 'The
war of 1870 need never have been fought had people read my Sentimental
Education,' said Gustave Flaubert.

It is this aspect of new art that Kenneth Galbraith recommends to the careful
study of businessmen who want to stay in business. For in the electric age there
is no longer any sense in talking about the artist's being ahead of his time. Our
technology is, also, ahead of its time, if we reckon by the ability to recognize
it for what it is. To prevent undue wreckage in society, the artist tends now
to move from the ivory tower to the control tower of society. Just as higher
education is no longer a frill or luxury but a stark need of production and
operational design in the electric age, so the artist is indispensable in the shaping
and analysis and understanding of the life of forms, and structures created by
electric technology.

The percussed victims of the new technology have invariably muttered cliches
about the impractical ity of artists and their fanciful preferences. But in the past
century it has come to be generally acknowledged that, in the words of
Wyndham Lewis, 'The artist is always engaged in writing a detailed history of
the future because he is the only person aware of the nature of the present.'
Knowledge of this simple fact is now needed for human survival. The ability
of the artist to sidestep the bully blow of new technology of any age, and to
parry such violence with full awareness, is age-old. Equally age-old is the
inability of the percussed victims, who cannot sidestep the new violence, to



via Art and Modern Life 741

recognize their need of the artist. To reward and to make celebrities of artists
can, also, be a way of ignoring their prophetic work, and preventing its timely
use for survival. The artist is the man in any field, scientific or humanistic,
who grasps the implications of his actions and of new knowledge in his own
time. He is the man of integral awareness.

The artist can correct the sense ratios before the blow of new technology has
numbed conscious procedures. He can correct them before numbness and
subliminal groping and reaction begin. If this is true, how is it possible to
present the matter to those who are in a position to do something about it? If
there were even a remote likelihood of this analysis being true, it would warrant
a global armistice and period of stock-taking. If it is true that the artist possesses
the means of anticipating and avoiding the consequences of technological trauma,
then what are we to think of the world and bureaucracy of 'art appreciation'?
Would it not seem suddenly to be a conspiracy to make the artist a frill, a
fribble, or a Milltown? If men were able to be convinced that art is precise
advance knowledge of how to cope with the psychic and social consequences of
the next technology, would they all become artists? Or would they begin a
careful translation of new art forms into social navigation charts? I am curious
to know what would happen if art were suddenly seen for what it is, namely,
exact information of how to rearrange one's psyche in order to anticipate the
next blow from our own extended faculties. Would we, then, cease to look at
works of art as an explorer might regard the gold and gems used as the
ornaments of simple nonliterates?

At any rate, in experimental art, men are given the exact specifications of
coming violence to their own psyches from their own counter-irritants or
technology. For those parts of ourselves that we thrust out in the form of new-
invention are attempts to counter or neutralize collective pressures and irrita-
tions. But the counter-irritant usually proves a greater plague than the initial
irritant, like a drug habit. And it is here that the artist can show us how to
'ride with the punch,' instead of 'taking it on the chin.' It can only be repeated
that human history is a record of 'taking it on the chin.'



16 Tony Smith (b. 1912) from an Interview with
Samuel Wagstaff Jr

Smith has worked as an architect as well as a sculptor. Though a contemporary of
Pollock, he was to make his principal impact in the 1960s. His description of the car
ride along the unfinished New Jersey Turnpike was attractive to a generation of artists
trying to come to terms with what seemed to them to be the limitations of the
autonomous art object (VIIb2). Conversely, for Modernist critics defending the concept
of an autonomous art, Smith's experience and the claims he made for it became
paradigmatic of a misunderstanding of the essential nature of modern art (see, in
particular, Fried's 'Art and Objecthood', VIIa6). Published as Talking with Tony Smith',
Artforum, vol. 1, no. 4, New York, December 1966, pp. 18-19, from which the present
extracts are taken.



742 Modernization and Modernism

I view art as something vast. I think highway systems fall down because they
are not art. Art today is an art of postage stamps. [. . .] I think of art in a
public context and not in terms of mobility of works of art. Art is just there.

When I was teaching at Cooper Union in the first year or two of the fifties,
someone told me how I could get on to the unfinished New Jersey Turnpike.
I took three students and drove from somewhere in the Meadows to New
Brunswick. It was a dark night and there were no lights or shoulder markers,
lines, railings, or anything at all except the dark pavement moving through the
landscape of the flats, rimmed by hills in the distance, but punctuated by stacks,
towers, fumes, and colored lights. This drive was a revealing experience. The
road and much of the landscape was artificial, and yet it couldn't be called a
work of art. On the other hand, it did something for me that art had never
done. At first I didn't know what it was, but its effect was to liberate me from
many of the views I had had about art. It seemed that there had been a reality
there which had not had any expression in art.

The experience on the road was something mapped out but not socially
recognized. I thought to myself, it ought to be clear that's the end of art. Most
painting looks pretty pictorial after that. There is no way you can frame it, you
just have to experience it. Later I discovered some abandoned airstrips in Europe
- abandoned works, Surrealist landscapes, something that had nothing to do
with any function, created worlds without tradition. Artificial landscape without
cultural precedent began to dawn on me. There is a drill ground in Nuremberg,
large enough to accommodate two million men. The entire field is enclosed with
high embankments and towers. The concrete approach is three sixteen-inch
steps, one above the other, stretching for a mile or so. [ . . . ]




VlB

Modernist Art



1 Alain Robbe-Grillet (b. 1922) 'Commitment'

Robbe-Grillet is a novelist and the leading theoretician of the French nouveau roman
(new novel) of the 1950s and early 1960s, in which the principle of the inseparability
of form and content is given precedence over traditional conventions of narrative
sequence. This text is taken from his Towards a New Novel, originally published in 1957
as Pour un nouveau roman. In defence of the autonomy of art, he argues against the
equation of political with artistic revolution, and in particular against the tendency of
Socialist Realism to create its types as exemplifications of its theories. He also argues
against the notion of exemplary moral commitment which Sartre put forward in Exist-
entialism and Humanism (VbD, taking the characteristically Modernist position that the
commitment of the artist is realized through a primary engagement with the problems
of the medium rather than the problems of society. The present text is taken from the
translation by Barbara Wright, London, 1965, pp. 65-70.

Since writing in order to entertain is futile, and writing to make people believe
has become suspect, the novelist thinks he can see another path: to write in
order to teach. Tired of hearing armchair critics declare in their condescending
way: 'I don't read novels any more, I've grown out of them, they're all right
for women (who have nothing to do), personally I prefer reality. . . . ' and other
such idiocies, the novelist falls back on didactic literature. There at least he
hopes to get the upper hand again: reality is too baffling, too ambiguous, for
everyone to be able to learn something from it. When it comes to proving
something (whether it be showing up the poverty of man without God, or
explaining the feminine heart, or arousing class-consciousness), then fiction must
come into its own again: it will be so much more convincing!

Unfortunately, it then doesn't convince anyone any more; the moment the
novel becomes suspect it runs the risk, on the contrary, of discrediting psycho-
logy, socialist morality and religion. Anyone interested in these disciplines will
read essays, they are safer. And once again literature is rejected and put back
into the category of the frivolous. The didactic novel has even rapidly become
obnoxious to everyone. . . . And yet, a few years ago, we saw it take on a new
lease of left-wing life, in different guise: 'commitment'; which is also, in the
East, and more naively coloured, called 'socialist realism'.



VIb Modernist Art 745

Certainly the idea of a possible union between an artistic rebirth and a
politico-economic revolution is one that springs very naturally to the mind. It
is an idea which from the very beginning is attractive from the sentimental
point of view, and which also seems obviously to be supported by logic. And
yet the problems posed by such an alliance are serious and difficult; urgent,
but perhaps insoluble.

The connection, at first, seemed simple. On the one hand the artistic forms
which have followed one another in the history of the nations seem to us to be
linked to this or that type of society, to the preponderance of a certain class,
to the operation of a tyranny or to the birth of a form of liberty. In France,
for instance, in the field of literature, there is some justification for seeing a
close relationship between Racine's tragedies and the development of a court
aristocracy, between Balzac's novels and the triumph of the bourgeoisie, etc.

And as, on the other hand, most people, even conservatives, will readily agree
that our great contemporary artists, whether writers or painters, belong, for the
most part, (or did belong, when they were producing their greatest works) to
the progressive parties, they are tempted to fabricate this idyllic blueprint: Art
and Revolution, advancing hand in hand, fighting for the same cause, going
through the same ordeals, facing the same dangers, gradually making the same
conquests, and finally attaining the same apotheosis.

Unfortunately, though, the moment we move on to the practical level, things
start to go wrong. The least we can say, today, is that the data of this problem
are not so simple. We all know the comedies and tragedies which for the last
fifty years have been disturbing, and still are disturbing, every attempt to bring
about this marvellous union which people thought was both a love match and
a marriage of convenience. How can we forget the successive surrenders and
resignations, the resounding quarrels, the excommunications, the imprisonments,
the suicides? How can we forget what has happened to painting, not to mention
any other art, in the countries where the revolution has triumphed? How can
we not smile at the accusations of 'decadence', of 'excess', of 'formalism',
employed at random by the most zealous revolutionaries to describe everything
which we think of value in contemporary art? How can we not fear that we
may one day find ourselves prisoners in the same net?

It is too easy, and let's say so straight away, to blame bad leaders, bureaucratic
routine, Stalin's lack of culture, the stupidity of the French communist party.
We know from experience that it is just as difficult ro try and plead the cause
of art to any politician in any progressive organization. Let us be blunt about
it: the socialist Revolution mistrusts revolutionary Art, and, what is more, it is
not so obvious that it is wrong.

In fact, from the point of view of the revolution, everything must directly
combine for the final goal: the liberation of the proletariat, . . . Everything,
including literature and painting, etc. But it is quite different for the artist;
e ven if his political convictions are of the strongest, even if he is a fervent
jnilitant, art can never be reduced to a means to a wider end, even if that end
*s the greatest and most exalted cause. Nothing can be more important to the
ar tist than his work, and he soon discovers that he can only create for nothing;



746 Modernization and Modernism

the slightest directive from outside paralyses him, to have to pay the slightest
attention to didactics, or even to meaning, is an intolerable constraint; whatever
his attachment to his party or to liberal ideas, at the moment of creation he
can only be concerned with the problems of his art.

Now even at a time when art and society, after developing in similar ways,
seem to be undergoing parallel crises, it is still clear that the problems raised
by the one and the other cannot be solved in the same way. Later, no doubt,
sociologists will discover new similarities in their solutions. But for us, in any
case - and this we must face honestly and with clarity - the fight is not the
same. And we must also face the fact that today, as always, there is a direct
conflict between the two points of view. Either art is nothing - and in that case
painting, literature, sculpture and music might as well be enrolled in the service
of the revolutionary cause, where they would be no more than instruments,
comparable to motorised armies, machine tools and tractors, which have nothing
to contribute but their direct and immediate efficacy.

Or else art will continue to exist in its own right; and in that case, at least
so far as the artist is concerned, it will remain the most important thing in the
world. In which case, in comparison with political activity, it will always seem
to be lagging behind, useless, if not frankly reactionary. And yet we know from
history that it is only this so-called gratuitous art that will turn out to be on
the side of the trade unions and the barricades.

In the meantime this generous, but Utopian, way of talking about a novel, a
painting, or a statue as if they could carry the same weight in day to day action
as a strike, or a mutiny, or the cry of a victim denouncing his torturers, is
doing a disservice, in the final analysis, both to Art and to the Revolution. Too
many such errors have been committed in the last few years in the name of
socialist realism. The total artistic poverty of the works that claim the greatest
affinity with it is certainly no accident: it is in the very idea of a work being
created for the purpose of expressing some content of a social, political, economic,
moral, etc., nature, that the falsehood lies.

Now, then, once and for all, we must stop taking it seriously when we are
accused of being gratuitous, stop being afraid of 'art for art's sake' as if it were
the worst of all evils, and stand firm against all the instruments of coercion that
are brandished in front of us the moment we talk about anything other than
the class struggle or the anti-colonial war.

And yet, not everything in the Soviet theory of so-called 'socialist realism'
should be condemned a priori. In literature, for instance, did it not also imply
a reaction against the accumulation of false philosophy which had finally invaded
everything, from poetry to the novel? In its opposition to metaphysical allegories,
in its fight against the abstract hinterlands that these allegories presuppose, as
well as against purposeless verbal delirium, and against the vague sentimentality
of the emotions, socialist realism might well have been a good influence.

For misleading ideologies and myths have no more place in it. This literature
simply exposes man's situation, and that of the universe he has to contend with.
And it is not only the worldly 'values' of bourgeois society that have disappeared,




VIb Modernist Art 747

but with them any magic, religious or philosophical appeal to any sort of spiritual
resource 'beyond' our visible world. The now fashionable themes of despair and
the absurd are denounced as alibis which are too easy. Ilya Ehrenburg was not
afraid to write, immediately after the war: 'Anguish is a bourgeois vice. Our
answer lies in reconstruction.'

Given principles such as this, we had every reason to hope that they were
proposing to purge people and things of their systematic romanticism, so that
they could once again properly be described by that expression so dear to
Lukacs, which in any case is the only thing they can be - what they are. Reality
would no longer be permanently situated elsewhere, but here and now, without
ambiguity. The world would no longer find its justification in a hidden meaning,
whatever it might be, because its existence would lie only in its concrete, solid,
material presence. Beyond what we see (what our senses perceive), there would
henceforth be nothing.

Let us now consider the outcome. What does socialist realism offer us?
Obviously, this time, what's good is good, and what's bad is bad. But that is
the point: their concern with the evidence has nothing to do with what we
observe in the world. Where is the progress if, to avoid the division into essence
and appearance we fall into the manicheism of good and evil?

And there is something even more serious. When, in the less naive stories,
we come up against credible human beings, in a complex world endowed with
a tangible existence, we soon discover that, in spite of everything, this world
and these people have been constructed with a view to being interpreted. And
anyway, their authors don't conceal the fact that what they are primarily trying
to do is to illustrate, with the greatest possible precision, various types of
historical, economic, social and political behaviour.

Now, from the point of view of literature, economic truths and marxist
theories about excess yield and usurpation are also hinterlands. If progressive
novels are only to have any reality through these functional explanations of the
visible world, which they have prepared in advance, tested and acknowledged,
it is hard to see wherein their power of discovery or invention might lie. Above
all, it would merely be one more new way of refusing the world its most certain
quality - the simple fact that it is there. An explanation, whatever it may be,
can only be superfluous when it comes face to face with the presence of things.
A theory about their social function, if it has been responsible for their description,
can only confuse their design, can only falsify them, on exactly the same grounds
as the old psychological and moral theories, or the symbolism of allegories.

Which explains, after all, why socialist realism has no need of experiment in
fictional forms, why it so utterly distrusts every new artistic technique, why
What suits it best, as we see every day, is the most 'bourgeois' form of expression.

But for some time now some uneasiness has been felt in Russia and the
Peoples' Republics. Responsible artists are now realizing that they are on the
wrong track, and that in spite of appearances the so-called 'laboratory' experi-
ments on the structure and language of the novel, even if the only people to
oe enthusiastic about them at first are the specialists, are perhaps not so useless
as the revolutionary party pretends to think.



748 Modernization and Modernism

What is left of 'commitment', then? Sartre, who saw the danger of this
moralistic literature, advocated a moral literature which would aim at arousing
people's political consciences merely by stating the problems of our society, but
would try to avoid a propagandist spirit by restoring the reader's liberty.
Experience has shown that that too was Utopian: the moment the writer starts
worrying about conveying some meaning (exterior to the work of art), literature
starts to retreat, to disappear.

Let us restore to the idea of commitment, then, the only meaning it can have
for us. Rather than being of a political nature, commitment, for the writer,
means to be fully aware of the current problems of his own language, convinced
of their extreme importance, and desirous of solving them from within. Therein
lies his sole possibility of remaining an artist, and also, no doubt, by means of
some obscure and distant consequence, of maybe one day being of some use -
maybe even to the revolution.



2 David Smith (1906-1965) 'Tradition and Identity'

The ethical basis of Smith's work is to be found in his commitment to improvisation,
and to what is revealed of the artist in the process. This position implies a rejection
both of traditional notions of realism and of those concepts of abstraction which
presuppose that composition is governed by fundamental rational or naturalistic princi-
ples. This is the text of a speech given at Ohio University, Athens, Ohio, on 17 April
1959; printed in Garnett McCoy (ed), David Smith, New York, 1973, pp. 146-8.

When I lived and studied in Ohio, I had a very vague sense of what art was.
Everyone I knew who used the reverent word was almost as unsure and insecure.

Mostly art was reproductions, from far away, from an age past and from some
golden shore, certainly from no place like the mud banks of the Auglaze or the
Maumee, and there didn't seem much chance that it could come from Paulding
County.

Genuine oil painting was some highly cultivated act that came like the silver
spoon, born from years of slow method, applied drawing, watercoloring, desig-
ning, art structure, requiring special equipment of an almost secret nature, that
could only be found in Paris or possibly New York, and when I got to New
York and Paris I found that painting was made with anything at hand, building
board, raw canvas, self-primed canvas, with or without brushes, on the easel,
on the floor, on the wall, no rules, no secret equipment, no anything, except
the conviction of the artist, his challenge to the world and his own identity.

Discarding the old methods and equipment will not of course make art. It
has only been a symbol in creative freedom from the bondage of tradition and
outside authority.

Sculpture was even farther away. Modeling clay was a mystic mess which
came from afar. How sculpture got into metal was so complex that it could be
done only in Paris. The person who made sculpture was someone else, an ethereal
poetic character divinely sent, who was scholar, aesthetician, philosopher,



VIb Modernist Art 749

Continental gentleman so sensitive he could unlock the crying vision from a log
or a Galatea from a piece of imported marble.

I now know that sculpture is made from rough externals by rough characters
or men who have passed through all polish and are back to the rough again.

The mystic modeling clay is only Ohio mud, the tools are at hand in garages
and factories. Casting can be achieved in almost every town. Visions are from
the imaginative mind, sculpture can come from the found discards in nature,
from sticks and stones and parts and pieces, assembled or monolithic, solid
form, open form, lines of form, or, like a painting, the illusion of form. And
sculpture can be painting and painting can be sculpture and no authority can
overrule the artist in his declaration. Not even the philosopher, the aesthetician,
or the connoisseur.

I have spoken against tradition, but only the tradition of others who would
hold art from moving forward. Tradition holding us to the perfections of others.
In this context tradition can only say what art was, not what art is. Tradition
comes wrapped in word pictures; these are traps which lead laymen into cliche
thinking. This leads to analogy and comparative evaluation and conclusion,
especially in the hands of historians. Where conclusions are felt, the under-
standing of art has been hampered and the innovations of the contemporary
scene are often damned.

Art has its tradition, but it is a visual heritage. The artist's language is the
memory from sight. Art is made from dreams, and visions, and things not
known, and least of all from things that can be said. It comes from the inside
of who you are when you face yourself. It is an inner declaration of purpose,
it is a factor which determines artist identity.

The nature to which we all refer in the history of art is still with us, although
somewhat changed; it is no longer anecdote or robed and blindfolded virtue,
the bowl of fruit, or that very abstract reference called realistic; it is very often
the simple subject called the artist. Identifying himself as the artist, he becomes
his own subject as one of the elements in nature. He no longer dissects it, nor
moralizes upon it; he is its part. The outside world of nature is equal, without
accent, unquestioning. He is an element in the atmosphere called nature, his
reference to nature is more like primitive man addressing it as 'thou' and not
'it.' Aura and association, all the parts into the whole expression, all actions in
an emotional flow, manifest the artist as subject, a new position for the artist
but natural to his time. Words become difficult, they can do little in explaining a
work of art, let alone the position of the artist in the creative irrational flow of power
and force which underlies the position and conception. Possibly I can explain my own
procedure more easily. When I begin a sculpture I'm not always sure how it is going
to end. In a way it has a relationship to the work before, it is in continuity with the
previous work - it often holds a promise or a gesture toward the one to follow.

I do not often follow its path from a previously conceived drawing. If I have
a strong feeling about its start, I do not need to know its end; the battle for
solution is the most important. If the end of the work seems too complete and
final, posing no question, I am apt to work back from the end, that in its finality
it poses a question and not a solution.



750 Modernization and Modernism

Sometimes when I start a sculpture I begin with only a realized part; the rest
is travel to be unfolded, much in the order of a dream.

The conflict for realization is what makes art, not its certainty, its technique,
or material. I do not look for total success. If a part is successful, the rest
clumsy or incomplete, I can still call it finished, if I've said anything new, by
finding any relationship which I might call an origin.

I will not change an error if it feels right, for the error is more human than
perfection. I do not seek answers. I haven't named this work nor thought where
it would go. I haven't thought what it is for, except that it is made to be seen.
I've made it because it comes closer to saying who I am than any other method
I can use. This work is my identity. There were no words in my mind during
its creation, and I'm certain words are not needed in its seeing; and why should
you expect understanding when I do not? That is the marvel - to question but
not to understand. Seeing is the true language of perception. Understanding is
for words. As far as I am concerned, after I've made the work, I've said
everything I can say.



3 Maurice Merleau-Ponty (1908-1961) from 4 Eye and
Mind'

Merleau-Ponty was responsible for revising phenomenological concepts of perception
in line with a neo-Marxist account of the grounds of knowledge and experience. In his
phenomenology, perception involves a combination of language with bodily awareness.
In his later work he was concerned to stress the limitations of philosophical concepts
when dealing with visual experience. His writing was of importance to younger Modernist
critics writing in the 1960s and early 1970s, and in particular to Michael Fried. This
was the last work printed in the author's lifetime. Originally published as I'Oeil et I'esprif
in Art de France, vol. 1, no. 1, Paris, January 1961; English translation by Carleton
Dallery in James M. Edie (ed.), The Primacy of Perception, Evanston, 1964, pp. 159-90;
the present extract is taken from the two concluding sections.

The entire modern history of painting, with its efforts to detach itself from
illusionism and to acquire its own dimensions, has a metaphysical significance.
This is not something to be demonstrated. Not for reasons drawn from the
limits of objectivity in history and from the inevitable plurality of interpreta-
tions, which would prevent the linking of a philosophy and an event; the
metaphysics we have in mind is not a body of detached ideas [idees separees] for
which inductive justifications could be sought in the experiential realm. There
are, in the flesh of contingency, a structure of the event and a virtue peculiar
to the scenario. These do not prevent the plurality of interpretations but in fact
are the deepest reasons for this plurality. They make the event into a durable
theme of historical life and have a right to philosophical status. In a sense
everything that could have been said and that will be said about the French
Revolution has always been and is henceforth within it, in that wave which
arched itself out of a roil of discrete facts, with its froth of the past and its




VIb Modernist Art 751

crest of the future. And it is always by looking more deeply into how it came
a bout that we give and will go on giving new representations of it. As for the
history of art works, if they are great, the sense we give to them later on has
issued from them. It is the work itself that has opened the field from which it
appears in another light. It changes itself and becomes what follows; the inter-
minable reinterpretations to which it is legitimately susceptible change it only
in itself And if the historian unearths beneath its manifest content the surplus
and thickness of meaning, the texture which held the promise of a long history,
{his active manner of being, then, this possibility he unveils in the work, this
monogram he finds there - all are grounds for a philophical meditation. But
such a labour demands a long familiarity with history. We lack everything for
its execution, both the competence and the place. Just the same, since the power
or the fecundity of art works exceeds every positive causal or filial relation,
there is nothing wrong with letting a layman, speaking from his memory of a
few paintings and books, tell us how painting enters into his reflections; how
painting deposits in him a feeling of profound discordance, a feeling of mutation
within the relations of man and Being. Such feelings arise in him when he holds
a universe of classical thought, en bloc, up against the explorations [recherches]
of modern painting. This is a sort of history by contact, perhaps, never extending
beyond the limits of one person, owing everything nevertheless to his frequen-
tation of others. . . .

'I believe Cezanne was seeking depth all his life', says Giacometti. Says Robert
Pelaunay, 'Depth is the new inspiration.' Four centuries after the 'solutions' of
the Renaissance and three centuries after Descartes, depth is still new, and it
insists on being sought, not 'once in a lifetime' but all through life. It cannot
be merely a question of an unmysterious interval, as seen from an aeroplane,
between these trees nearby and those farther away. Nor is it a matter of the
way things are conjured away one by another, as we see happen so vividly in
a perspective drawing. These two views are very explicit and raise no problems.
The enigma, though, lies in their bond, in what is between them. The enigma
consists in the fact that I see things, each one in its place, precisely because
they eclipse one another, and that they are rivals before my sight precisely
because each one is in its own place. Their exteriority is known in their
envelopment and their mutual dependence in their autonomy. Once depth is
understood in this way, we can no longer call it a third dimension. In the first
place, if it were a dimension, it would be the first one; there are forms and
definite planes only if it is stipulated how far from me their different parts are.
But a first dimension that contains all the others is no longer a dimension, at
least in the ordinary sense of a certain relationship according to which we make
measurements. Depth thus understood is, rather, the experience of the rever-
sibility of dimensions, of a global 'locality' - everything in the same place at
the same time, a locality from which height, width, and depth are abstracted,
of a voluminosity we express in a word when we say that a thing is there. In
search of depth Cezanne seeks this deflagration of Being, and it is all in the
modes of space, in form as much as anything. Cezanne knows already what
cubism will repeat: that the external form, the envelope, is secondary and



752 Modernization and Modernism

derived, that it is not that which causes a thing to take form, that this shell of
space must be shattered, this fruit bowl broken - and what is there to paint,
then? Cubes, spheres, and cones (as he said once)? Pure forms which have the
solidity of what could be defined by an internal law of construction, forms
which all together, as traces or slices of the thing, let it appear between them
like a face in the reeds? This would be to put Being's solidity on one side and
its variety on the other. Cezanne made an experiment of this kind in his middle
period. He opted for the solid, for space - and came to find that inside this
space, a box or container too large for them, the things began to move, colour
against colour; they began to modulate in instability. Thus we must seek space
and its content as together. The problem is generalized; it is no longer that of
distance, of line, of form; it is also, arid equally, the problem of colour.

Colour is the 'place where our brain and the universe meet', he says in that
admirable idiom of the artisan of Being which Klee liked to cite. It is for the
benefit of colour that we must break up the form-spectacle. Thus the question
is not of colours, 'simulacra of the colours of nature' [Delaunay]. The question,
rather, concerns the dimension of colour, that dimension which creates identities,
differences, a texture, a materiality, a something - creates them from itself, for
itself. . . .

Yet (and this must be emphasized) there is no one master key of the visible,
and colour alone is no closer to being such a key than space is. The return to
colour has the merit of getting somewhat nearer to 'the heart of things' [Klee],
but this heart is beyond the colour envelope just as it is beyond the space
envelope. The Portrait of Vallier sets white spaces between the colours which
take on the function of giving shape to, and setting off a being, more general
than the yellow-being or green-being or blue-being. Also in the water-colours
of Cezanne's last years, for example, space (which had been taken to be evidence
itself and of which it was believed that the question of where was not to be
asked) radiates around planes that cannot be assigned to any place at all . . .

Obviously it is not a matter of adding one more dimension to those of the
flat canvas, of organizing an illusion or an objectless perception whose perfection
consists in simulating an empirical vision to the maximum degree. Pictorial
depth (as well as painted height and width) comes 'I know not whence' to alight
upon, and take root in, the sustaining support. The painter's vision is not a
view upon the outside, a merely 'physical-optical' [Klee] relation with the world.
The world no longer stands before him through representation; rather, it is the
painter to whom the things of the world give birth by a sort of concentration
or coming-to-itself of the visible. Ultimately the painting relates to nothing at
all among experienced things unless it is first of all 'autofigurative'. 1 It is a
spectacle of something only by being a 'spectacle of nothing', 2 by breaking the
'skin of things' 3 to show how the things become things, how the world becomes
world. Apollinaire said that in a poem there are phrases which do not appear
to have been created, which seem to have formed themselves. And Henri Michaux
said that sometimes Klee's colours seem to have been born slowly upon the
canvas, to have emanated from some primordial ground, 'exhaled at the right
place' 4 like a patina or a mould. Art is not construction, artifice, meticulous




VIb Modernist Art 753

relationship to a space and a world existing outside. It is truly the 'inarticulate
cry', as Hermes Trismegistus said, 'which seemed to be the voice of the light.'
And once it is present it awakens powers dormant in ordinary vision, a secret
of pre-existence. When through the water's thickness I see the tiling at the
bottom of a pool, I do not see it despite the water and the reflections there; I
see it through them and because of them. If there were no distortions, no ripples
of sunlight, if it were without this flesh that I saw the geometry of the tiles,
then I would cease to see it as it is and where it is - which is to say, beyond
any identical, specific place. I cannot say that the water itself - the aqueous
power, the sirupy and shimmering element - is in space; all this is not
somewhere else either, but it is not in the pool. It inhabits it, it materializes
itself there, yet it is not contained there; and if I raise my eyes towards the
screen of cypresses where the web of reflections is playing, I cannot gainsay the
fact that the water visits it, too, or at least sends into it, upon it, its active and
living essence. This internal animation, this radiation of the visible is what the
painter seeks under the name of depth, of space, of colour.

Anyone who thinks about the matter finds it astonishing that very often a
good painter can also make good drawings or good sculpture. Since neither the
means of expression nor the creative gestures are comparable, this fact [of
competence in several media] is proof that there is a system of equivalences, a
Logos of lines, of lighting, of colours, of reliefs, of masses - a conceptless
presentation of universal Being. The effort of modern painting has been directed
not so much towards choosing between line and colour, or even between the
figuration of things and the creation of signs, as it has been towards multiplying
the systems of equivalences, towards severing their adherence to the envelope
of things. This effort might force us to create new materials or new means of
expression, but it could well be realized at times by the re-examination and
reinvestment of those which existed already.
* * *



Because depth, colour, form, line, movement, contour, physiognomy are all
branches of Being and because each one can sway all the rest, there are no
separated, distinct 'problems' in painting, no really opposed paths, no partial
'solutions', no cumulative progress, no irretrievable options. There is nothing
to prevent a painter from going back to one of the devices he has shied away
from - making it, of course, speak differently. [. . .]

In 'working over' a favourite problem, even if it is just the problem of velvet
or wool, the true painter unknowingly upsets the givens of all the other
problems. His quest is total even where it looks partial. Just when he has reached
proficiency in some area, he finds that he has reopened another one where
everything he said before must be said again in a different way. The upshot is
that what he has found he does not yet have. It remains to be sought out; the
discovery itself calls forth still further quests. The idea of a universal painting,
of a totalization of painting, of a fully and definitively achieved painting is an
idea bereft of sense. For painters the world will always be yet to be painted,



754 Modernization and Modernism

even if it lasts millions of years ... it will end without having been conquered
in painting.

Panofsky shows that the 'problems 1 of painting which magnetize its history
are often solved obliquely, not in the course of inquiries instigated to solve
them but, on the contrary, at some point when the painters, having reached an
impasse, apparently forget those problems and permit themselves to be attracted
by other things. Then suddenly, altogether off guard, they turn up the old
problems and surmount the obstacle. This unhearing [sourde] historicity, ad-
vancing through the labyrinth by detours, transgression, slow encroachments
and sudden drives, does not imply that the painter does not know what he
wants. It does imply that what he wants is beyond the means and goals at hand
and commands from afar all our useful activity.



*The spectacle is first of all a spectacle of itself before it is a spectacle of something outside of

it.' - Translator's note from Merle au-Pontys 1961 lectures.

C. P. Bru, Esthetique de ('abstraction (Paris, 1959), pp. 99, 86.

Henri Michaux, Aventures de lignes.

Ibid.



4 Clement Greenberg (b. 1909) 'Modernist Painting'

More than any other single text in English, this essay has come to typify the Modernist
critical position on the visual arts. Its aim is to represent a logic of development
supposedly connecting the most successful painting of the previous hundred years, and
thus to justify the findings of taste as involuntary responses to the inexorable self-critical
tendency of painting itself. Though clearly built on Greenberg's earlier analyses of
avant-garde art and culture (see IVdIO and VaI), the argument of this essay relies less
on social-historical forms of evidence and more upon the observation of technical
changes in art itself. At the time of its publication Greenberg was closely engaged with
the painters Morris Louis and Kenneth Noland, whose form of abstract painting he was
soon to label 'Post-Painterly Abstraction'. The essay can be read as a form of response
to this work, which Greenberg saw as paradigmatic of the expression of feeling in art,
and as preparing a position for it as the most advanced outcome of an unquestionable
historical development. First published in Forum Lectures (Voice of America), Washington
DC, 1960. Reprinted with slight revisions in Art & Literature, no. 4, Spring 1965,
pp. 193-201, from which the present text is taken.



Modernism includes more than just art and literature. By now it includes almost
the whole of what is truly alive in our culture. It happens, also, to be very
much of a historical novelty. Western civilization is not the first to turn around
and question its own foundations, but it is the civilization that has gone furthest
in doing so. I identify Modernism with the intensification, almost the exacer-
bation, of this self-critical tendency that began with the philosopher Kant.
Because he was the first to criticize the means itself of criticism, I conceive of
Kant as the first real Modernist.



VIb Modernist Art 755

The essence of Modernism lies, as I see it, in the use of the characteristic
methods of a discipline to criticize the discipline itself - not in order to subvert
it, but to entrench it more firmly in its area of competence. Kant used logic
to establish the limits of logic, and while he withdrew much from its old
jurisdiction, logic was left in all the more secure possession of what remained
to it.

The self-criticism of Modernism grows out of but is not the same thing as
the criticism of the Enlightenment. The Enlightenment criticized from the
outside, the way criticism in its more accepted sense does; Modernism criticizes
from the inside, through the procedures themselves of that which is being
criticized. It seems natural that this new kind of criticism should have appeared
first in philosophy, which is critical by definition, but as the nineteenth century
wore on it made itself felt in many other fields. A more rational justification
had begun to be demanded of every formal social activity, and Kantian self-
criticism was called on eventually to meet and interpret this demand in areas
that lay far from philosophy.

We know what has happened to an activity like religion that has not been
able to avail itself of 'Kantian' immanent criticism in order to justify itself. At
first glance the arts might seem to have been in a situation like religion's. Having
been denied by the Enlightenment all tasks they could take seriously, they looked
as though they were going to be assimilated to entertainment pure and simple,
and entertainment itself looked as though it was going to be assimilated, like
religion, to therapy. The arts could save themselves from this leveling down
only by demonstrating that the kind of experience they provided was valuable
in its own right and not to be obtained from any other kind of activity.

Each art, it turned out, had to effect this demonstration on its own account.
What had to be exhibited and made explicit was that which was unique and
irreducible not only in art in general, but also in each particular art. Each art
had to determine, through the operations peculiar to itself, the effects peculiar
and exclusive to itself. By doing this each art would, to be sure, narrow its area
of competence, but at the same time it would make its possession of this area
all the more secure.

It quickly emerged that the unique and proper area of competence of each
art coincided with all that was unique to the nature of its medium. The task
of self-criticism became to eliminate from the effects of each art any and every
effect that might conceivably be borrowed from or by the medium of any other
art. Thereby each art would be rendered 'pure', and in its 'purity' find the
guarantee of its standards of quality as well as of its independence. 'Purity'
meant self-definition, and the enterprise of self-criticism in the arts became one
of self-definition with a vengeance.

Realistic, illusionist art had dissembled the medium, using art to conceal art.
Modernism used art to call attention to art. The limitations that constitute the
medium of painting - the flat surface, the shape of the support, the properties
of pigment - were treated by the Old Masters as negative factors that could be
acknowledged only implicitly or indirectly. Modernist painting has come to
regard these same limitations as positive factors that are to be acknowledged



756 Modernization and Modernism

openly. Manet's paintings became the first Modernist ones by virtue of the
frankness with which they declared the surfaces on which they were painted.
The Impressionists, in Manet's wake, abjured underpaying and glazing, to
leave the eye under no doubt as to the fact that the colors used were made of
real paint that came from pots or tubes. Cezanne sacrificed verisimilitude, or
correctness, in order to fit drawing and design more explicitly to the rectangular
shape of the canvas.

It was the stressing, however, of the ineluctable flatness of the support that
remained most fundamental in the processes by which pictorial art criticized
and defined itself under Modernism. Flatness alone was unique and exclusive
to that art. The enclosing shape of the support was a limiting condition, or
norm, that was shared with the art of the theater; color was a norm or means
shared with sculpture as well as the theater. Flatness, two-dimensionality, was
the only condition painting shared with no other art, and so Modernist painting
oriented itself to flatness as it did to nothing else.

The Old Masters had sensed that it was necessary to preserve what is called
the integrity of the picture plane: that is, to signify the enduring presence of
flatness under the most vivid illusion of three-dimensional space. The apparent
contradiction involved - the dialectical tension, to use a fashionable but apt
phrase - was essential to the success of their art, as it is indeed to the success
of all pictorial art. The Modernists have neither avoided nor resolved this
contradiction; rather, they have reversed its terms. One is made aware of the
flatness of their pictures before, instead of after, being made aware of what the
flatness contains. Whereas one tends to see what is in an Old Master before
seeing it as a picture, one sees a Modernist painting as a picture first. This is,
of course, the best way of seeing any kind of picture, Old Master or Modernist,
but Modernism imposes it as the only and necessary way, and Modernism's
success in doing so is a success of self-criticism.

It is not in principle that Modernist painting in its latest phase has abandoned
the representation of recognizable objects. What it has abandoned in principle
is the representation of the kind of space that recognizable, three-dimensional
objects can inhabit. Abstractness, or the non-figurative, has in itself still not
proved to be an altogether necessary moment in the self-criticism of pictorial
art, even though artists as eminent as Kandinsky and Mondrian have thought
so. Representation, or illustration, as such does not abate the uniqueness of
pictorial art; what does do so are the associations of the things represented. All
recognizable entities (including pictures themselves) exist in three-dimensional
space, and the barest suggestion of a recognizable entity suffices to call up
associations of that kind of space. The fragmentary silhouette of a human figure,
or of a teacup, will do so, and by doing so alienate pictorial space from the
two-dimensionality which is the guarantee of painting's independence as an art.
Three-dimensionality is the province of sculpture, and for the sake of its own
autonomy painting has had above all to divest itself of everything it might share
with sculpture. And it is in the course of its effort to do this, and not so much
- I repeat - to exclude the representational or the 'literary', that painting has
made itself abstract.




'<:



VIb Modernist Art 757

At the same time Modernist painting demonstrates, precisely in its resistance
to the sculptural, that it continues tradition and the themes of tradition, despite
all appearances to the contrary. For the resistance to the sculptural begins long
before the advent of Modernism. Western painting, insofar as it strives for
realistic illusion, owes an enormous debt to sculpture, which taught it in the
beginning how to shade and model towards an illusion of relief, and even how
to dispose that illusion in a complementary illusion of deep space. Yet some of
the greatest feats of Western painting came as part of the effort it has made in
the last four centuries to suppress and dispel the sculptural. Starting in Venice
in the sixteenth century and continuing in Spain, Belgium, and Holland in the
seventeenth, that effort was carried on at first in the name of color. When
David, in the eighteenth century, sought to revive sculptural painting, it was
in part to save pictorial art from the decorative flattening-out that the emphasis
on color seemed to induce. Nevertheless, the strength of David's own best
pictures (which are predominantly portraits) often lies as much in their color
as in anything else. And Ingres, his pupil, though subordinating color far more
consistently, executed pictures that were among the flattest, least sculptural done
in the West by a sophisticated artist since the fourteenth century. Thus by the
middle of the nineteenth century all ambitious tendencies in painting were
converging (beneath their differences) in an anti-sculptural direction.

Modernism, in continuing this direction, made it more conscious of itself.
With Manet and the Impressionists, the question ceased to be defined as one
of color versus drawing, and became instead a question of purely optical
experience as against optical experience modified or revised by tactile associ-
ations. It was in the name of the purely and literally optical, not in that of
color, that the Impressionists set themselves to undermining shading and
modeling and everything else that seemed to connote the sculptural. And in a
way like that in which David had reacted against Fragonard in the name of the
sculptural, Cezanne, and the Cubists after him, reacted against Impressionism.
But once again, just as David's and Ingres' reaction had culminated in a kind
of painting even less sculptural than before, so the Cubist counter-revolution
eventuated in a kind of painting flatter than anything Western art had seen since
before Cimabue - so flat indeed that it could hardly contain recognizable images.

In the meantime the other cardinal norms of the art of painting were
undergoing an equally searching inquiry, though the results may not have been
equally conspicuous. It would take me more space than is at my disposal to tell
how the norm of the picture's enclosing shape or frame was loosened, then
tightened, then loosened once again, and then isolated and tightened once more
by successive generations of Modernist painters; or how the norms of finish, of
paint texture, and of value and color contrast, were tested and retested. Risks
have been taken with all these, not only for the sake of new expression, but
also in order to exhibit them more clearly as norms. By being exhibited and
made explicit they are tested for their indispensability. This testing is by no
means finished, and the fact that it becomes more searching as it proceeds
accounts for the radical simplifications, as well as radical complications, in which
the very latest abstract art abounds.



758 Modernization and Modernism

Neither the simplifications nor the complications are matters of license. On
the contrary, the more closely and essentially the norms of a discipline become
defined the less apt they are to permit liberties ('liberation' has become a much
abused word in connection with avant-garde and Modernist art). The essential
norms or conventions of painting are also the limiting conditions with which a
marked-up surface must comply in order to be experienced as a picture.
Modernism has found that these limiting conditions can be pushed back
indefinitely before a picture stops being a picture and turns into an arbitrary
object; but it has also found that the further back these limits are pushed the
more explicitly they have to be observed. The intersecting black lines and
colored rectangles of a Mondrian may seem hardly enough to make a picture
out of, yet by echoing the picture's enclosing shape so self-evidently they impose
that shape as a regulating norm with a new force and a new r completeness. Far
from incurring the danger of arbitrariness in the absence of a model in nature,
Mondrian's art proves, with the passing of time, almost too disciplined, too
convention-bound in certain respects; once we have become used to its utter
abstractness we realize that it is more traditional in its color, as well as in its
subservience to the frame, than the last paintings of Monet are.

It is understood, I hope, that in plotting the rationale of Modernist art I have
had to simplify and exaggerate. The flatness towards which Modernist painting
orients itself can never be an utter flatness. The heightened sensitivity of the
picture plane may no longer permit sculptural illusion, or trompe-Voeil, but it
does and must permit optical illusion. The first mark made on a surface destroys
its virtual flatness, and the configurations of a Mondrian still suggest a kind of
illusion of a kind of third dimension. Only now it is a strictly pictorial, strictly
optical third dimension. Where the Old Masters created an illusion of space
into which one could imagine oneself walking, the illusion created by a Mod-
ernist is one into which one can only look, can travel through only with the
eye.

One begins to realize that the Neo-Impressionists were not altogether mis-
guided when they flirted with science. Kantian self-criticism finds its perfect
expression in science rather than in philosophy, and when this kind of self-criti-
cism was applied in art the latter was brought closer in spirit to scientific method
than ever before - closer than in the early Renaissance. That visual art should
confine itself exclusively to what is given in visual experience, and make no
reference to anything given in other orders of experience, is a notion whose
only justification lies, notionally, in scientific consistency. Scientific method
alone asks that a situation be resolved in exactly the same kind of terms as that
in which it is presented - a problem in physiology is solved in terms of
physiology, not in those of psychology; to be solved in terms of psychology, it
has to be presented in, or translated into, these terms first. Analogously,
Modernist painting asks that a literary theme be translated into strictly optical,
two-dimensional terms before becoming the subject of pictorial art - which
means its being translated in such a way that it entirely loses its literary
character. Actually, such consistency promises nothing in the way of aesthetic
quality or aesthetic results, and the fact that the best art of the past seventy or




VIb Modernist Art 759

eighty years increasingly approaches such consistency does not change this; now
as before, the only consistency which counts in art is aesthetic consistency,
which shows itself only in results and never in methods or means. From the
point of view of art itself its convergence of spirit with science happens to be
a mere accident, and neither art nor science gives or assures the other of
anything more than it ever did. What their convergence does show, however,
is the degree to which Modernist art belongs to the same historical and cultural
tendency as modern science.

It should also be understood that the self-criticism of Modernist art has never
been carried on in any but a spontaneous and subliminal way. It has been
altogether a question of practice, immanent to practice and never a topic of
theory. Much has been heard about programs in connection with Modernist art,
but there has really been far less of the programmatic in Modernist art than in
Renaissance or Academic art. With a few untypical exceptions, the masters of
Modernism have betrayed no more of an appetite for fixed ideas about art than
Gorot did. Certain inclinations and emphases, certain refusals and abstinences
seem to become necessary simply because the way to stronger, more expressive
art seems to lie through them. The immediate aims of Modernist artists remain
individual before anything else, and the truth and success of their work is
individual before it is anything else. To the extent that it succeeds as art
Modernist art partakes in no way of the character of a demonstration. It has
needed the accumulation over decades of a good deal of individual achievement
to reveal the self-critical tendency of Modernist painting. No one artist was, or
is yet, consciously aware of this tendency, nor could any artist work successfully
in conscious awareness of it. To this extent - which is by far the largest - art
gets carried on under Modernism in the same way as before.

And I cannot insist enough that Modernism has never meant anything like a
break with the past. It may mean a devolution, an unraveling of anterior
tradition, but it also means its continuation. Modernist art develops out of the
past without gap or break, and wherever it ends up it will never stop being
intelligible in terms of the continuity of art. The making of pictures has been
governed, since pictures first began to be made, by all the norms I have
mentioned. The Paleolithic painter or engraver could disregard the norm of the
frame and treat the surface in both a literally and a virtually sculptural way
because he made images rather than pictures, and worked on a support whose
limits could be disregarded because (except in the case of small objects like a
bone or horn) nature gave them to the artist in an unmanageable way. But the
making of pictures, as against images in the flat, means the deliberate choice
and creation of limits. This deliberateness is what Modernism harps on: that
is, it spells out the fact that the limiting conditions of art have to be made
altogether human limits.

I repeat that Modernist art does not offer theoretical demonstrations. It could
be said, rather, that it converts all theoretical possibilities into empirical ones,
and in doing so tests, inadvertently, all theories about art for their relevance
to the actual practice and experience of art. Modernism is subversive in this
respect alone. Ever so many factors thought to be essential to the making and



760 Modernization and Modernism

experiencing of art have been shown not to be so by the fact that Modernist art
has been able to dispense with them and yet continue to provide the experience of
art in all its essentials. That this 'demonstration' has left most of our old value
judgments intact only makes it the more conclusive. Modernism may have had
something to do with the revival of the reputations of Uccello, Piero, El Greco,
Georges de la Tour, and even Vermeer, and it certainly confirmed if it did not
start other revivals like that of Giotto; but Modernism has not lowered thereby
the standing of Leonardo, Raphael, Titian, Rubens, Rembrandt or Watteau.
What Modernism has made clear is that, though the past did appreciate masters
like these justly, it often gave wrong or irrelevant reasons for doing so.

Still, in some ways this situation has hardly changed. Art criticism lags behind
Modernist as it lagged behind pre-Modernist art. Most of the things that get
written about contemporary art belong to journalism rather than criticism
properly speaking. It belongs to journalism - and to the millennial complex
from which so many journalists suffer in our day - that each new phase of
Modernism should be hailed as the start of a whole new epoch of art marking
a decisive break with all the customs and conventions of the past. Each time,
a kind of art is expected that will be so unlike previous kinds of art and so
'liberated' from norms of practice or taste, that everybody, regardless of how
informed or uninformed, will be able to have his say about it. And each time,
this expectation is disappointed, as the phase of Modernism in question takes
its place, finally, in the intelligible continuity of taste and tradition, and as it
becomes clear that the same demands as before are made on artist and spectator.

Nothing could be further from the authentic art of our time than the idea of
a rupture of continuity. Art is, among many other things, continuity. Without
the past of art, and without the need and compulsion to maintain past standards
of excellence, such a thing as Modernist art would be impossible.



5 Theodor Adorno (1903-1969) from 'Commitment'

After the Second World War members of the Frankfurt School, who had been exiled in
the USA during the Nazi years, returned to West Germany and re-established the Institute
for Social Research in Frankfurt. Adorno became its Director after Horkheimer's retire-
ment in 1959. Adorno remained hostile to overtly political art, a position which he had
initially set out in his dialogue with Walter Benjamin in the 1930s (see IVo7). This debate
was given renewed currency after the war by Sartre's essay 'What is Literature?', which
had called for a committed art. In the present text Adorno reaffirms his belief in the
critical power of autonomous art, a position which in the later 1960s was to bring him
into conflict with a new generation of radical student activists. Adomo's is not, however,
a claim for i'art pour I'art Rather, it proceeds from an acknowledgement that the moral
high ground of commitment was open to claim by the Right as readily as by the Left.
Adorno had earlier claimed that to write poetry after Auschwitz would be barbaric.
Without abandoning this claim he now reread it, not as a total prohibition on art but as
a prohibition on committed art. For its very commitment required, as he put it, an
entente with the world which was to be affected. The paradoxical result was that only
the autonomous work of art could be the site of resistance to the competing interests



1



VIb Modernist Art 761

of a debased reality. Written in 1962 the essay was published in English translation by
F. McDonagh in A. Arato and E. Gebhardt (eds.), The Essential Frankfurt School Reader,
Oxford, 1978. The present extracts form three of the essay's four concluding sections.

The Problem of Suffering

I have no wish to soften the saying that to write lyric poetry after Auschwitz
is barbaric; it expresses in negative form the impulse which inspires committed
literature. The question asked by a character in Sartre's play Morts Sans
Sepulture, 'Is there any meaning in life when men exist who beat people until
the bones break in their bodies?', is also the question whether any art now has
a right to exist; whether intellectual regression is not inherent in the concept
of committed literature because of the regression of society. But Enzensberger's
retort also remains true, that literature must resist this verdict, in other words,
be such that its mere existence after Auschwitz is not a surrender to cynicism.
Its own situation is one of paradox, not merely the problem of how to react to
it. The abundance of real suffering tolerates no forgetting; Pascal's theological
saying, On ne doit plus dormir, must be secularized. Yet this suffering, what
Hegel called consciousness of adversity, also demands the continued existence
of art while it prohibits it; it is now virtually in art alone that suffering can
still find its own voice, consolation, without immediately being betrayed by it.
The most important artists of the age have realized this. The uncompromising
radicalism of their works, the very features defamed as formalism, give them a
terrifying power, absent from helpless poems to the victims of our time. But
even Schonberg's Survivor of Warsaw remains trapped in the aporia to which
it, autonomous figuration of heteronomy raised to the intensity of hell, totally
surrenders. There is something painful in Schonberg's compositions - not what
arouses anger in Germany, the fact that they prevent people from repressing
from memory what they at all costs want to repress. It is rather the way in
which, by turning suffering into images, despite all their hard implacability,
they wound our shame before the victims. For these are used to create
something, works of art, that are thrown to the consumption of a world which
destroyed them. The so-called artistic representation of the sheer physical pain
of people beaten to the ground by rifle butts contains, however remotely, the
power to elicit enjoyment out of it. The moral of this art, not to forget for a
single instant, slithers into the abyss of its opposite. The esthetic principle of
stylization, and even the solemn prayer of the chorus, make an unthinkable fate
appear to have had some meaning; it is transfigured, something of its horror is
removed. This alone does an injustice to the victims; yet no art which tried to
evade them could stand upright before justice. Even the sound of despair pays
its tribute to a hideous affirmation. Works of less than the highest rank are
even willingly absorbed, as contributions to clearing up the past. When genocide
becomes part of the cultural heritage in the themes of committed literature, it
becomes easier to continue to play along with the culture which gave birth to
|*Uirder. There is one nearly invariable characteristic of such literature. It is that
lt implies, purposely or not, that even in the so-called extreme situations, indeed



762 Modernization and Modernism

in them most of all, humanity flourishes. Sometimes this develops into a dismal
metaphysic which does its best to work up atrocities into 'limiting situations 1
which it then accepts to the extent that they reveal authenticity in men. In such
a homely existential atmosphere, the distinction between executioners and
victims becomes blurred; both, after all, are equally suspended above the
possibility of nothingness, which of course is generally not quite so uncomfort-
able for the executioners.



French and German Cultural Traditions

In the history of French and German consciousness, the problem of commitment
has been posed in opposite ways. In France, esthetics have been dominated,
openly or covertly, by the principle of Tart pour Vart, allied to academic and
reactionary tendencies. 1 This explains the revolt against it. Even extreme
avant-garde works have a touch of decorative allure in France. It is for this
reason that the call to existence and commitment sounded revolutionary there.
In Germany, the situation is the other way round. The liberation of art from
any external end, although it was a German who first raised it purely and
incorruptibly into a criterion of taste, has always been suspect to a tradition
which has deep roots in German idealism. The first famous document of this
tradition is that senior masters' bible of intellectual history, Schiller's Treatise
on the Theatre as a Moral Institution. Such suspicion is not so much due to the
elevation of mind to an Absolute that is coupled with it - an attitude that
swaggered its way to hubris in German philosophy. It is rather provoked by
the side that any work of art free of an ulterior goal shows to society. For this
art is a reminder of that sensuous pleasure in which even - indeed especially -
the most extreme dissonance, by sublimation and negation, partakes. German
speculative philosophy granted that a work of art contains within itself the
sources of its transcendence, and that its own sum is always more than it - but
only therefore to demand a certificate of good behavior from it. According to
this latent tradition, a work of art should have no being for itself, since otherwise
it would - as Plato's embryonic state socialism classically stigmatized it - be a
source of effeminacy and an obstacle to action for its own sake, the German
original sin. Killjoys, ascetics, moralists of the sort who are always invoking
names like Luther and Bismarck, have no time for esthetic autonomy; and there
is also an undercurrent of servile heteronomy in the pathos of the categorical
imperative, which is indeed on the one hand reason itself, but on the other a
brute datum to be blindly obeyed. Fifty years ago Stefan George and his school
were still being attacked as Frenchifying esthetes.

Today the curmudgeons whom no bombs could demolish have allied them-
selves with the philistines who rage against the alleged incomprehensibility of
the new art. The underlying impulse of these attacks is petty bourgeois hatred
of sex, the common ground of Western moralists and ideologists of socialist
realism. No moral terror can prevent the side the work of art shows its beholder
from giving him pleasure, even if only in the formal fact of temporary freedom




VIb Modernist Art 763

from the compulsion of practical goals. Thomas Mann called this quality of art
'high spirits,' a notion intolerable to people with morals. Brecht himself who
was not without ascetic traits - which reappear transmuted in the reserve of
any great autonomous art towards consumption - rightly ridiculed culinary art;
but he was much too intelligent not to know that pleasure can never be
completely ignored in the total esthetic effect, no matter how relentless the
work. The primacy of the esthetic object as pure refiguration does not smuggle
consumption or false harmony back by a detour. Although the moment of
pleasure, even when it is extirpated from the effect of a work, constantly returns
to it, the principle that governs autonomous works of art is not the totality of
their effects, but their own inherent structure. They are knowledge as noncon-
ceptual objects. This is the source of their greatness. It is not something of
which they have to persuade men, because it should be given to them. This is
why today autonomous rather than committed works of art should be encouraged
in Germany. Committed works all too readily credit themselves with every noble
value, and then manipulate them at their ease. Under fascism, too, no atrocity
was perpetrated without a moral veneer. Those who trumpet their ethics and
humanity in Germany today are merely waiting for a chance to persecute those
whom their rules condemn, and to exercise the same inhumanity in practice of
which they accuse modern art in theory. In Germany, commitment often means
bleating what everyone is already saying or at least secretly wants to hear. The
notion of a 'message' in art, even when politically radical, already contains an
accommodation to the world: the stance of the lecturer conceals a clandestine
entente with the listeners, who could only be truly rescued from illusions by
refusal of it.

The Politics of Autonomous Art

The type of literature that, in accordance with the tenets of commitment but
also with the demands of philistine moralism exists for man, betrays him by
traducing that which alone could help him, if it did not strike a pose of helping
him. But any literature which therefore concludes that it can be a law unto
itself, and exist only for itself, degenerates into ideology no less. Art, which
even in its opposition to society remains a part of it, must close its eyes and
ears against it: it cannot escape the shadow of irrationality. But when it appeals
to this unreason, making it a raison d'etre, it converts its own malediction into
a theodicy. Even in the most sublimated work of art there is a hidden 'it should
be otherwise.' When a work is merely itself and no other thing, as in a pure
pseudoscientific construction, it becomes bad art - literally pre-artistic. The
moment of true volition, however, is mediated through nothing other than the
form of the work itself, whose crystallization becomes an analogy of that other
condition which should be. As eminently constructed and produced objects,
works of art, even literary ones, point to a practice from which they abstain:
the creation of a just life. The mediation is not a compromise between
commitment and autonomy, nor a sort of mixture of advanced formal elements
with an intellectual content inspired by genuinely or supposedly progressive



764 Modernization and Modernism

politics. The content of works of art is never the amount of intellect pumped
into them: if anything it is the opposite. Nevertheless, an emphasis on auto-
nomous works is itself sociopolitical in nature. The feigning of a true politics
here and now, the freezing of historical relations which nowhere seem ready to
melt, oblige the mind to go where it need not degrade itself. Today, every
phenomenon of culture, even if a model of integrity, is liable to be suffocated
in the cultivation of kitsch. Yet paradoxically in the same epoch it is to works
of art that has fallen the burden of wordlessly asserting what is barred to politics.
Sartre himself has expressed this truth in a passage which does credit to his
honesty. 2 This is not a time for political art, but politics has migrated into
autonomous art, and nowhere more so than where it seems to be politically
dead. An example is Kafka's allegory of toy guns, in which an idea of
non-violence is fused with a dawning awareness of the approaching paralysis of
politics. Paul Klee too belongs to any debate about committed and autonomous
art: for his work, ecriture par excellence, has roots in literature and would not
have been what it was without them - or if it had not consumed them. During
the First World War or shortly after, Klee drew cartoons of Kaiser Wilhelm as
an inhuman iron-eater. Later, in 1920, these became - the development can be
shown quite clearly - the Angelus Novus, the machine angel, who, though he
no longer bears any emblem of caricature or commitment, flies far beyond both.
The machine angel's enigmatic eyes force the onlooker to try to decide whether
he is announcing the culmination of disaster or salvation hidden within it. But,
as Walter Benjamin, who owned the drawing, said, he is the angel who does
not give but takes.

1 'We know very well that pure art and empty art are the same thing and that esthetic purism was
a brilliant manoeuvre of the bourgeois of the last century who preferred to see themselves
denounced as philistines rather than as exploiters/ What is Literature?, Jean-Paul Sartre, London,
1967, p. 17.

2 See Jean-Paul Sartre, L'Existentialisme est un Humanisme, Paris, 1946, p. 105.



6 Barnett Newman (1905-1970) Interview with
Dorothy Gees Seckler

Although Newman was the most evidently articulate of the New York School of painters,
his first one-man shows of 1950 and 1951 were generally greeted with incomprehen-
sion, and it was not until the early 1960s that his work was widely recognized. From
then' on, however, his work was increasingly taken as a model for new forms of
ambitious abstract art. In this interview he reiterates that strong concern for directness
of expression and for the ethical content and purport of art which he shared with his
contemporaries Rothko, Gottlieb and Still. First published in Art in America, vol. 50, no.
2, New York, Summer 1962, pp. 83 and 86-7. Reprinted as 'Frontiers of Space' in
Barnett Newman, Selected Writings and Interviews, New York, 1990, pp. 247-51.

SECKLER: A general public image of your work conceives of it as excessively
logical, hieratic, involved with structure and intellectual dialectic.



VIb Modernist Art 765

NEWMAN: This is not art criticism. This is art politics. It is advanced by
painters, and their institutional friends, to give themselves the cloak of
romantic spontaneity. I repudiate all these charges. I like your phrase that I
am concerned with the immediate and the particular without using a general
formula for the painting process with its many particulars. My concern is
with the fullness that comes from emotion, not with its initial explosion, or
its emotional fallout, or the glow of its expenditure. The fact is, I am an
intuitive painter, a direct painter. I have never worked from sketches, never
planned a painting, never 'thought out' a painting. I start each painting as if
I had never painted before. I present no dogma, no system, no demonstrations.
I have no formal solutions. I have no interest in the 'finished' painting. I
work only out of high passion.

* * *

SECKLER: How would you define your sense of space?

NEWMAN: I don't manipulate or play with space. I declare it. It is by my
declaration that my paintings become full. All of my paintings have a top
and a bottom. They are never divided; nor are they confined or constricted;
nor do they jump out of their size. Since childhood I have always been aware
of space as a space-dome. I remember years ago shocking my friends by saying
I would prefer going to Churchill, Canada, to walk the tundra than go to
Paris. For me space is where I can feel all four horizons, not just the horizon
in front of me and in back of me because then the experience of space exists
only as volume. In architecture the concern with volume is valid. Unfortu-
nately, painting is still involved in the notion of space as architectural volumes
- intricate small volumes, medium volumes, or pulsating total volumes. I am
glad that by 1945 I got out of it.

Is space where the orifices are in the faces of people talking to each other,
or is it not between the glance of their eyes as they respond to each other?
Anyone standing in front of my paintings must feel the vertical domelike
vaults encompass him to awaken an awareness of his being alive in the
sensation of complete space. This is the opposite of creating an environment.
The environment is separate from the painting. A painter friend, [Gerome]
Kamrowski, said it well: he said my paintings are hostile to the environment.
The room space is empty and chaotic, but the sense of space created by my
painting should make one feel, I hope, full and alive in a spatial dome of 180
degrees going in all four directions. This is the only real sensation of space.
At the same time I want to make it clear that I never set out to paint
space-domes per se. I am, I hope, involved in much more.

SECKLER: What about subject matter?

NEWMAN: The central issue of painting is the subject matter. Most people
think of subject matter as what Meyer Schapiro has called 'object matter.' It
is the 'object matter' that most people want to see in a painting. That is
what, for them, makes the painting seem full. For me both the use of objects
and the manipulation of areas for the sake of the areas themselves must end
up being anecdotal. My subject is antianecdotal. An anecdote can be subjective
and internal as well as of the external world, so that the expression of the



^



766 Modernization and Modernism

biography of self or the intoxicated moment of glowing ecstasy must in the
end also become anecdotal. All such painting is essentially episodic, which
means it calls for a sequel. This must happen if a painting does not give a
sensation of wholeness or fulfillment. That is why I have no interest in the
episodic or ecstatic, however abstract. The excitement always ends at the
brink and leaves the subject, so to speak, hanging there like the girl i n
The Perils of Pauline. The next painting repeats the excitement, in a kind of
ritual. One expects the girl to be saved finally, but she is again left hanging
on the brink, and so on and on. This is the weakness of the ecstatic and the
episodic. It is an endless search for a statement of personality that never takes
place. The truly passionate exists on a different level.

SECKLER: You have the reputation of being a slow worker.

NEWMAN: It is easy to be a fast worker. I have great admiration for raw,
boundless energy, but I cannot work out of boredom, to keep myself busy or
only to express myself - or to tell the story of my life - or to find my
personality in painting by acting out some character. I paint out of high
passion, and although my way of working may seem simple, for me it is
difficult and complex.

It would be easy for me now to talk about the transcendental, the self,
revelation, etc. All painting worth anything has all this. I prefer to talk on
the practical or technical level. For example, drawing is central to my whole
concept. I don't mean making drawings, although I have always done a lot of
them. I mean the drawing that exists in my painting. Yet no writer on art
has ever confronted that issue. I am always referred to in relation to my color.
Yet I know that if I have made a contribution, it is primarily in my drawing.
The impressionists changed the way of seeing the world through their kind of
drawing; the cubists saw the world anew in their drawing; and I hope that I
have contributed a new way of seeing through drawing. Instead of using outlines,
instead of making shapes or setting off spaces, my drawing declares the space.
Instead of working with the remnants of space, I work with the whole space.

SECKLER: Can you clarify the meaning of your work in relation to society?

NEWMAN: It is full of meaning, but the meaning must come from the seeing,
not from the talking. I feel, however, that one of its implications is its
assertion of freedom, its denial of dogmatic principles, its repudiation of all
dogmatic life. Almost fifteen years ago Harold Rosenberg challenged me to
explain what one of my paintings could possibly mean to the world. My
answer was that if he and others could read it properly it would mean the
end of all state capitalism and totalitarianism. That answer still goes.



7 Clement Greenberg (b. 1909) from 'After Abstract
Expressionism'

In this essay Greenberg's analysis of Modernist painting is concentrated upon American
painting, and upon the transition from the 'first generation' painting of Rothko, Still and
Newman to the 'Post-Painterly Abstraction' of a younger generation. In particular he




VIb Modernist Art 767

stresses the priority to be accorded to the artist's initial conception in the assessment
of current forms of abstract painting. First published in Art International, VI, no. 8,
Lugano, October 1962, pp. 24-32, from which the present extract is taken.

Like so much of painterly art before it, Abstract Expressionism has worked in
the end to reduce the role of colour: unequal densities of paint become, as I
have said, so many differences of light and dark, and these deprive colour of
both its purity and its fullness. At the same time it has also worked against
true openness, which is supposed to be another quintessentially painterly aim:
the slapdash application of paint ends by crowding the picture plane into a
compact jumble - a jumble that is another version, as we see it in de Kooning
and his followers, of academically Cubist compactness. Still, Newman, and
Rothko turn away from the painterliness of Abstract Expressionism as though
to save the objects of painterliness - colour and openness - from painterliness
itself. This is why their art could be called a synthesis of painterly and
non-painterly or, better, a transcending of the differences between the two. Not
a reconciling of these - that belonged to Analytical Cubism, and these three
Americans happen to be the first serious abstract painters, the first abstract
painters of style, really to break with Cubism.

Clyfford Still, who is one of the great innovators of modernist art, is the
leader and pioneer here. Setting himself against the immemorial insistence on
light and dark contrast, he asserted instead colour's capacity to act through the
contrast of pure hues in relative independence of light and dark design. Late
Impressionism was the precedent here, and as in the late Monet, the suppression
of value contrasts created a new kind of openness. The picture no longer divided
itself into shapes or even patches, but into zones and areas and fields of colour.
This became essential, but it was left to Newman and Rothko to show how
completely so. If Still's largest paintings, and especially his horizontal ones, fail
so often to realize the monumental openness they promise, it is not only because
he will choose a surface too large for what he has to say; it is also because too
many of his smaller colour areas will fail really to function as areas and will
remain simply patches - patches whose rustic-Gothic intricacies of outline halt
the free flow of colour-space.

With Newman and Rothko, temperaments that might strike one as being
natively far more painterly than Still's administer themselves copious antidotes
in the form of the rectilinear. The rectilinear is kept ambiguous, however:
Rothko fuzzes and melts all his dividing lines; Newman will insert an uneven
edge as foil to his ruled ones. Like Still, they make a show of studiedness, as
if to demonstrate their rejection of the mannerisms which have become insep-
arable by now from rapid brush or knife handling. Newman's occasional brushy
e dge, and the torn but exact one left by Still's knife, are there as if to advertise
both their awareness and their repudiation of the easy effects of spontaneity-
Still continues to invest in surface textures, and there is no question but that
the tactile irregularities of his surfaces, with their contrasts f m att and shiny*
Paint coat and priming, contribute to the intensity of his art. But by renouncing



768 Modernization and Modernism

tactility, and detail in drawing, Newman and Rothko achieve what I find a more
positive openness and colour. The rectilinear is open by definition: it calls the
least attention to drawing and gets least in the way of colour-space. A thin paint
surface likewise gets least in the way of colour-space, by excluding tactile
associations. Here both Rothko and Newman take their lead from Milton Avery,
who took his from Matisse. At the same time colour is given more autonomy
by being relieved of its localizing and denotative function. It no longer fills in
or specifies an area or even plane, but speaks for itself by dissolving all
definiteness of shape and distance. To this end - as Still was the first to show
- it has to be warm colour, or cool colour infused with warmth. It has also to
be uniform in hue, with only the subtlest variations of value if any at all, and
spread over an absolutely, not merely relatively, large area. Size guarantees the
purity as well as the intensity needed to suggest indeterminate space: more blue
simply being bluer than less blue. This too is why the picture has to be confined
to so few colours. Here again, Still showed the way, the vision of the two- or
three-colour picture . . . being his in the first place (whatever help towards it
he may have got from the Miro of 1924-1930).

But Newman and Rothko stand or fall by colour more obviously than Still
does. (Where Newman often fails is in using natively warm colours like red and
orange, Rothko in using pale ones, or else in trying to dram, as in his disastrous
'Seagram' murals.) Yet the ultimate effect sought is one of more than chromatic
intensity; it is rather one of an almost literal openness that embraces and absorbs
colour in the act of being created by it. Openness, and not only in painting, is
the quality that seems most to exhilarate the attuned eyes of our time. Facile
explanations suggest themselves here which I leave the reader to explore for
himself. Let it suffice to say that by the new openness they have attained
Newman, Rothko, and Still point to what I would risk saying is the only way
to high pictorial art in the near future. And they also point to that way by their
repudiation of virtuosity of execution.

Elsewhere I have written of the kind of self-critical process which I think
provides the infra-logic of modernist art ('Modernist Painting'). [. . .] As it
seems to me, Newman, Rothko, and Still have swung the self-criticism of
modernist painting in a new direction simply by continuing it in its old one.
The question now asked through their art is no longer what constitutes art, or
the art of painting, as such, but what irreducibly constitutes good art as such.
Or rather, what is the ultimate source of value or quality in art? And the
worked-out answer appears to be: not skill, training, or anything else having to
do with execution or performance, but conception alone. Culture or taste may
be a necessary condition of conception, but conception is alone decisive.
Conception can also be called invention, inspiration, or even intuition (in the
usage of Croce, who did anticipate theoretically what practice has just now
discovered and confirmed for itself)- It is true that skill used to be a vessel of
inspiration and do the office of conception, but that was when the best pictorial
art was the most naturalistic pictorial art.

Inspiration alone belongs altogether to the individual; everything else, includ-



VIb Modernist Art 769

ing skill, can now be acquired by any one. Inspiration remains the only factor
in the creation of a successful work of art that cannot be copied or imitated.
This has been left to artists like Newman and Mondrian to make explicit (and
it is really the only thing Newman and Mondrian have in common). Newman's
pictures look easy to copy, and maybe the\ really are. But they are far from
easy to conceive, and their quality and meaning lies almost entirely in their
conception. That, to me, is self-evident, but even if it were not, the frustrated
efforts of Newman's imitators would reveal it. The onlooker who says his child
could paint a Newman may be right, but Newman would have to be there to
tell the child exactly what to do. The exact choices of colour, medium, size,
shape, proportion - including the size and shape of the support - are what alone
determine the quality of the result, and these choices depend solely on inspir-
ation or conception. Like Rothko and Still, Newman happens to be a conven-
tionally skilled artist - need I say it? But if he uses his skill, it is to suppress
the evidence of it. And the suppression is part of the triumph of his art, next
to which most other contemporary painting begins to look fussy. [ . . . ]



Michael Fried (b.
Painters



1939) from Three American



Fried is one of a group of American critics and art historians who were close to
Greenberg in the early 1960s, taking his criticism as a source of methodological
example and his theorization of Modernism as an explicit point of departure for their
own work. Fried was concerned to amend the essentialism of Greenberg's account of
Modernism and of its development. His distinct contribution has been to concentrate
upon the specificity of the effects of paintings and sculptures, and thus to reintroduce
considerations of spectatorship into Modernist criticism. By this shift of emphasis, the
question of value in Modernist art is refrained in terms of historically specific kinds of
relations between paintings and spectators, and therefore opened to inquiry. According
to Fried's thesis, it is this historical character of Modernist art that justifies the
application of a formal method of criticism. Three American Painters was first published
as the catalogue introduction to an exhibition organized by Fried at the Fogg Art
Museum, Harvard University, from 21 April to 30 May 1965. The painters in question
were Kenneth Noland, Jules Olitski and Frank Stella. In an introductory note Fried
asserted that his aim was 'to raise, even to force, the issue of quality'. The opening
section reprinted here was based on a separate essay published under the title
'Modernist Painting and Formal Criticism' in The American Scholar, Autumn 1964.

. . . vous n 'etes que le premier
dans la decrepitude de voire art.

Baudelaire to Manet, 1865

For twenty years or more almost all the best new painting and sculpture has
been done in America; notably the work of artists such as de Kooning,
Frankenthaler, Gorky, Gottlieb, Hofmann, Kline, Louis, Motherwell, Newman,



770 Modernization and Modernism

Pollock, Rothko, Smith and Still - apart from those in the present exhibition
- to name only some of the best. It could be argued, in fact, that the flowering
of painting and, to a much lesser degree, of sculpture that has taken place in
this country since the end of the Second World War is comparable to that
which occurred in American poetry in the two decades after 1912, as regards
both the quality of the work produced and what might be called its intrinsic
difficulty.

[. . .] It is one of the most important facts about the contemporary situation
in the visual arts that the fundamental character of the new art has not been
adequately understood. This is not altogether surprising. Unlike poets, painters
and sculptors rarely practice criticism; and perhaps partly as a consequence of
this, the job of writing about art has tended to pass by default to men and
women who are in no way qualified for their profession. Moreover, the visual
skills necessary to come to grips with the new painting and sculpture are perhaps
even more rare than the verbal skills demanded by the new poetry. But if the
inadequacy of almost all contemporary art criticism is not surprising, it is
undeniably ironic, because the visual arts - painting especially - have never
been more explicitly self-critical than during the past twenty years.

. . . this essay attempts an exposition of what, to my mind, are some of the
most important characteristics of the new art. At the same time it tries to show
why formal criticism, such as that practiced by Roger Fry or, more to the point,
by Clement Greenberg, is better able to throw light upon the new art than any
other approach. To do this, the development over the past hundred years of
what Greenberg calls 'modernist' painting must be considered, because the work
of the artists mentioned above represents, in an important sense, the extension
in this country of a kind of painting that began in France with the work of
Edouard Manet. 1 Sculpture is, to a certain extent, another story, and for reasons
of space and simplicity will not be considered here.

Roughly speaking, the history of painting from Manet through Synthetic
Cubism and Matisse may be characterized in terms of the gradual withdrawal
of painting from the task of representing reality - or of reality from the power
of painting to represent it 2 - in favor of an increasing preoccupation with
problems intrinsic to painting itself. One may deplore the fact that critics such
as Fry and Greenberg concentrate their attention upon the formal characteristics
of the works they discuss; but the painters whose work they most esteem on
formal grounds - e.g. Manet, the Impressionists, Seurat, Cezanne, Picasso,
Braque, Matisse, Leger, Mondrian, Kandinsky, Miro - are among the finest
painters of the past hundred years. This is not to imply that only the formal
aspect of their paintings is worthy of interest. On the contrary, because
recognizable objects, persons and places are often not entirely expunged from
their work, criticism which deals with the ostensible subject of a given painting
can be highly informative; and in general, criticism concerned with aspects of
the situation in which it was made other than in a formal context can add
significantly to our understanding of the artist's achievement. But criticism of
this kind has shown itself largely unable to make convincing discriminations of
value among the works of a particular artist; and in this century it often happens



w



VIb Modernist Art 771

that those paintings that are most full of explicit human content can be faulted
on formal grounds - Picasso's Guernica is perhaps the most conspicuous example
- in comparison with others virtually devoid of such content. (It must be granted
that this says something about the limitations of formal criticism as well as
about its strengths. Though precisely what it is taken to say will depend on
one's feelings about Guernica, etc.)

It is worth adding that there is nothing binding in the value judgements of
formal criticism. All judgments of value begin and end in experience, or ought
to and if someone does not feel that Manet's Dejeuner sur Vherbe, Matisse's
Piano Lesson or Pollock's Autumn Rhythm are superb paintings, no critical
arguments can take the place of feeling it. On the other hand, one's experiences
of works of art are always informed by what one has come to understand about
them; and it is the burden of the formal critic both to objectify his intuitions
with all the intellectual rigor at his command, and to be on his guard against
enlisting a formalist rhetoric in defense of what he fears may be merely private
enthusiasms.

It is also imperative that the formal critic bear in mind at all times that the
objectivity he aspires toward can be no more than relative. But his detractors
would do well to bear in mind themselves that his aspirations toward objectivity
are given force and relevance by the tendency of the most important current in
painting since Manet to concern itself increasingly and with growing self-aware-
ness with formal problems and issues. [ . . . ]

Ever since the publication in 1888 of Heinrich Wolfflin's first book, Renais-
sance und Barock, many critics of style have tended to rely on a fundamentally
Hegelian conception of art history, in which styles are described as succeeding
one another in accord with an internal dynamic or dialectic, rather than in
response to social, economic and political developments in society at large. One
of the stock objections, in fact, to exclusively stylistic or formal criticism of the
art of the past - for example, of the High Renaissance - is that it fails to deal
with the influence of non-artistic factors upon the art of the time, and as a
result is unable both to elucidate the full meaning of individual works and to
put forward a convincing account of stylistic change. Such an objection,
however, derives the real but limited validity it possesses from the fact that
painting and sculpture during the Renaissance were deeply involved, as regards
patronage and iconography, with both the Church and State. But by the late
nineteenth and early twentieth century, the relation of art - as well as of the
Church and State - to society appears to have undergone a radical change. And
although the change in question cannot be understood apart from a consideration
of economic and other non-artistic factors, by far the most important single,
characteristic of the new modus vivendi between the arts and bourgeois society
gradually arrived at during the first decades of the present century has been
the tendency of ambitious art to become more and more concerned with
Problems and issues intrinsic to itself. 3

All this has, of course, been recounted before. But what has not been
sufficiently recognized is that in the face of these developments the same
objections that are effective when directed against exclusively formal criticism



772 Modernization and Modernism

of High Renaissance painting lose almost all their force and relevance. In
comparison with what may be said in precise detail about the relations between
High Renaissance art and the society in which it arose, only the most general
statements - such as this one - may be made about the relation between
modernist painting and modern society. In a sense, modernist art in this century
finished what society in the nineteenth began: the alienation of the artist from
the general preoccupations of the culture in which he is embedded, and the
prizing loose of art itself from the concerns, aims and ideals of that culture.
With the achievements of Cubism in the first and second decades of this century,
if not before, painting and sculpture became free to pursue concerns intrinsic
to themselves. This meant that it was now possible to conceive of stylistic change
in terms of the decisions of individual artists to engage with particular formal
problems thrown up by the art of the recent past; and in fact the fundamentally
Hegelian conception of art history at work in the writings of Wblfflin and
Greenberg, whatever its limitations when applied to the art of the more distant
past, seems particularly well suited to the actual development of modernism in
the visual arts, painting especially.

I am arguing, then, that something like a dialectic of modernism has in effect
been at work in the visual arts for roughly a century now; and by dialectic I
mean what is essential in Hegel's conception of historical progression, as well
as that of the young Marx, as expounded in this century by the Marxist
philosopher Georg Lukacs in his great work, History and Class Consciousness,
and by the late Maurice Merleau-Ponty in numerous books and essays. More
than anything else, the dialectic in the thought of these men is an ideal of action
as radical criticism of itself founded upon as objective an understanding of one's
present situation as one is able to achieve. There is nothing teleological about
such an ideal: it does not aim toward a predetermined end, unless its complete
incarnation in action can be called such an end. But this would amount to
nothing less than the establishment of a perpetual revolution - perpetual because
bent on unceasing radical criticism of itself. It is no wonder such an ideal has
not been realized in the realm of politics; but it seems to me that the
development of modernist painting over the past century has led to a situation
that may be described in these terms. That is, while the development of
modernist painting has not been directed toward any particular style of painting,
at any moment - including the present one - the work of a relatively few
painters appears more advanced, more radical in its criticism of the modernist
art of the recent past, than any other contemporary work. The chief function
of the dialectic of modernism in the visual arts has been to provide a principle
by which painting can change, transform and renew itself, and by which it is
enabled to perpetuate virtually intact, and sometimes even enriched, through
each epoch of self-renewal, those of its traditional values that do not pertain
directly to representation. Thus modernist painting preserves what it can of its
history, not as an act of piety toward the past but as a source of value in the
present and future.

For this reason, if for no other, it is ironic that modernist painting is often
described as nihilistic and its practitioners characterized as irresponsible char-



VIb Modernist Art 773

latans. In point of fact, the strains under which they work are enormous, and
it is not surprising that, in one way or another, many of the finest modernist
painters have cracked up under them. This tendency toward breakdown has
been intensified in the past twenty years by the quickening that has taken place
in the rate of self-transformation within modernism itself - a quickening that,
in turn, has been the result of an increase in formal and historical self-awareness
on the part of modernist painters. The work of such painters as Noland, Olitski
and Stella not only arises largely out of their personal interpretations of the
particular situations in which advanced painting found itself at crucial moments
in their respective developments; their work also aspires to be adjudged, in
retrospect, to have been necessary to the finest modernist painting of the future.
'History, according to Hegel, is the maturation of a future in the present, not
the sacrifice of the present to an unknown future, and the rule of action
according to him is not to be effective at any price, but above all to be fecund,'
Merleau-Ponty has written. In this sense the ultimate criterion of the legitimacy
of a putative advance in modernist painting is its fecundity. But if one seeks
to test this criterion against the art of the recent past, one must bear in mind
that the finest contemporary painting testifies to the fecundity not only of the
art of Barnett Newman around 1950, but to that of de Kooning as well; and
that this is so because of, not in spite of, the fact that Newman's art amounts
to the most radical criticism of de Kooning's one can imagine.

One consequence of all this is that modernist painting has gone a long way
toward effacing the traditional distinction between problems in morals and
problems in art formulated by Stuart Hampshire in his essay 'Logic and
Appreciation' as follows: 'A work of art is gratuitous. It is not essentially the
answer to a question or the solution to a presented problem.' Whereas 'action
in response to any moral problem is not gratuitous; it is imposed; that there
should be some response is absolutely necessary. One cannot pass by a situation;
one must pass through it in one way or another.'

Hampshire's distinction holds good, I think, for all painting except the kind
I have been trying in this essay to define. Once a painter who accepts the basic
premises of modernism becomes aware of a particular problem thrown up by
the art of the recent past, his action is no longer gratuitous but imposed. He
may be mistaken in his assessment of the situation. But as long as he believes
such a problem exists and is important, he is confronted by a situation he cannot
pass by, but must, in some way or other, pass through; and the result of this
forced passage will be his art. This means that while modernist painting has
increasingly divorced itself from the concerns of the society in which it
precariously flourishes, the actual dialectic by which it is made has taken on
more and more of the denseness, structure and complexity of moral experience
- that is, of life itself, but life lived as few are inclined to live it: in a state of
continuous intellectual and moral alertness.

The formal critic of modernist painting, then, is also a moral critic: not
because all art is at bottom a criticism of life, but because modernist painting
is at least a criticism of itself. And because this is so, criticism that shares the
basic premises of modernist painting finds itself compelled to play a role in its



774 Modernization and Modernism

development closely akin to, and potentially only somewhat less important than,
that of new paintings themselves. Not only will such a critic expound the
significance of new painting that strikes him as being genuinely exploratory,
and distinguish between this and work that does not attempt to challenge or to
go beyond the achievements of prior modernists; but in discussing the work of
painters he admires he will have occasion to point out what seem to him flaws
in putative solutions to particular formal problems; and, more rarely, he may
even presume to call the attention of modernist painters to formal issues that,
in his opinion, demand to be grappled with. Finally just as a modernist painter
may be mistaken in his assessment of a particular situation, or having grasped
the situation may fail to cope with it successfully, the formal critic who shares
the basic premises of modernist painting runs the analogous risk of being wrong.
And in fact it is inconceivable that he will not be wrong a fair amount of the
time. But being wrong is preferable to being irrelevant; and the recognition that
everyone involved with contemporary art must work without certainty can only
be beneficial in its effects. For example, it points up the difficulty of trying to
decide whose opinions on the subject among the many put forward deserve to
be taken seriously - a decision about as hard to make as value-judgments in
front of specific paintings.

It may be argued that this is an intolerably arrogant conception of the critic's
job of work, and perhaps it is. But it has the virtue of forcing the critic who
takes it up to run the same risks as the artist whose work he criticizes. In view
of this last point it is not surprising that so few critics have chosen to assume
its burdens.

1 Although Manet is probably the first painter whom one would term 'modernist,' some of the
problems and crises to which his paintings constitute a decisive and unexpected response are
present in the work of David, Gericault, Ingres, Delacroix and Courbet. Any account of the
genesis of modernism would have to deal with these men.

2 This is more than just a figure of speech: it is a capsule description of what may be seen to take
place in Manet's paintings. Manet's ambitions are fundamentally realistic. He starts out aspiring
to the objective transcription of reality, of a world to which one wholly belongs, such as he finds
in the work of Velasquez and Hals. But where Velasquez and Hals took for granted their relation
to the worlds they belonged to and observed and painted, Manet is sharply conscious that his
own relation to reality is far more problematic. And to paint his world with the same fullness
of response, the same passion for truth, that he finds in the work of Velasquez and Hals, means
that he is forced to paint not merely his world but his problematic relation to it: his own awareness
of himself as in and yet not of the world. In this sense Manet is the first post-Kantian painter:
the first painter whose awareness of himself raises problems of extreme difficulty that cannot be
ignored: the first painter for whom consciousness itself is the great subject of his art.

Almost from the first - surely as early as the Dejeuner sur Vherbe - Manet seems to have striven
hard to make this awareness function as an essential part of his paintings, an essential aspect of
their content. This accounts for the situational character of Manet's paintings of the 1860s: the
painting itself is conceived as a kind of tableau vivant (in this respect Manet relates back to
David), but a tableau vivant constructed so as to dramatize not a particular event so much as the
beholder's alienation from that event. Moreover, in paintings like the Dejeuner and the Olympia,
for example, the inhibiting, estranging quality of self-awareness is literally depicted within the
painting: in the Dejeuner by the unintelligible gesture of the man on the right and the bird frozen
in flight at the top of the painting; in the Olympia above all by the hostile, almost schematic cat;
and in both by the distancing calm stare of Victorine Meurend.



VIb Modernist Art 775

But Manet's desire to make the estranging quality of self-awareness an essential part of the
content of his work - a desire which, as we have seen, is at bottom realistic - has an important
consequence: namely, that self-awareness in this particular situation necessarily entails the
awareness that what one is looking at is, after all, merely a painting. And this awareness too
must be made an essential part of the work itself. That is, there must be no question but that
the painter intended it to be felt; and if necessary the spectator must be compelled to feel it.
Otherwise the self- awareness (and the alienation) Manet is after would remain incomplete and
equivocal.

For this reason Manet emphasizes certain characteristics which have nothing to do with
verisimilitude but which assert that the painting in question is exactly that: a painting. For
example, Manet emphasizes the flatness of the picture-surface by eschewing modelling and (as
in the Dejeuner) refusing to depict depth convincingly, calls attention to the limits of the canvas
by truncating extended forms with the framing-edge, and underscores the rectangular shape of
the picture-support by aligning with it, more or less conspicuously, various elements within the
painting. (The notions of emphasis and assertion are important here. David and Ingres rely on
rectangular composition far more than Manet; and some of Ingres' forms have as little modelling
as Manet's. But David and Ingres are not concerned to emphasize the rectangularity or the
flatness of the canvas, but rather they make use of these to insure the stability of their compositions
and the Tightness of their drawing.)

No wonder Manet's art has always been open to contradictory interpretations: the contradictions
reside in the conflict between his ambitions and his actual situation. (What one takes to be the
salient features of his situation is open to argument; an uncharacteristically subtle Marxist could,
I think, make a good case for focussing on the economic and political situation in France after
1848. In this note, however, I have stressed Manet's recognition of consciousness as a problem
for art, as well as the estranging quality of his own consciousness of himself.) Manet's art
represents the last attempt in Western painting to achieve a full equivalent to the great realistic
painting of the past: an attempt which led, in quick inexorable steps, to the founding of modernism
through the emphasis on pictorial qualities and problems in their own right. This is why Manet
was so easily thrown off stride by the advent of impressionism around 1870: because his pictorial
and formal innovations of the preceding decade had not been made for their own sakes, but in
the service of a phenomenology that had already been worked out in philosophy, and had been
objectified in some poetry (e.g. Blake), but which had not yet made itself felt in the visual arts.
It was only at the end of his life that Manet at last succeeded in using what he had learned from
Impressionism to objectify his own much more profound phenomenology, in the Bar aux
Folies-Bergere. I intend to deal with all this elsewhere as soon as possible.

This is dangerously over-simplified. I am convinced that something of the sort did in fact occur,
and that it makes sense to speak of painting itself having become increasingly self-aware, both
formally and historically, during the past century or more. But a lot of careful work would be
required to give this notion the substance it requires. Moreover, the notion that there are problems
'intrinsic' to the art of painting is, so far as I can see, the most important question begged in
this essay. It has to do with the concept of a 'medium,' and is one of the points philosophy and
art criticism might discuss most fruitfully, if a dialogue between them could be established.
Similarly, an examination of the 'grammar' (in the sense Wittgenstein gives to this word in the
Philosophical Investigations) of a family of concepts essential to this essay - e.g., problem, solution,
advance, logic, validity - would be more than welcome.



9 Michael Fried (b. 1939) from 'Shape as Form:
Frank Stella's New Paintings'

This essay was written in specific response to a series of eccentrically shaped paintings
made by Stella in 1966. The author's apparent aim, however, was to advance the
theorization of recent abstract art in general. In this, the first of the essay's four
sections, Fried reviews what he takes to be the technically significant developments in



iib-



776 Modernization and Modernism

painting of the preceding twenty years. In discussion of the work in question he develops
a useful distinction between literal and depicted shape. Originally published in Artforum,
V, no. 3, New York, November 1966, pp. 18-27, from which the present extract is
taken.

The craving for simplicity. People would like to say: 'What really matters
is only the colors." You say this mostly because you wish it to be the case.
If your explanation is complicated, it is disagreeable, especially if you don't
have strong feelings about the thing itself.

Wittgenstein

Frank Stella's new paintings investigate the viability of shape as such. By shape
as such I mean not merely the silhouette of the support (which I will call literal
shape), nor merely that of the outlines of elements in a given picture (which I
will call depicted shape), but shape as a medium within which choices about
both literal and depicted shapes are made, and made mutually responsive. And
by the viability of shape, I mean its power to hold, to stamp itself out, and in
- as verisimilitude and narrative and symbolism used to impress themselves -
compelling conviction. Stella's undertaking in these paintings is therapeutic: to
restore shape to health, at least temporarily, though of course its implied
'sickness' is simply the other face of the unprecedented importance shape has
assumed in the finest modernist painting of the past several years - most notably,
in the work of Kenneth Noland and Jules Olitski. It is only in their work that
shape as such can be said to have become capable of holding, or stamping itself
out, or compelling conviction - as well as, so to speak, capable of failing to do
so. These are powers or potentialities - not to say responsibilities - which shape
never until now possessed, and which have been conferred upon it by the
development of modernist painting itself. In this sense shape has become
something different from what it was in traditional painting or, for that matter,
in modernist painting until recently. It has become, one might say, an object
of conviction, whereas before it was merely ... a kind of object. Stella's new
pictures are a response to the recognition that shape itself may be lost to the
art of painting as a resource able to compel conviction, precisely because - as
never before - it is being called upon to do just that.

The way in which this has come about is, in the fullest sense of the word,
dialectical, and I will not try to do justice to its enormous complexity in these
rough notes. An adequate account of the developments leading up to Stella's
new paintings would, however, deal with the following:

1 The emergence of a new, exclusively visual mode of illusionism in the work of
Pollock, Newman and Louis. No single issue has been as continuously fundamen-
tal to the development of modernist painting as the need to acknowledge the
literal character of the picture-support. Above all this has tended to mean
acknowledging its flatness or two-dimensionality. There is a sense in which a
new illusionism was implicit in this development all along. [ . . . ] But the
universal power of any mark to suggest something like depth belongs not so
much to the art of painting as to the eye itself; it is, one might say, not



i



,1



VIb Modernist Art 777

something that has had to be established so much as something - a perceptual
limitation - that cannot be escaped, whereas the dissolution of traditional
drawing in Pollock's work, the reliance on large and generally rather warm
expanses of barely fluctuating color in Newman's, and the staining of thinned
(acrylic) pigment into mostly unsized canvas in Louis's were instrumental in
the creation of a depth or space accessible to eyesight alone which, so to speak,
specifically belongs to the art of painting.

2 The neutralizing of the flatness of the picture-support by the new, exclusively
optical illusionism. In the work of Pollock and Newman, but even more in that
of Louis, Noland and Olitski, the new illusionism both subsumes and dissolves
the picture-surface - opening it, as Greenberg has said, from the rear - while
simultaneously preserving its integrity. More accurately, it is the flatness of the
picture-surface, and not that surface itself, that is dissolved, or anyway neu-
tralized, by the illusion in question. The literalness of the picture-surface is not
denied; but one's experience of that literalness is an experience of the properties
of different pigments, of foreign substances applied to the surface of the
painting, of the weave of the canvas, above all of color - but not, or not in
particular, of the flatness of the support. (One could say that here the literalness
of the picture-surface is not an aspect of the literalness of the support.) Not
that literalness here is experienced as competing in any way with the illusionistic
presence of the painting as a whole; on the contrary, one somehow constitutes
the other. And in fact there is no distinction one can make between attending
to the surface of the painting and to the illusion it generates: to be gripped by
one is to be held, and moved, by the other.

3 The discovery shortly before 1960 of a new mode of pictorial structure based
on the shape, rather than the flatness, of the support. With the dissolution or
neutralizing of the flatness of the support by the new optical illusionism, the
shape of the support - including its proportions and exact dimensions - came
to assume a more active, more explicit importance than ever before. The crucial
figures in this development are Frank Stella and Kenneth Noland. In Stella's
aluminum stripe paintings of 1960, for example, iVi-inch wide stripes begin at
the framing-edge and reiterate the shape of that edge until the entire picture
is filled; moreover, by actually shaping each picture - the canvases are rectangles
with shallow (one stripe deep) notches at two corners or along the sides or both
- Stella was able to make the fact that the literal shape determines the structure
of the entire painting completely perspicuous. That is, in each painting the
stripes appear to have been generated by the framing-edge and, starting there,
to have taken possession of the rest of the canvas, as though the whole painting
self-evidently followed from, not merely the shape of the support, but its actual
physical limits.

Noland too has shaped his pictures. [. . .] It cannot be emphasized too
strongly, however, that Noland's chief concern throughout his career has been
with color - or rather, with feeling through color - and not with structure: which
niakes the role that structural decisions and alterations have played in his
development all the more significant. This is not to say that Noland's colorism



778 Modernization and Modernism

has had to maintain itself in the teeth of his forced involvement with structural
concerns. On the contrary, it is precisely his deep and impassioned commitment
to making color yield major painting that has compelled him to discover
structures in which the shape of the support is acknowledged lucidly and
explicitly enough to compel conviction.

4 The primacy of literal over depicted shape. In both Noland's and Stella's
(stripe) paintings the burden of acknowledging the shape of the support is borne
by the depicted shape, or perhaps more accurately, by the relation between it
and the literal shape - a relation that declares the primacy of the latter. And in
general the development of modernist painting during the past six years can be
described as having involved the progressive assumption by literal shape of a
greater - that is, more active, more explicit - importance than ever before, and
the consequent subordination of depicted shape. It is as though depicted shape
has become less and less capable of venturing on its own, of pursuing its own
ends; as though unless, in a given painting, depicted shape manages to participate
in - by helping to establish - the authority of the shape of the support,
conviction is aborted and the painting fails. In this sense depicted shape may
be said to have become dependent upon literal shape - and indeed unable to
make itself felt as shape except by acknowledging that dependence.



10 Jules Olitski (b. 1922) Tainting in Color'

Olitski came to prominence in the 1960s with atmospheric abstract paintings made by
staining and spraying canvases with acrylic paints. Few artists of his generation have
been the subject of such widely varying critical assessments. His work was central both
to Greenberg's notion of Post-Painterly Abstraction' and to Fried's account of a new,
exclusively optical form of illusionism in Modernist painting after Pollock. The same
work was taken by commentators hostile to such criticism as exemplifying more
bathetically than any other work the emptiness of criteria which reduce to judgements
of taste. This text is a slightly revised and expanded version of a catalogue statement
written by the artist for the XXXIII Venice Biennale, June 1966. First published in the
present version in Artforum, New York, January 1967, p. 20.

Painting is made from inside out. I think of painting as possessed by a structure
- i.e., shape and size, support and edge - but a structure born of the flow of
color feeling. Color in color is felt at any and every place of the pictorial
organization; in its immediacy - its particularity. Color must be felt throughout.

What is of importance in painting is paint. Paint can be color. Paint becomes
painting when color establishes surface. The aim of paint surface (as with
everything in visual art) is appearance - color that appears integral to material
surface. Color is of inherent significance in painting. (This cannot be claimed,
however, for any particular type of paint, or application of paint.)

I begin with color. The development of a color structure ultimately determines
its expansion or compression - its outer edge. Outer edge is inescapable. I
recognize the line it declares, as drawing. This line delineates and separates the



VIb Modernist Art 779

painting from the space around and appears to be on the wall (strictly speaking,
I it remains in front of the wall). Outer edge cannot be visualized as being in
some way within - it is the outermost extension of the color structure. The
decision as to where the outer edge is, is final, not initial.

Wherever edge exists - both within a painting and at its limits - it must be
felt as a necessary outcome of the color structure. Paint can be color and drawing
when the edge of the painting is established as the final realization of the color
structure.

The focus in recent painting has been on the lateral - a flat and frontal view

of the surface. This has tended toward the use of flat color areas bounded by

and tied inevitably to a structure composed of edges. Edge is drawing and

;; drawing is on the surface. (Hard-edge or precision made line is no less drawing

2 than any other kind.) Because the paint fills in the spaces between the edges,

the color areas take on the appearance of overlay. Painting becomes subservient

to drawing. When the conception of internal form is governed by edge, color

> (even when stained into raw canvas) appears to remain on or above the surface.

I think, on the contrary, of color as being seen in and throughout, not solely

on, the surface.



11 Stanley Cavell (b. 1926) 'A Matter of Meaning It'

Cavell is an American philosopher and aesthetician who has written extensively on the
problems of Modernism in the arts. The effects of his dialogue with Fried are discernible
in the writings of both. Fried's critique of Greenberg's essentialism benefits from the
familiarity of Cavell with the philosophy of the later Wittgenstein, while in the present
text the use of Caro's sculpture as example reflects a shared conviction of its signific-
ance. First published in W. H. Capitan and D. D. Merrill (eds.), Art, Mind and Religion,
Pittsburgh, 1967; reprinted in Cavell, Must We Mean What We Say? A book of essays,
New York, 1969, pp. 216-22, from which the present extract is taken.

[- . ] I might define the problem of modernism as one in which the question
of value comes first as well as last: to classify a modern work as art is already
to have staked value, more starkly than the (later) decision concerning its
goodness or badness. Your interest in Mozart is not likely to draw much
attention - which is why such interests can be, so to speak, academic. But an
interest in Webern or Stockhausen or Cage is, one might say, revealing, even
sometimes suspicious. (A Christian might say that in such interests, and choices,
the heart is revealed. This is what Tolstoy saw.) Philosophers sometimes speak
of the phrase 'work of art' as having an 'honorific sense,' as though that were
* surprising or derivative fact about it, even one to be neutralized or ignored.
But that works of art are valuable is analytically true of them; and that value
*s inescapable in human experience and conduct is one of the facts of life, and
Of art, which modern art lays bare.

Of course there is the continuous danger that the question will be begged,
*at theory and evidence become a closed and vicious circle. I do not insist that



780 Modernization and Modernism

this is always the case, but merely that unless this problem is faced here no
problem of the right kind can come to focus. For if everything counted as art
which now offers itself as art, then questions about whether, for example,
figurative content, or tonality, or heroic couplets are still viable resources for
painters, composers, and poets would not only never have arisen, but would
make no sense. When there was a tradition, everything which seemed to count
did count. (And that is perhaps analytic of the notion of 'tradition.') I say that
Krenek's late work doesn't count, and that means that the way it is 'organized'
does not raise for me the question of how music may be organized. I say that
Caro's steel sculptures count, and that raises for me the question of what
sculpture is: I had - I take it everyone had - thought (assumed? imagined? -
but no one word is going to be quite right, and that must itself require a
philosophical account) that a piece of sculpture was something worked (carved,
chipped, polished, etc.); but Caro uses steel rods and beams and sheets which
he does not work (e.g., bend or twist) but rather, one could say, places. I had
thought that a piece of sculpture had the coherence of a natural object, that it
was what I wish to call spatially closed or spatially continuous (or consisted of
a group of objects of such coherence); but a Caro may be open and discontinu-
ous, one of its parts not an outgrowth from another, nor even joined or
connected with another so much as it is juxtaposed to it, or an inflection from
it. I had thought a piece of sculpture stood on a base (or crouched in a pediment,
etc.) and rose; but a Caro rests on the raw ground and some do not so much
rise as spread or reach or open. I had heard that sculpture used to be painted,
and took it as a matter of fashion or taste that it no longer was (in spite of the
reconstructed praises of past glories, the idea of painted stone figures struck me
as ludicrous); Caro paints his pieces, but not only is this not an external or
additional fact about them, it creates objects about which I wish to say they are
not painted, or not colored; they have color not the way, say, cabinets or walls
do, but the way grass and soil do - the experience I recall is perhaps hit off
by saying that Caro is not using colored beams, rods, and sheets, but beams
and rods and sheets of color. It is almost as though the color helps de-materialize
its supporting object. One might wish to say they are weightless, but that would
not mean that these massively heavy materials seem light., but, more surprisingly,
neither light nor heavy, resistant to the concept of weight altogether - as they
are resistant to the concept of size; they seem neither large nor small. Similarly,
they seem to be free of texture, so critical a parameter of other sculpture. They
are no longer things. (Something similar seems to be true of the use of color in
recent painting: it is not merely that it no longer serves as the color of
something, nor that it is disembodied; but that the canvas we know to underly
it is no longer its support - the color is simply there, as the canvas is. How it
got there is only technically (one could say it is no longer humanly) interesting,
it is no longer handled.)

The problem this raises for me is exactly not to decide whether this is art (
mean, sculpture), nor to find some definition of 'sculpture' which makes the
Caro pieces borderline cases of sculpture, or sculptures in some extended sense.




VIb Modernist Art 781

The problem is that I am, so to speak, stuck with the knowledge that this is
sculpture, in the same sense that any object is. The problem is that I no longer
know what sculpture is, why I call any object, the most central or traditional,
a piece of sculpture. How can objects made this way elicit the experience I had
thought confined to objects made so differently? And that this is a matter of
experience is what needs constant attention; nothing more, but nothing less,
than that. Just as it needs constant admission that one's experience may be
wrong, or misformed, or inattentive and inconstant.

This admission is more than a reaffirmation of the first fact about art, that
it must be felt, not merely known - or, as I would rather put it, that it must
be known for oneself. It is a statement of the fact of life - the metaphysical
fact, one could say - that apart from one's experience of it there is nothing to
be known about it, no way of knowing that what you know is relevant. For
what else is there for me to rely on but my experience? It is only if I accept
(my experience of) the Caro that I have to conclude that the art of sculpture
does not (or does no longer) depend on figuration, on being worked, on spatial
continuity, etc. Then what does it depend on? That is, again, the sort of issue
which prompted me to say that modern art lays bare the condition of art in
general. Or put it this way: That an object is 'a piece of sculpture' is not (no
longer) grammatically related to its 'being sculptured,' i.e., to its being the result
of carving or chipping, etc., some material with some tool. Then we no longer
know what kind of object a piece of sculpture (grammatically) is. That it is not
a natural object is something we knew. But it also is not an artifact either - or
if it is, it is one which defines no known craft. It is, one would like to say, a
work of art. But what is it one will then be saying?

Two serious ambiguities . . . become particularly relevant here:

a) ... [Am I] addressing the question 'Is this music?' or Ts this (music)
art?'? I am very uncertain about this important alternation; but I want to suggest
what it is I am uncertain about and why I take it to be important.

There is this asymmetry between the questions: If there is a clear answer to
the question, 'Is this music (painting, sculpture . . , )?', then the question
whether it is art is irrelevant, superfluous. If it is music then (analytically) it
is art. That seems unprejudicial. But the negation does not: if it is not music
then it is not art. But why does that seem prejudicial? Why couldn't we allow
Pop Art, say, or Cage's evenings, or Happenings, to be entertainments of some
kind without troubling about art? But we are troubled. Because for us, given
the gradual self-definitions and self-liberations over the past century of the
separate major arts we accept, Pop Art presents itself as, or as challenging,
Painting; Cage presents his work as, or as challenging the possibility of, music.
..It would be enough to say that objects of Pop Art are not paintings or
Sculptures, that works of Cage and Krenek are not music - //we are clear what
a painting is, what a piece of music is. But the trouble is that the genuine
article - the music of Schoenberg and Webern, the sculpture of Caro, the
Painting of Morris Louis, the theatre of Brecht and Beckett - really does
challenge the art of which it is the inheritor and voice. Each is, in a word, not
I Merely modern, but modernist. Each, one could say, is trying to find the limits



782 Modernization and Modernism



VIb Modernist Art 783



or essence, of its own procedures. And this means that it is not clear a priori
what counts, or will count, as a painting, or sculpture or musical composition.
... So we haven't got clear criteria for determining whether a given object is
or is not a painting, a sculpture. . . . But this is exactly what our whole discussion
has prepared us for. The task of the modernist artist, as of the contemporary
critic, is to find what it is his art finally depends upon; it doesn't matter that
we haven't a priori criteria for defining a painting, what matters is that we
realize that the criteria are something we must discover, discover in the
continuity of painting itself. But my point now is that to discover this we need
to discover what objects we accept as paintings, and why we so accept them.
And to 'accept something as a painting' is to 'accept something as a work of
art,' i.e., as something carrying the intentions and consequences of art: the
nature of the acceptance is altogether crucial. So the original questions 'Is this
music?' and 'Is this art?' are not independent. The latter shows, we might say,
the spirit in which the former is relevantly asked.

b) To say that the modern 'lays bare' may suggest that there was something
concealed in traditional art which hadn't, for some reason, been noticed, or that
what the modern throws over - tonality, perspective, narration, the absent fourth
wall, etc. - was something inessential to music, painting, poetry, and theater in
earlier periods. These would be false suggestions. For it is not that now we
finally know the true condition of art; it is only that someone who does not
question that condition has nothing, or not the essential thing, to go on in
addressing the art of our period. And far from implying that we now know, for
example, that music does not require tonality, nor painting figuration nor theater
an audience of spectators, etc., exactly what I want to have accomplished is to
make all such notions problematic, to force us to ask, for example, what the art
was which as a matter of fact did require, or exploit, tonality, perspective, etc.
Why did it? What made such things media of art? It may help to say that the
notion of 'modernism laying bare its art' is meant not as an interpretation of
history (the history of an art), but as a description of the latest period of a
history, a period in which each of the arts seems to be, even forced to be,
drawing itself to its limits, purging itself of elements which can be foregone
and which therefore seem arbitrary or extraneous - poetry wishing the abstrac-
tion and immediacy of lyricism; theater wishing freedom from entertainment
and acting; music wishing escape from the rhythm or logic of the single body
and its frame of emotion. . . . Why this has happened one would like to know,
but for the moment what is relevant is that it has happened at a certain moment
in history. For it was not always true of a given art that it sought to keep its
medium pure, that it wished to assert its own limits, and therewith its
independence of the other arts. Integrity could be assured without purity. So
in saying that 'we do not know what is and what is not essentially connected
to the concept of music' I am not saying that what we do not know is which
one or more phenomena are always essential to something's being music, but
that we have yet to discover what at any given moment has been essential to
our accepting something as music. As was said, this discovery is unnecessary as
long as there is a tradition - when everything which is offered for acceptance



is the real thing. But so far as the possibility of fraudulence is characteristic of
the modern, then the need for a grounding of our acceptance becomes an issue
for aesthetics. I think of it as a need for an answer to the question, What is a
medium of art?

Philosophers will sometimes say that sound is the medium of music, paint of
painting, wood and stone of sculpture, words of literature. One has to find what
problems have been thought to reach illumination in such remarks. What needs
recognition is that wood or stone would not be a medium of sculpture in the
absence of the art of sculpture. The home of the idea of a medium lies in the
visual arts, and it used to be informative to know that a given medium is oil
or gouache or tempera or dry point or marble . . . because each of these media
had characteristic possibilities, an implied range of handling and result. The
idea of a medium is not simply that of a physical material, but of a material-
in-certain-characteristic-applications. Whether or not there is anything to be
called and any good purpose in calling anything, 'the medium of music,' there
certainly are things to be called various media of music, namely the various
ways in which various sources of sound (from and for the voice, the several
instruments, the body, on different occasions) have characteristically been
applied: the media are, for example, plain song, work song, the march, the
fugue, the aria, dance forms, sonata form. It is the existence or discovery of
such strains of convention that have made possible musical expression -
presumably the role a medium was to serve. In music, the 'form' (as in literature,
the genre) is the medium. It is within these that composers have been able to
speak and to intend to speak, performers to practice and to believe, audiences
to attend and to know. Grant that these media no longer serve, as portraits,
nudes, odes, etc., no longer serve, for speaking and believing and knowing. What
now is a medium of music? If one wishes now to answer, 'Sound, Sound itself,'
that will no longer be the neutral answer it seemed to be, said to distinguish
music from, say, poetry or painting (whatever it means to 'distinguish' things
one would never have thought could be taken for one another); it will be one
way of distinguishing (more or less tendentiously) music now from music in
the tradition, and what it says is that there are no longer known structures
which must be followed if one is to speak and be understood. The medium is
to be discovered, or invented out of itself.

If these sketches and obscurities are of any use, they should help to locate,
or isolate, the issue of Pop Art . . . Left to itself it may have done no harm, its
amusements may have remained clean. But it was not made to be left to itself,
any more than pin ball games or practical jokes or starlets are; and in an
artistic-philosophical-cultural situation in which mass magazines make the same
news of it they make of serious art and in which critics in elite magazines
underwrite such adventures - finding new bases for aesthetics and a new future
for art in every new and safe weirdness or attractiveness which catches on - it
is worth saying: This is not painting; and it is not painting not because paintings
couldn't look like that, but because serious painting doesn't; and it doesn't, not
because serious painting is not forced to change, to explore its own foundations,
even its own look; but because the way it changes - what will count as a relevant



784 Modernization and Modernism

change - is determined by the commitment to painting as an art, in struggle
with the history which makes it an art, continuing and countering the conven-
tions and intentions and responses which comprise that history. It may be that
the history of a given art has come to an end, a very few centuries after it has
come to a head, and that nothing more can be said and meant in terms of that
continuity and within those ambitions. It is as if the various anti-art movements
claim to know this has happened and to provide us with distraction, or to
substitute new gratifications for those well gone; while at the same time they
claim the respect due only to those whose seriousness they cannot share; and
they receive it, because of our frightened confusion. Whereas such claims, made
from such a position, are no more to be honored than the failed fox's sour
opinion about the grapes. [ . . . ]



12 William Tucker (b. 1935) and Tim Scott (b. 1937)
'Reflections on Sculpture'

Both sculptors studied with Anthony Caro at St Martin's School of Art in London in the
late 1950s, both were teaching at St Martin's during the 1960s, and both exhibited in
the 'New Generation' exhibition at the Whitechapel Art Gallery in 1965. This latter
occasion was seen at the time as marking the emergence of a distinct school of
abstract sculpture, informed by Caro's example and by a theorization of Modernism
which had largely been developed by American critics with regard to American abstract
painting. These 'Reflections' were originally published with the subtitle 'A commentary
by Tim Scott on notes by William Tucker' in the catalogue of the exhibition Tim Scott;
sculpture 1961-67 at the Whitechapel Art Gallery, London, June-July 1967 (unpagi-
nated), from which the present text is taken.

OBJECT

The totals or unities created by man in his attempts to understand and control

the world. (WT)

Isolation of the particular within our world. Investing of personal identification
in the physical properties of the world around us. A chair, not because it is wood
or round, but because of sitting, comfort, symbol. (TS)

MASS

a) Matter in general.

b) The solid earth under one's feet.

Weight; a feeling of substance; approaching knowledge of matter. Time; a feeling
of permanence.

SPACE

The void, emptiness. Between things, above, about and below things, the air
we breathe.

Tension; that part of the world we can activate by our presence, by our actions.



VIb Modernist Art 785

NUMBER AND ORDER

One-ness, two-ness, three-ness, etc. As in the Roman numerals I, II, III. The

formal and symbolic characteristics of numbers.

One, the point, the centre.

Two, the pair, mirror-image, simple symmetry.

Three, the vertices of the triangle, the primitive series, instable, open, the air.

Four, the square, stability, the ground, the cycle ended.

The more plastic the expression, the more fundamental the symbol; in the end

both seeing and knowing, sensation and memory, are identified.

Volume as volume - (mass)

Volume as plane - (configuration)

Volume as line - (direction)

Order; making sense by pattern. The quality of relationship. Measure; the order
of dimension and the diagnosis of cause and effect in the physical world. Intensity;
the degree of pattern and control that we can disperse around us.
The only means by which we can reduce physical property to a comprehensible
mental structure (idea).

THE CENTRE

A point: the object exists for the sake of this point, exists through it and around
it. The centre is the centre of gravity as it might exist for the figure outside
it - i.e. we are aware of the object in the same way we are aware of our own
centrality, by inference, passively: as we recognize our selves at the centre of
our 'own' sensations. The object is fixed, still, because it is the centre. The
spectator is free to move, because by attending to the object he has disposed
of his centrality, and must seek it in the object.

The traditional concept of the 'heart\ We are incapable of constructive thought
without recognition of centrality. It is the establishment of ego, of a point of
meaning from which contact can be made. It is fundamental to all structural law.

LEVEL

Level in sculpture corresponds to distance in traditional perspective painting.
The ground is the horizon: the rising layers above mediate between spectator
and horizon. Distance between points (both internally and externally with
relation to the spectator) physically exists, and is given and modulated by
perspective.

Level is the degree of immediate visual perception. Immediate contact person to
person takes place at eye level - the face. The visual discovery of the object
corresponds to the level from which in distance this initial contact takes place. It
is an anthropomorphic ratio.

Sculpture is a proposition about the physical world, about a finite order
(completeness), and by implication about our existence in the world; the
direction of the activity itself being toward the general, away from the personal.



786 Modernization and Modernism

Sculpture acts by displacement; it is the state of being, the state of feeling, the
state of experience, the state of physical awareness and sensation, the state of
confrontation by physical phenomena; not these things themselves or an interpre-
tation of them.

Any object exists partly (1) because it physically is, it can be proved to have
an independent existence in the world, partly (2) in the mind, so that it has
identity, being of a kind, of a class, and partly (3) in the individual experience,
personal and special to him.

Thus a tree, for example, is and grows: it has a word by which everyone can
recognize it: and it has a particular meaning in the memory of every individual.
Sculpture also must have the generality of the world: the identity of the object:
the character of a human individual.

Any art generates the emotion and intelligence proper to that art. Sculpture
seems so exposed to sentimentality and rhetoric that only a handful of sculptors
have arrived at that point where pure sculptural emotion, pure sculptural
intelligence, freed from the kinds of feeling or intelligence at work in the other
arts, or in life, have been released. It is a creation of the mind first, before
hand or eye. The object is a proposition - 'suppose such a thing should exist'.
There is no longer any resistance in the traditional limits of sculpture, Imitation
and Material. The sculptor must now take responsibility for everything he does.
Even the physical properties of matter are no longer inherent: they are assigned
by the sculptor.

What distinguishes an object of sculpture from other objects (identity)? What special
realm is there in the field of human experience which demands that there should
be a sculpture (reality)}

Identity; that which distinguishes the essence of matter in the world. The charac-
teristics given by accumulation of experience and the ability to make conscious
choice within this. The ability to consciously choose and incorporate particular
facts' available within the world structure in order to create an individual harmony
and order, a remaking of the person.

Reality; the effect of comprehension of the real, and, causing this, the necessity
for an equivalent to emotional perception of the real, underlie art. The particular
form of an art is a conscious reduction of personal activity to means which will
unfold the uniqueness of that Wealness' within its terms.

Sculpture penetrates the inhabited world. If it is not to be simply active
('dynamic 1 ) or aggressive in its passivity (simply 'being there 1 ), it must have a
complex double character which might be called 'reflective'; i.e. it exists and
its structure reflects consciousness of its existence. It will have internality,
without being withdrawn from the real into an internal world.

Sculpture has now the greatest freedom to comprehend its terms on the broadest
basis. It is no longer confined by the restrictions of attitudes toward content and
subject. It can achieve poetry in which the language itself is invented, is a product
of pure analysis and conception.




VIb Modernist Art 787

13 Richard Wollheim (b. 1923) The Work of Art as
Object'

Wotlheim writes as a philosopher interested in aesthetics, psychology and modern art.
His account of the 'conceptual hierarchy' of modern art is broadly compatible with the
findings of Modernist criticism, and in particular with the views of Fried. The original
version of this paper was published in Studio International, vol. 180, no. 928, London,
December 1970. A revised version was published in Wollheim, On Art and the Mind,
Cambridge, 1973. This was edited by the author for inclusion in C. Harrison and F.
Orton (eds.), Modernism, Criticism, Realism, London and New York, 1984, pp. 10-17,
from which the present text is taken.

If we wanted to say something about art that we could be quite certain was
true, we might settle for the assertion that art is intentional. And by this we
would mean that art is something we do, that works of art are things that human
beings make. And the truth of this assertion is in no way challenged by such
discoveries, some long known, others freshly brought to light, as that we cannot
produce a work of art to order, that improvisation has its place in the making
of a work of art, that the artist is not necessarily the best interpreter of his
work, that the spectator too has a legitimate role to play in the organization of
what he perceives. [. . .]

Though much is unclear about the notion of activity, one thing seems clear.
From the fact that art is something that we do, it follows that in the making
of art a concept enters into, and plays a crucial role in, the determination of
what is made: or, to put it another way, that when we make a work of art, we
make it under a certain description - though, of course, unless our attention is
drawn to the question, we may not be in a position to give the description.
Indeed [. . .] the truth seems to me to be that, on any given occasion, or in
the case of any given work, there will be more than one concept involved, and
the concepts that are involved will form some kind of hierarchy, with some
concepts falling under others, either more or less organized. In the existence of
such a conceptual hierarchy, regulative in the production of works of art, we
find, I maintain, the justification for talking of a theory of art. In this lecture
I want to look at the matter rather more generally, and I shall ask you to
consider with me a theory of modern art. The theory I have in mind could not
be called the theory of modern art, for there is evidently no such thing, but I
would claim that it is the dominant theory. [. . .]

My suggestion is this: that for the mainstream of modern art, we can postulate
a theory that emphasizes the material character of art, a theory according to
which a work of art is importantly or significantly, and not just peripherally, a
physical object. Such a theory, I am suggesting, underlies or regulates much of
the art activity of our age, and it is it that accounts for many of the triumphs
and perhaps not a few of the disasters of modern art. Within the concept of
art under which most of the finest, certainly most of the boldest, works of our
age have been made, the connotation of physicality moves to the fore.



788 Modernization and Modernism

The evidence for such a theory at work is manifold, the inspiration of the
theory can be seen in a wide variety of phenomena which it thereby unifies:
the increasing emphasis upon texture and surface qualities; the abandonment of
linear perspective, at any rate as providing an overall grid within which the
picture can be organized; the predilection for large areas of undifferentiated or
barely fluctuating colour, the indifference to figuration; the exploitation of the
edge, of the shaped or moulded support, of the unprimed canvas; and the
physical juxtaposition of disparate or borrowed elements, sometimes stuck on,
sometimes freestanding, to the central body of the work, as in collage or
assemblages. These devices have, beyond a shadow of a doubt, contributed
decisively to the repertoire of European art since, say, 1905: and any dispute
about the presence of some such theory as I have produced would, I imagine,
confine itself to the issue of how central these devices, and the modifications
in art that they have brought about, are thought to be.

I want therefore to turn away from any central discussion of the theory to
the qualifications that need to be entered if the theory, or the formulation of
it, is to be adequate. I shall bring what I have to say under three general
considerations. But in doing so, I shall give the theory itself a small twist towards
greater specificity. I shall consider it exclusively in relation to painting, and I
shall understand it as insisting upon the surface of a painting. In the context
of a painting, for 'physicality' read 'possession of a surface'.

The first consideration, is this: The theory that I have been suggesting
emphasizes or insists upon the physicality of the work of art, or the surface of
the painting - emphasizes or insists upon them, but (this is the point) the theory
did not discover or invent them. I am not, of course, making the self-evident
point that even before 1905 paintings had surfaces. I am making the somewhat
less evident point that before 1905 the fact that a painting had a surface, or the
more general fact that works of art were physical, were not regarded as accidental
or contingent facts about art.

For to read certain critics, certain philosophers of art, even certain contem-
porary artists, one might well think that before the beginning of the twentieth
century the concept of art was totally without any connotation of materiality.
Of course - it is conceded - in making their pictures earlier artists recognized
that they were making physical objects. But for them the picture and the physical
object were not equated, and the manipulation of the medium was seen more
as a preliminary to the process of making art rather than as that process itself.
For the picture was conceived of as something immaterial that burgeoned or
billowed out from the canvas, panel or frescoed wall that provided its substrate.
These things - canvas, panel, wall - were necessary for its existence, but it
went beyond them, and the concept of it bore no reference to them.

Such a view of the past, which is artificially sustained by the very careless
and utterly misleading use of the term 'illusionism' to characterize all forms of
figurative painting, indeed all forms of representational painting, seems sup-
ported neither by empirical nor by theoretical considerations. Furthermore, there
is a body of evidence against it. There are various moments in the history of
European painting since the high Renaissance, when artists have shown a clear



VIb Modernist Art 789

predilection for the values of surface, and they have employed selected means
to bring out the physical quality of what they were working on or with. Take
for instance, the emergence of the brush-stroke as an identifiable pictorial
element in sixteenth-century Venetian painting; the free sketching in of land-
scapes in the background of seventeenth- and eighteenth-century painting; or
the distinctive use of cropped figures set up against the tdg^ of the support in
late nineteenth-century Parisian art. Now, of course, there is this difference:
that to the earlier painters these devices were no more than a possible employment
of painting, and for them the constraints of art lay elsewhere. It was, for instance,
optional for Velazquez or for Gainsborough whether they expressed their
predilection for the medium. What was necessary within their theory of art was
that, if they did, it found expression within the depiction of natural phenomena.
For, say, Matisse or Rothko, the priorities are reversed. But none of this suggests
that the earlier painters thought that what they were doing was ancillary to
painting. Between them and us what has happened is that some connotations
of art that were previously recessive have moved to the fore, and vice versa.

The second consideration that touches upon the theory of modern art I have
proposed seems to strike somewhat deeper. It is this: The theory emphasizes
the physicality of art; it insists upon the fact that a painting has a surface.
Indeed, by a ready trick of exaggeration the insisted-upon fact that a painting
has a surface - a fact which, as we have seen, earlier generations did not overlook
- can convert itself into the thesis that a painting is, or is no more than, a
surface. Which gives us an extreme version of the theory, though not one
unknown. However, a necessary modification is effected - once it is recognized
that, in talking of a surface, the theory is irreducibly or ineliminably referring
to the surface of a painting. In formulating the theory we can safely drop the
phrase 'of a painting' only when the dropped phrase is understood. If the phrase
is not merely dropped, but drops out of mind, the theory becomes incoherent.
For to talk of a surface, without specifying what kind of surface it is, which
means in effect what it is a surface of, picks out no kind of object of attention.

Perhaps one way of bringing out this consideration is to go back to the nature
of the theory. For the theory, as we have seen, provides us, if it is adequate,
with those concepts under which a certain form of art - the art of our day -
has been produced. However, it is clear that no one could set himself to produce
a surface, unless he had some answer to the question what it was the surface
of: nor could he endeavour to accentuate or work up a surface unless, once
again, he thought of himself as accentuating or working up the surface of this
or that kind of thing. To put it another way round: the instruction 'Make us
aware or conscious of the surface' given in the studio, would take on quite
different significances, if said, to someone throwing a stoneware pot, to someone
painting in oil on primed canvas, to someone carving in marble, or to someone
Working in fresco. (Think, for instance, whether, in conformity to the instruc-
tion, the surface should be made smooth or rough.) Each of the recipients of
the instruction would, in effect, fill it out from his knowledge of what he was
doing, before he obeyed it. And, if he didn't know what he was doing, if, for
instance, he was a complete beginner who hadn't as yet grasped the nature of



!**



790 Modernization and Modernism



the activity on which he had launched himself, he could not obey the instruction
at all. It wouldn't be, simply, that he wouldn't know how to do what he had
been asked to do: he wouldn't know what he had been asked to do. For him
the instruction would mean about as much as 'Make it average-sized'.

The examples I have given might be misleading in one respect: for they might
suggest that the further specification that is required before it becomes clear
how the surface is to be worked refers exclusively to the material. The artist,
in other words, needs to know what the surface is of just in the sense of what
it is made of. This, however, would be erroneous. Not merely is this no more
than part of what is required, but it is misleading even as to that. The distinction
we need here is that between a material and a medium. A medium may embrace
a material, though it may not, but, if it does, a medium is a material worked
in a characteristic way, and the characteristics of the way can be understood
only in the context of the art within which the medium arises. 1 'Fidelity
to material' is not so much an inadequate aesthetic, as some have thought,
it is rather an inadequate formulation of an aesthetic: Bernini and Rodin
were not faithful to marble, though they may have been faithful to marble as
a material of sculpture. Given this distinction, the barest specification of the
surface must be by reference to the medium which makes up or is laid on
the surface. [ . . . ]

The third consideration that I want to raise in connection with the theory of
modern art is this: The theory insists upon the physicality of the work of art

- upon for instance, the surface of the painting. And this I have equally put
by saying that the theory insists upon the fact that the painting has a surface.
But from this it does not follow that a painting produced in conformity with
this theory will insist upon the fact that it has a surface. Yet this is sometimes
thought to follow both by critics and by artists: and consequential distortions
are produced both in criticism - so that for instance, it is thought good enough
to say of a painting that it insists upon the fact of its surface - and in art itself

- so that we are confronted by objects which seek to acquire value from this
insistence. [. . .]

Perhaps the best way of bringing out this consideration is to show how the
theory, as it stands, can lead to anything but boring art. For the theory, in
asserting that a painting has a surface, draws the painter's attention to the
surface in a way or to a degree not contemplated by his predecessors. But if
the theory were that the painting should assert that it has a surface, then not
merely would no premium be placed on the use of the surface but the effect
of the theory might well be to work against the use of the surface. For it might
be felt that any such use would only interfere with the clarity or the definitive-
ness of the painting's assertion. The fact of the surface might become eclipsed,
wholly or partially, by the use of the surface. And in an aesthetic situation
where the fact of the surface is reckoned the important thing, the use of the
surface begins to look diversionary at best and probably hazardous.

To talk of the use of the surface and to contrast this with the fact of the
surface, and to identify the former rather than the latter as the characteristic
preoccupation of modern art, attributes to modern art a complexity of concern



VIb Modernist Art 791

that it cannot renounce. For it is only if we assume such a complexity that
there is any sense in which we can think of the surface as being used. Used,
we must ask, for what? And the answer to this has to lie in that complexity of
concern. - The point, I must emphasize, would not be worth making were it
not for the widespread confusion which equates the autonomy of modern art
with its single-mindedness, even with its simple-mindedness. To talk of the
autonomy of art is to say something about where its concerns derive from, it
is to say nothing about their number or their variety.

To talk of the surface being used, rather than of its existence being asserted,
as a characteristic of modern painting, is not a point to make in the abstract.
The point cannot be grasped without some kind of incursion into the substantive
issue. What therefore I should like to do for the rest of this lecture is to consider
three paintings, and try to make the point in relation to them. It is no accident
that these paintings are amongst the masterpieces of twentieth-century art.

The first painting is La Fenetre Ouverte painted by Matisse in Tangiers in
1913. Some of the things that I shall say about it will apply to the other great
open-window paintings of Matisse, for instance the sombre La Porte-fenetre of
1914 or the painting entitled La Fenetre, or Le Rideau Jaune. In this painting
we discern, amongst other things, Matisse's recurrent concern with the nature
of the ground. Now, if we consider what is not so much the earliest painting
we have, though it is often called that, as the precursor of painting - I refer
to the cave art of the early Stone Age - there is no ground, there is simply the
image. 2 With the introduction of the ground, the problem arises, How are we
to conceive of the ground in a way that does not simply equate it with the gap
between the figures or the absence of depiction? In the history of European
painting we can see various answers to this question. One answer is for the
painter to equate the ground with the background or, if this term is taken
broadly enough, with the landscape, and then to organize the detail that this
equation is likely to impose upon him in a hierarchical fashion, detail subsumed
within detail, in a Chinese box-like fashion. This answer we can see as given
in some of the finest achievements of European art - for instance, in such
different kinds of work as the masterpieces of Van Eyck and Poussin. Another
answer is to regard the ground as providing, still through representation, not
so much content additional to the central figures, but a space in which the
central figures are framed. Now for a variety of reasons neither of these two
classic answers is open to Matisse. For Matisse - and here he exhibits two of
the main thrusts of twentieth-century art - dispenses both with the notion of
detail in the traditional sense and also with the commitment to a unitary and
ordered spatial framework. And so the question returns. How is the ground to
be conceived of except in purely negative terms? How - which is an extension
of this question - is the frontier of the ground, of the line which encloses it,
not to seem quite arbitrary? And it is at this point, to find an answer to this
question, that Matisse resorts to the surface. It is here that he uses the surface.
For what he does is to associate the ground so closely with the surface - by
which I mean that he charges the surface in such a way that it barely involves
a shift of attention for us to move from seeing a certain expanse as ground to



792 Modernization and Modernism

seeing it as surface - that we fully accept the size of the surface as determining
the extent of the ground. To understand Matisse's use of the surface, we might
say that through it he reconciles us to the ground without our hankering after
any of the classic ways of treating the ground that Matisse has forsworn.

There is perhaps another line of thought in La Fenitre Ouverte which is worth
pursuing. What we see through the open window is a view. Now, at any rate
for a painter there is, perhaps, a certain absurdity in thinking of a view as a
view on to - well, a view on to nothing, which is rather what treating what is
depicted through the frame of the window as mere ground implies. The view
is - of course in a rather special, one might say in a rather professional, sense
- an object. And now we can see a secondary use that Matisse makes of the
surface. For by emphasizing the surface where it coincides with the ground, he
leads us towards this painter's way of looking at or considering the view. Of
course, Matisse isn't a clumsy painter, and he avoids that use of the surface
which would make it look as though the open window were filled with a solid
object. It is made clear, at one and the same time, that the view isn't an object
but that it is as though it were.

The second painting I want to consider is one of Morris Louis's later canvases
[Alpha Phi, 1961]. Louis's work at this stage was largely dominated by one
preoccupation - apart, that is, from his interest in the physical look of the
picture or how the surface looks. And this preoccupation can be described from
two different points of view. From one point of view, it is a concern with
colour: from another point of view it is a concern with patches - where patches
are contrasted both with volumes, which are three-dimensional, and with shapes,
which, though two-dimensional, are seen as suspended in, or visibly inhabit,
three-dimensional space. Louis, in other words, wanted to introduce colour into
the content of his paintings but to as great a degree as is humanly possible -
or, better, visibly possible - he wanted consideration of the spatial relations
between the coloured elements, or the bearers of colour, to recede. Now, I do
not think that it is quite correct to say - as Michael Fried does in his otherwise
perceptive account of these paintings 3 - that Louis's patches are non-repre-
sentational: that is to say, I do not think that Louis wants us exclusively to see
stained parts of the canvas. He seeks a form of representation where the
representation of space or of anything spatial is at a minimum. And to achieve
this effect, he uses the surface in such a way that so long as we look centrally
at one of the patches we see it representationally. But, as our eyes move towards
the edge of the patch, the representational element diminishes, and we become
dominantly, then exclusively, aware of the canvas. In other words, representation
gets negated at the very point where questions of spatiality - how does this
patch stand to the next? - would begin to arise. The overall effect is that, in
looking at Louis's patches, we seem aware of them as though they were
embedded in, or pressed down upon, the surface - an effect, which, incidentally,
we find, in a highly figurative context, in some of Goya's paintings. The surface,
then, is used to control or to limit the operation of representation, so that colour
can be encountered in what we might call a 'pure' mode: as predicated of
extended but non-spatial elements.



I



VIb Modernist Art 793

The third painting that I want to consider is one of Rothko's canvases from
the Four Seasons series, now hanging in the Tate [Red on Maroon, 1969]: to
my mind, one of the sublimest creations of our time. In comparison with Louis,
even with Matisse, Rothko uses the surface in a highly complex way. And I
shall only give one hint of how we might think of this. The greatness of Rothko's
painting lies ultimately, I am quite sure, in its expressive quality, and if we
wanted to characterize this quality - it would be a crude characterization - we
would talk of a form of suffering and of sorrow, and somehow barely or fragilely
contained. We would talk perhaps of some sentiment akin to that expressed in
Shakespeare's Tempest ~ I don't mean expressed in any one character, but in
the play itself. However, the immediacy of Rothko's canvas derives from the
way in which this expressive quality is provided with a formal counterpart: and
that lies in the uncertainty that the painting is calculated to produce, whether
we are to see the painting as containing an image within it or whether we are
to see the painting as itself an image. Whether we are to see it as containing a
ring of flame or shadow - I owe this description of the fugitive image to the
brilliant description of the Four Seasons paintings by Michel Butor in his essay
'Rothko: The Mosques of New York' 4 - or whether we are to look upon it as
somewhat the equivalent of a stained glass window. 5

Now, it is to bring about this uncertainty, as well as to preserve it from, or
to prevent it from degenerating into, a mere oscillation of perception, which
could, if I am right, be highly inimical to Rothko's expressive purpose, that he
uses the surface as he does. For the use of the surface, or the way it manifests
itself to us, simultaneously suggests forms within the painting and imposes unity
across the painting. It suggests light falling upon objects and light shining
through a translucent plane. Wherever a definitive reading begins to form itself,
the assertion of surface calls this in doubt.

It is only now, when we have taken note of other, or more working, aspects
of the theory of modern art as I have suggested it, that it seems to me
appropriate to observe an aspect that might have seemed to some worthy of
earlier attention: I mean the way it is likely to give rise to objects that manifest
the only kind of beauty we find acceptable today.

* Stanley Cavell, Must We Mean What We Say} 1969.

On this, see Meyer Schapiro, 'On Some Problems in the Semiotics of Visual Art: Field and

3 Vehicle in Image-Signs', Semwtica, I, no. 3, 1969, pp. 223-42.

4 Michael Fried, Three American Painters, Boston, 1965, pp. 19-20.

5 Michael Butor, Inventory, trans. Richard Howard, London, 1970.

I have benefited greatly from conversations with Peter Larisey, SJ.




Part VII

Institutions and
Objections



VII

Introduction



Modernist judgements of quality and relevance, particularly as regards the
diverse forms of American art since Pollock, came under foundational challenge
in the mid-1960s: an attack which coincided with the quintessential formulation
of Greenbergian Modernism itself. The apparent paradox thus presented by
Modernism's fall from grace at the height of its powers is dissipated somewhat
if we interpret its achievement of pre-eminence as a narrative wherein a powerful
and exclusive critical approach to art (arguably powerful because of its exclu-
sivity) became transformed into a managerial culture of art. On this account,
that is to say, Modernism's hegemony was achieved at the price of sclerosis.
The moment its exclusivity was seen to cut with the grain of temporal power
rather than against it, its claims to critical virtue stood fatally compromised.

Always implicit in Greenberg's account of modern art as a process of
self-purification was an essentialism, which Fried was later to try to dispel. A
reading of Modernism as a process of reduction none the less proved attractive to
representatives of a generation who otherwise reacted against the Greenbergian
view. Donald Judd, Frank Stella, and somewhat differently Robert Morris all
took up the implication that the tendency of modern art was progressively to
expunge relational composition in the quest for a more unitary, less illusionistic
form of work (VIIA2, 4, 5). In particular this seemed to militate against the
continued viability of painting as an adequate vehicle, and to propose instead
the substitution of 'reaP relations in 'real' space for the illusionism in which
painting, by its very nature, was forced to trade.

The reasoning lying behind this emphasis on 'wholeness' is nowhere made
explicit. Two related implications are indicated, however. One concerns the
refusal of composition, of 'balancing', as an essentially archaic Cubist device,
and the concomitant paring-down of the work towards a unity which was no
longer the sum of parts, in any traditional sense. This in turn goes to a different
order of validation which is premised on the association of 'composition' and
the like with a European, and hence outmoded, 'dualistic' sensibility; that is to
say, ultimately, with a tradition of Cartesian rationalism. Lying behind the
rehearsal of the 'specific object' seems to have been a deeper sense that
something altogether new - in a way that painting and sculpture could never



798 Institutions and Objections

be - was required by an altogether new form of life. The assumption was that
such a life was being lived, pre-eminently, in modern America.

For Michael Fried, art had to 'compel conviction'. For Judd and others it
had to be 'credible'. In one sense, there is little between these demands. It is
hard, however, to escape another sense in which the one partakes of an
idealization of art, seeking to escape the contingencies of literal reality, whereas
the other seeks credibility in a kind of adequacy to urban experience in a world
of mass production. At least this is in part how matters appeared at the time.
A world was at stake, or to put it slightly differently, a stake in a kind of world;
and the options were fiercely contested. Fried's 'Art and Objecthood' appeared
as an intervention in a debate already, by the summer of 1967, largely dominated
by his opponents (VIIA6). His defence of the integrity of medium-specificity,
and of the value of aesthetic experience conceived as essentially independent of
time and place, was made against rival interests engaged in what he represented
as moral and not merely aesthetic compromise. More to the point, Modernist
aesthetics, as Fried conceived it, was imbued with an ethics.

But however passionately his position was defended, in 1967 Fried's argument
had the air of a rearguard action. The position which Abstractionist-Modernism
had formerly occupied was already being usurped. Forms of art abounded in
which the conventional distinctions between media were deliberately trans-
gressed. In such work, increasing attention was paid to the contingent aspects
of the context wherein art was in general encountered. This was just the kind
of work that Fried had condemned as 'theatrical'. Neither was such work being
done in isolation. It was paralleled by forms of art-critical revision which
themselves took issue with both the premises and judgements of Modernism
(VIID7-8).

It remains an open question where the line is to be drawn between Modernism
and its opponents. In a manner quite distinct from later journalistic demarcations
(between for example, 'abstract', 'Minimal' and 'Pop' art), Judd accounted
positively for Noland's painting, as well as Oldenburg's sculpture, as part of a
tendency towards specificity. There is a sense in which the reductionism
underpinning the promulgation of the art object, as well as subsequent moves
to 'dematerialize' the object, can all be read as a continuation of, rather than a
movement beyond, Modernist essentialism. That is, it can be construed as a
kind of ultimate Modernism, a striving to hitch the last, and hence most
up-to-date wagon, on to a train coming from history. From this perspective,
Greenberg's failure to accommodate so-called Minimal Art might be seen as a
failure of nerve in face of the logic of his own position.

The literalist refusal of aestheticist Modernism as it was formulated by
Greenberg and defended - in his own terms - by Michael Fried was fuelled by
a quest for the core, a drive to strip away the inessentials from the practice of
art. It resulted in a trek from paintings and sculptures, to 'specific' objects, to
objects on the threshold of perception, to objects of thought, and to the assertion
of art as an analytical proposition (VIIA2-5 and 9-10). For all Judd's criticism
of a dualism which derives from an outmoded European rationalism, it is not
hard to see a wider idealism governing much of this process of reduction. In



VII Introduction 799

the hands of Morris and others, however, the 'literalism' (Fried's term) implicit
in the drive to objects rapidly turned itself inside out and gave rise to an art
which no aestheticist formalism could embrace. A materialism focused on the
processing of mute stuff turned the hyper-formalism of the Minimalist object
into 'anti-form' (VIIB3): a materialism reminiscent of nothing so much as
Bataille's earlier valorization of the 'informe' (VIIB2, and see also IVcl2).
Attention turned towards 'making': a concern with processes of manipulation of
materials, rather than their constitution into some object. Although given new
force in the late 1960s, this concern can be seen to re-invoke aspects of
Rosenberg's representation of Abstract Expressionism as 'action painting' (see
Va14), as well as the subsequent extrapolation from this into 'Happenings' (see
VIA4).

The effect of this materialism was to focus concern on context. Whereas
Modernism had been indifferent to context, and whereas the 'specific object'
for the most part unproblematically occupied a traditional gallery space, the
concern with materials - particularly relatively formless materials - had the
effect of inducing reflection upon the 'containers' which conferred form upon
them. Principal among these was the gallery space itself. But once that was
highlighted as constitutive of the work, rather than a neutral factor undeserving
of attention, the possibility arose of making art which further problematized the
conventions of spectatorship.

This occurred in two main ways. First, by siting the work outside the gallery.
Land Art and site-specific sculpture generated a phenomenologically informed
focus upon the conditions of encounters with artworks: that is to say, the
embodied perception of physical objects and events in time and space - precisely
that which for Fried courted theatricality (VIIB2).

Alternatively, an analytical form of Conceptual Art problematized the primor-
dial convention of art's visuality (VIlBl). This use of language to question the
status and framing conditions of the art object led to a second-order practice
explicitly concerned with the status of the modern art object. This practice was
premised on the redundancy of any further expansions to the range of art's
'objects'. If the object had a role, it was to serve as the focus of inquiry into
its own now manifest contingency (VIIB4-5). This contingency itself rapidly
came to be understood as not merely physical, nor indeed merely conceptual,
but social (VHc8). What resulted was an engagement with the consequences of
viewing the work of art as a commodity. It goes without saying that these
practical options were neither exclusive nor distinct. They formed as it were
the field of possibilities in which the avant-garde of the late 1960s and early
1970s conducted itself. Its prime axes were thus ontological and ideological.

A sense of the context of art was thus extended to embrace the invisible but
powerful forces circumscribing its production. One of the key features of
Modernism was that it was American, and that New York had supplanted Paris
as capital of the avant-garde. In the later 1960s, for the first time since the end
of the Second World War, European art regained a kind of parity. This
internationalization of the avant-garde is not to be separated from a wider
internationalism, which came at that period to contest a global status quo with



800 Institutions and Objections

its perceived headquarters in America. What 'American' meant, internationally,
was not something with which all Americans were content to remain identified.

This contestation extended over a long period from approximately the mid-
1960s to the mid-1970s. It has, however, become identified with its high-water
mark in 1968. '1968' as a name means many things, from forms of popular
culture to military actions, from an excess of utopianism to a general strike. Its
extraordinary constellation brought Maoism into alignment with the Civil Rights
movement and opposition to the Vietnam war; it saw the emergence of a
widespread women's movement, and the transformation of hitherto reactionary
sections such as students into the cutting-edge of opposition. Widespread
assumptions of the passivity of the Western working class were shaken by the
May Events in Paris where student rioting acted as a detonator to industrial
militancy. In a world which embraced Bob Dylan, Jean-Luc Godard, Che
Guevara and the Prague Spring there developed a sense of possibility. Not only
was the status quo a brake on development, it seemed that it could be overcome.
Precise relations and influences between the climate of these times and the art
produced in them are as hard to decide as they were undoubtedly crucial. What
is certain is that a level of debate about the relation of art to politics was
stimulated, and forms of organization were broached, in a fashion not seen since
the 1920s and 1930s.

Interventions ranged from the sociological to the Utopian, from the crusading
to the ironic. Some measure of the atmosphere can be gleaned from the claim
made in the pages of Studio International by the French writer Jean Clay in
June 1970 that 'It is clear that we are witnessing the death throes of the cultural
system maintained by the bourgeoisie in its galleries and its museums.' Some
grounds for irony may be discerned in the continued willingness of multinational
corporations to sponsor avant-garde manifestations (VIIB8). This should not,
however, entirely trivialize the scale of reassessment, both aesthetic and cultural,
which was prompted by Conceptual Art. The condition of modernity did come
under critical scrutiny by artists once again. Where that scrutiny failed to extend
to the art world itself as the determining site of practice it was possible to hear
the rhetorical hollowness so often attendant on a commitment to sorting out
other people's problems. But where an adequate measure of reflexivity was
ensured, these debates both stimulated, and were themselves reciprocally fuelled
by, the rediscovery of earlier ones. The contributions of Benjamin, Brecht,
Lukacs and others were reclaimed from the margins to which decades of
Fascism, war and Cold War had consigned them.

This process was by no means straightforward, however. The art of the later
1960s and early 1970s was not directly comparable with the alignments of the
1930s. Neither, ultimately, was the world, except in the limited sense that
international capitalism resisted successful challenge. One significant difference
between the two periods was the virtual disappearance of Soviet Communism
as an object of attraction to elements in the Western avant-garde. After the
invasions of Hungary and Czechoslovakia and the split with China, as well as
its consistent identification with reaction in art itself, the Soviet Union offered



VII Introduction 801

nothing to a Western avant-garde now more closely associated with the 'New
Left'.

The avant-garde, it goes without saying, has never been systematically affil-
iated to any one political perspective. None the less, to the extent that it has
maintained an oppositional cast it has been substantially affected by the terms
in which a wider opposition has been conducted. The decline in intellectual
prestige of the Soviet Union was a part of, though it should not be identified
with, a wider historical crisis in Marxism. This could not leave the avant-garde
unaffected. Particularly after the absorption of the wave of 1968, a wholesale
intellectual re-examination of the premises of opposition began, focused particu-
larly in France itself. Trench theory', however, had an international effect.

Two main emphases may be noted. First, what Perry Anderson has referred
to as the 'exorbitation of language'. The powerful example of Roland Barthes
helped fuel a tendency to perceive the mute objects and practices of the social
world as encoding meaning, after the manner of a text (VIID5). In short order
everything from paintings to objects, to practices, to sites, to people themselves,
became legible as 'texts' to those equipped with the tools of semiology. One
effect of global modernization has been for the developed economies of the West
to export the ruder forms of manufacture and become increasingly dedicated to
the processing of information. Knowledge is power, and the obsession with
information has generated a weight of emphasis upon the production of meanings
which has quite eclipsed attention to production of a more basic kind. The
conception of language as a structure of differences, a self-contained system
through which we, as it were, happen to be able to refer to a world, stimulated
a tendency to think in terms of relatively autonomous levels or practices rather
than a world cohered according to some originary contradiction (VIlDl).

Plural foci of determination have come to constitute a second persistent motif
in the theory of the period, a fact one presumes to be not unconnected with
the claimed pluralism of the social formations themselves. In particular the
question of gender came to the fore in the critical revisions which marked much
of the theory of this period. No other feature serves to mark out the radical
cultural practice of the 1960s and after from its forerunners in the 1920s and
1930s than this more pluralist perception of the social production of meaning
and its inscription through power.

Somewhat ironically, the work of the Marxist philosopher Louis Althusser
did much for this approach (VIId3). His insistence upon ideology and ideological
struggle as constitutive features of social organization, rather than detrimental
aspects of bourgeois society alone, fuelled a notion of theoretical practice which,
though itself short-lived, played a part in establishing a perspective wherein the
'political' was no longer perceived as being 'outside' culture, or art, or the
institutional exchange of meaning. It was rather an aspect of those practices. In
the hands of Michel Foucault the nexus of 'power-knowledge' became the point
upon which the critical intellectual or artist should concentrate (VIID12). And
power, from now on, was seen to be constituted by much more than its economic
moment. The articulation of Structuralism and semiotics to a Lacanian psycho-
analysis wherein the human subject was understood as formed in the play of



802 Institutions and Objections

gender difference contained far-reaching implications for the avant-garde (see
Vb7). One of the main casualties of this rewriting of subjectivity was the concept
of the artistic author, who in 'his' protean or expressive form had been so central
to modern art (VIID2).

The questioning to which Modernism was thus subjected, in terms of the
practices both of art and of art criticism, received support from diverse
directions. In addition to French philosophy, contemporary Marxism and the
philosophy of science provided methodological and theoretical resources (VIId4
and 13-14). These methods offered means of address to questions which had
been thrown up by the paradigm of Modernism. The answers, however,
threatened to consign that paradigm, at least in its most recently dominant form,
to history.



VIlA

Objecthood and Reductivism



1 Yves Klein (1928-1962) Sorbonne Lecture

In Klein's pursuit of the 'Immaterial' a connection may be discerned between the
neo-Dadaism of the French Nouveaux Realistes and the various forms of reductive
Modernism which were to be practised in America during the 1960s. An exhibition of
Klein's monochrome canvases took place in Paris in 1956 and at about the same time
he began to produce paintings and other objects painted a uniform deep blue. Two
years later he presented an empty white-painted gallery as an exhibition. The present
text is extracted from the transcript of a lecture delivered in 1959 at the Sorbonne in
Paris; this translation was published in the catalogue of an exhibition of Klein's work at
the Gimpel Fils Gallery, London, 1973.

How did I happen to enter this blue period? Toward the end of 1955, I exhibited
at the Colette Allendy Gallery a score of monochromatic surfaces, all of different
colors, green, red, yellow, violet, blue, orange. That was the beginning, or at
least the first public showing, of this style. I was attempting to show color, and
I realized at the opening of the exhibition that the public, enslaved by visual
habit, when presented with all those surfaces of different colors on the walls,
reassembled them as components of polychromatic decoration. The public could
not enter into the contemplation of the color of a single painting at a time, and
that was very disappointing to me, because I precisely and categorically refuse
to create on one surface even the interplay of two colors.

In my judgment two colors juxtaposed on one canvas compel the observer to
see the spectacle of this juxtaposition of two colors, or of their perfect accord,
but prevent him from entering into the sensitivity, the dominance, the purpose
of the picture. This is a situation of the psyche, of the senses, of the emotions,
which perpetuates a sort of reign of cruelty (laughter), and one can no longer
plunge into the sensibility of pure color, relieved from all outside contamination.

Some will no doubt protest that my development has taken place very rapidly,
in barely four years, and that nothing can occur in such a short time ... I reply
that, although indeed I did begin to exhibit my painting only in 1954 in Paris,
I had already been working for a long time in that style, since 1946. This
prolonged wait demonstrates precisely what I had been prepared to wait for. I



804 Institutions and Objections

had waited for something to become stable within me before I could reveal or
verify what it was. The few friends of that time who encouraged me are aware
of it; I had begun monochromatic painting, in addition to the everyday activities
of painting which were influenced by my parents, both of them artists, because
it seemed that while working color kept winking at me. It enchanted me, besides,
because in front of any painting, figurative or non-figurative I felt more and
more that the lines and all their consequences, the contours, the forms, the
perspectives, the compositions, became exactly like the bars on the window of
a prison. Far away, amidst color, dwelt life and liberty. And in front of the
picture I felt imprisoned, and I believe it is because of that same feeling of
imprisonment that van Gogh exclaimed, 'I long to be freed from I know not
what horrible cage!'

The painter of the future will be a colorist of a kind never seen before, and
that will occur in the next generation. And without doubt it is through color
that I have little by little become acquainted with the Immaterial. The outward
influences which have impelled me to pursue this monochromatic path as far
as the immateriality of today, are multiple: the reading of the Journal of
Delacroix, that champion of color, whose work lies at the source of contemporary
lyric painting; then a study of the position of Delacroix in relation to Ingres,
champion of an academic art which fostered line and all its consequences, which
in my opinion have brought today's art to the crisis of form, as in the beautiful
and grandiose but dramatic adventure of Malevich or Mondrian's insoluble
problem of spatial organization, which has encouraged the polychrome architec-
ture from which our contemporary urban developments suffer so atrociously;
finally, and above all, I received a profound shock when I discovered in the
Basilica of Saint Francis of Assisi frescoes which are scrupulously monochro-
matic, uniform and blue, which I believe may be attributed to Giotto (but which
might be by one of his pupils, or else by some follower of Cimabue or even
one of the artists of the school of Siena, though the blue of which I speak is
just of the same character and the same quality as the blue in the skies of Giotto
which may be admired in the same basilica on the floor above). Were one to
acknowledge that Giotto may have had only the figurative intention of showing
a clear, cloudless sky, that intention is nevertheless definitely monochromatic.

I unhappily did not have the pleasure of discovering the writings of Gaston
Bachelard till very late, only last year in the month of April 1958. To the
question which is often asked me - why did you choose blue? - I will reply by
borrowing yet again from Gaston Bachelard that marvelous passage concerning
blue from his book Air and Dreams. This is primarily a Mallarmean document
in which the poet, living in 'contented world-weariness amidst oblivious tarns',
suffers from the irony of blueness. He perceives an excessively hostile blueness
which strives with an indefatigable hand to Till the gaping blue holes wickedly
made by birds'. In the realm of the blue air more than anywhere else one feels
that the world is accessible to the most unlimited reverie. It is then that a
reverie assumes true depth. The blue sky yawns beneath the dreams, the dream
escapes from the two-dimensional image; soon in a paradoxical way the airborne
dream exists only in depth, while the two other dimensions, in which picturesque



VIIa Objecthood and Reductivism 805

and painted reverie are entertained, lose all visionary interest. The world is thus
on the far side of an unsilvered mirror, there is an imaginary beyond, a beyond
pure and insubstantial, and that is the dwelling place of Bachelard's beautiful
phrase: 'First there is nothing, next there is a depth of nothingness, then a
profundity of blue.' . . .

Blue has no dimensions, it is beyond dimensions, whereas the other colors
are not. They are pre-psychological expanses, red, for example, presupposing a
site radiating heat. All colors arouse specific associative ideas, psychologically
material or tangible, while blue suggests at most the sea and sky, and they, after
all, are in actual, visible nature what is most abstract.



2 Frank Stella (b. 1936) Pratt Institute Lecture

Stella's work first came to prominence with the inclusion of four striped black paintings
in the exhibition 'Sixteen Americans' at the Museum of Modern Art, New York, from 16
December 1959 to 17 February 1960. Both in his early work and in the present text
Stella gave clear exposition to one of the distinguishing concerns of his generation of
American artists: how to supersede the traditional concept of composition as a process
of relating of parts. Although Yves Klein and Piero Manzoni (VIa5) had voiced similar
concerns at about the same time, this problem was widely identified by the American
avant-garde of the 1960s as the legacy of a now outmoded European phase of
Modernism. This is the text of a talk given to art students at the Pratt Institute, New
York, at the time of the 'Sixteen Americans' exhibition. It was illustrated by diagrammatic
drawings of Stella's work. The typescript was preserved in a notebook by Carl Andre
and was published in Robert Rosenblum, Frank Stella, Harmondsworth and Baltimore,
1971, p. 57, from which the present text is taken.

There are two problems in painting. One is to find out what painting is and
the other is to find out how to make a painting. The first is learning something
and the second is making something.

One learns about painting by looking at and imitating other painters. I can't
stress enough how important it is, if you are interested at all in painting, to
look and to look a great deal at painting. There is no other way to find out
about painting. After looking comes imitating. In my own case it was at first
largely a technical immersion. How did Kline put down that color? Brush or
knife or both? Why did Guston leave the canvas bare at the edges? Why did
H. Frankenthaler use unsized canvas? And so on. Then, and this was the most
dangerous part, I began to imitate the intellectual and emotional processes of
the painters I saw. So that rainy winter days in the city would force me to
paint Gandy Brodies, as bright clear days at the seashore would force me to
paint De Staels. I would discover rose madder and add orange to make a
Hofmann. Fortunately, one can stand only so much of this sort of thing. I got
tired of other people's painting and began to make my own. I found, however,
that I not only got tired of looking at my own paintings but that I also didn't
like painting them at all. The painterly problems of what to put here and there
and how to make it go with what was already there became more and more



806 Institutions and Objections

difficult and the solutions more and more unsatisfactory. Until finally it became
obvious that there had to be a better way.

There were two problems which had to be faced. One was spatial and the
other methodological. In the first case I had to do something about relational
painting, i.e., the balancing of the various parts with and against each other.
The obvious answer was symmetry - make it the same all over. The question
still remained, though, of how to do this in depth. A symmetrical image or
configuration placed on an open ground is not balanced out in the illusionistic
space. The solution I arrived at - and there are probably quite a few, although
I know of only one other, color density - forces illusionistic space out of the
painting at a constant rate by using a regulated pattern. The remaining problem
was simply to find a method of paint application which followed and com-
plemented the design solution. This was done by using the house painter's
technique and tools.



3 Ad Reinhardt (1913-1967) 'Art as Art'

Reinhardt's characteristic statements express an apparent conviction in the utter sep-
aration of art from life. At the time they were written, his strings of negations offered
a strategic resistance to the types of claim for meaning in abstract art which had
become prevalent in the literature of Abstract Expressionism. They also served to clear
some theoretical space for the 'pure', contentless abstract paintings on which Reinhardt
had been working since the early 1950s. During the 1960s his example was important
for some American artists of a younger generation, and particularly for Joseph Kosuth.
Originally published in Art International, VI, no. 10, Lugano, December 1962.

The one thing to say about art is that it is one thing. Art is art-as-art and
everything else is everything else. Art-as-art is nothing but art. Art is not what
is not art.

The one object of fifty years of abstract art is to present art-as-art and as
nothing else, to make it into the one thing it is only, separating and defining
it more and more, making it purer and emptier, more absolute and more
exclusive - non-objective, non-representational, non-figurative, non-imagist,
non-expressionist, non-subjective. The only and one way to say what abstract
art or art-as-art is, is to say what it is not.

The one subject of a hundred years of modern art is that awareness of art of
itself, of art preoccupied with its own process and means, with its own identity
and distinction, art concerned with its own unique statement, art conscious of
its own evolution and history and destiny, toward its own freedom, its own
dignity, its own essence, its own reason, its own morality and its own conscience.
Art needs no justification with 'realism' or 'naturalism,' 'regionalism' or 'na-
tionalism,' 'individualism' or 'socialism' or 'mysticism,' or with any other ideas.

The one content of three centuries of European or Asiatic art and the one
matter of three millennia of Eastern or Western art, is the same 'one significance'
that runs through all the timeless art of the world. Without an art-as-art



VIIa Objecthood and Reductivism 807

continuity and art-for-art's-sake conviction and unchanging art spirit and ab-
stract point of view, art would be inaccessible and the 'one thing' completely
secret.

The one idea of art as 'fine,' 'high,' 'noble,' 'liberal,' ideal' of the seventeenth
century is to separate fine and intellectual art from manual art and craft. The
one intention of the word 'aesthetics' of the eighteenth century is to isolate the
art experience from other things. The one declaration of all the main movements
in art of the nineteenth century is of the 'independence' of art. The one question,
the one principle, the one crisis in art of the twentieth century centers in the
uncompromising 'purity' of art, and in the consciousness that art comes from
art only, not from anything else.

The one meaning in art-as-art, past or present, is art meaning. When an art
object is separated from its original time and place and use and is moved into
the art museum, it gets emptied and purified of all its meanings except one. A
religious object that becomes a work of art in an art museum loses all its religious
meanings. No one in his right mind goes to an art museum to worship anything
but art, or to learn about anything else.

The one place for art-as-art is the museum of fine art. The reason for the
museum of fine art is the preservation of ancient and modern art that cannot
be made again and that does not have to be done again. A museum of fine art
should exclude everything but fine art, and be separate from museums of
ethnology, geology, archaeology, history, decorative arts, industrial arts, military
arts, and museums of other things. A museum is a treasure house and tomb,
not a counting-house or amusement center. A museum that becomes an art
curator's personal monument or an art-collector-sanctifying establishment or an
art-history manufacturing plant or an artists' market block is a disgrace. Any
disturbance of a true museum's soundlessness, timelessness, airlessness, and
Hfelessness is a disrespect.

The one purpose of the art academy university is the education and 'correction
of the artist'-as-artist, not the 'enlightenment of the public' or the popularization
of art. The art college should be a cloister-ivyhall-ivory-tower-community of
artists, an artists' union and congress and club, not a success school or service
station or rest home or house of artists' ill-fame. The notion that art or an art
museum or art university 'enriches life' or 'fosters a love of life' or 'promotes
understanding and love among men' is as mindless as anything in art can be.
Anyone who speaks of using art to further any local, municipal, national, or
international relations is out of his mind.

The one thing to say about art and life is that art is art and life is life, that
art is not life and that life is not art. A 'slice-of-life' art is no better or worse
than a 'slice-of-art' life. Fine art is not a 'means of making a living' or a 'way
of living a life,' and an artist who dedicates his life to his art or his art to his
life burdens his art with his life and his life with his art. Art that is a matter
of life and death is neither fine nor free.

The one assault on fine art is the ceaseless attempt to subserve it as a means
to some other end or value. The one fight in art is not between art and non-art,
but between true and false art, between pure art and action-assemblage art,



808 Institutions and Objections

between abstract and surrealist-expressionist anti-art, between free art and servile
art. Abstract art has its own integrity, not someone else's 'integration' with
something else. Any combining, mixing, adding, diluting, exploiting, vulgarizing,
or popularizing abstract art deprives art of its essence and depraves the artist's
artistic consciousness. Art is free, but it is not a free-for-all.

The one struggle in art is the struggle of artists against artists, of artist against
artist, of the artist-as-artist within and against the artist-as-man, -animal, or
-vegetable. Artists who claim their artwork comes from nature, life, reality, earth
or heaven, as 'mirrors of the soul' or 'reflections of conditions' or 'instruments
of the universe,' who cook up 'new images of man' - figures and 'nature-in-
abstraction' - pictures, are subjectively and objectively rascals or rustics. The
art of 'figuring' or 'picturing' is not a fine art. An artist who is lobbying as a
'creature of circumstances' or logrolling as a 'victim of fate' is not a fine master
artist. No one ever forces an artist to be pure.

The one art that is abstract and pure enough to have the one problem and
possibility, in our time and timelessness, of the 'one single grand original
problem' is pure abstract painting. Abstract painting is not just another school
or movement or style but the first truly unmannered and untrammeled and
unentangled, styleless, universal painting. No other art or painting is detached
or empty or immaterial enough.

The one history of painting progresses from the painting of a variety of ideas
with a variety of subjects and objects, to one idea with a variety of subjects and
objects, to one subject with a variety of objects, to one object with a variety of
subjects, then to one object with one subject, to one object with no subject,
and to one subject with no object, then to the idea of no object and no subject
and no variety at all. There is nothing less significant in art, nothing more
exhausting and immediately exhausted, than 'endless variety.'

The one evolution of art forms unfolds in one straight logical line of negative
actions and reactions, in one predestined, eternally recurrent stylistic cycle, in
the same all-over pattern, in all times and places, taking different times in
different places, always beginning with an 'early' archaic schematization, achiev-
ing a climax with a 'classic' formulation, and decaying with 'late' endless variety
of illusionisms and expressionisms. When late stages wash away all lines of
demarcation, framework, and fabric, with 'anything can be art,' 'anybody can
be an artist,' 'that's life,' 'why fight it,' 'anything goes,' and 'it makes no
difference whether art is abstract or representational,' the artists' world is a
mannerist and primitivist art trade and suicide-vaudeville, venal, genial, con-
temptible, trifling.

The one way in art comes from art working and the more an artist works the
more there is to do. Artists come from artists, art forms come from art forms,
painting comes from painting. The one direction in fine or abstract art today
is in the painting of the same one form over and over again. The one intensity
and the one perfection come only from long and lonely routine preparation and
attention and repetition. The one originality exists only where all artists work
in the same tradition and master the same convention. The one freedom is
realized only through the strictest art discipline and through the most similar




VIIa Objecthood and Reductivism 809

studio ritual. Only a standardized, prescribed, and proscribed form can be
imageless, only a stereotyped image can be formless, only a formularized art
can be formulaless. A painter who does not know what or how or where to
paint is not a fine artist.

The one work for a fine artist, the one painting, is the painting of the one-size
canvas - the single scheme, one formal device, one color-monochrome, one linear
division in each direction, one symmetry, one texture, one free-hand brushing,
one rhythm, one working everything into one dissolution and one indivisibility,
each painting into one overall uniformity and non-irregularity. No lines or
imaginings, no shapes or composings or representings, no visions or sensations
or impulses, no symbols or signs or impastos, no decoratings or colorings or
picturings, no pleasures or pains, no accidents or ready-mades, no things, no
ideas, no relations, no attributes, no qualities - nothing that is not of the essence.
Everything into irreducibility, unreproducibility, imperceptibility. Nothing
'usable,' 'manipulatable,' 'salable,' 'dealable,' 'collectible,' 'graspable.' No art as
a commodity or a jobbery. Art is not the spiritual side of business.

The one standard in art is oneness and fineness, Tightness and purity,
abstractness and evanescence. The one thing to say about art is its breathlessness,
lifelessness, deathlessness, contentlessness, formlessness, spacelessness, and time-
lessness. This is always the end of art.



4 Donald Judd (1928-1994) 'Specific Objects'

Judd's first one-man show was held at the Green Gallery in New York in 1964 after he
had abandoned painting for work which took the form of reliefs and free-standing
objects. This essay was first published the following year. It is noteworthy for its claim
that the representative art of the modern is now neither painting nor sculpture but the
virtual new medium of 'three-dimensional work'. On the question of the legacy of
Abstract Expressionism, Judd thus stakes out a position in clear opposition to Green-
berg's (as exemplified in VIb7). As a consequence of the forthrightness of his views and
the consistently spare style of his work, Judd was identified as a leading figure in the
form of apostate Modernism which came to be called Minimalism. This is an identifica-
tion which Judd himself resisted, however. Despite the concentration of his own sculp-
tural output on a quite restricted range of box-like forms, it is noteworthy that in this
early formulation his conception of 'three-dimensional work' is exemplified by reference
to a thoroughly heterogeneous range of examples. First published in Arts Yearbook, 8,
New York, 1965, pp. 74-82; reprinted in Judd, Complete Writings 1 959-1 975, Halifax
Nova Scotia, 1975, from which the present text is taken.

Half or more of the best new work in the last few years has been neither painting
nor sculpture. Usually it has been related, closely or distantly, to one or the
other. The work is diverse, and much in it that is not in painting and sculpture
is also diverse. But there are some things that occur nearly in common.

The new three-dimensional work doesn't constitute a movement, school or
style. The common aspects are too general and too little common to define a
movement. The differences are greater than the similarities. The similarities are



810 Institutions and Objections

selected from the work; they aren't a movement's first principles or delimiting
rules. Three-dimensionality is not as near being simply a container as painting
and sculpture have seemed to be, but it tends to that. But now painting and
sculpture are less neutral, less containers, more defined, not undeniable and
unavoidable. They are particular forms circumscribed after all, producing fairly
definite qualities. Much of the motivation in the new work is to get clear of
these forms. The use of three dimensions is an obvious alternative. It opens to
anything. Many of the reasons for this use are negative, points against painting
and sculpture, and since both are common sources, the negative reasons are
those nearest common-age. 'The motive to change is always some uneasiness:
nothing setting us upon the change of state, or upon any new action, but some
uneasiness.' The positive reasons are more particular. Another reason for listing
the insufficiencies of painting and sculpture first is that both are familiar and
their elements and qualities more easily located.

The objections to painting and sculpture are going to sound more intolerant
than they are. There are qualifications. The disinterest in painting and sculpture
is a disinterest in doing it again, not in it as it is being done by those who
developed the last advanced versions. New work always involves objections to
the old, but these objections are really relevant only to the new. They are part
of it. If the earlier work is first-rate it is complete. New inconsistencies and
limitations aren't retroactive; they concern only work that is being developed.
Obviously, three-dimensional work will not cleanly succeed painting and sculp-
ture. It's not like a movement: anyway, movements no longer work: also, linear
history has unraveled somewhat. The new work exceeds painting in plain power,
but power isn't the only consideration, though the difference between it and
expression can't be too great either. There are other ways than power and form
in which one kind of art can be more or less than another. Finally, a flat and
rectangular surface is too handy to give up. Some things can be done only on
a flat surface. Lichtenstein's representation of a representation is a good instance.
But this work which is neither painting nor sculpture challenges both. It will
have to be taken into account by new artists. It will probably change painting
and sculpture.

The main thing wrong with painting is that it is a rectangular plane placed
flat against the wall. A rectangle is a shape itself; it is obviously the whole
shape; it determines and limits the arrangement of whatever is on or inside of
it. In work before 1946 the edges of the rectangle are a boundary, the end of
the picture. The composition must react to the edges and the rectangle must
be unified, but the shape of the rectangle is not stressed; the parts are more
important, and the relationships of color and form occur among them. In the
paintings of Pollock, Rothko, Still and Newman, and more recently of Reinhardt
and Noland, the rectangle is emphasized. The elements inside the rectangle are
broad and simple and correspond closely to the rectangle. The shapes and surface
are only those which can occur plausibly within and on a rectangular plane.
The parts are few and so subordinate to the unity as not to be parts in an
ordinary sense. A painting is nearly an entity, one thing, and not the indefinable
sum of a group of entities and references. The one thing overpowers the earlier




VIIa Objecthood and Reductivism 811
painting. It also establishes the rectangle as a definite form: it is no longer a
fairly neutral limit. A form can be used only in so many ways. The rectangular
plane is given a life span. The simplicity required to emphasize the rectangle
limits the arrangements possible within it. The sense of singleness also has a
duration, but it is only beginning and has a better future outside of painting.
Its occurrence in painting now looks like a beginning, in which new forms are
often made from earlier schemes and materials.

The plane is also emphasized and nearly single. It is clearly a plane one or
two inches in front of another plane, the wall, and parallel to it. The relationship
of the two planes is specific; it is a form. Everything on or slightly in the plane
of the painting must be arranged laterally.

Almost all paintings are spatial in one way or another. Yves Klein's blue
paintings are the only ones that are unspatial, and there is little that is nearly
unspatial, mainly Stella's work. It's possible that not much can be done with
both an upright rectangular plane and an absence of space. Anything on a surface
has space behind it. Two colors on the same surface almost always lie on
different depths. An even color, especially in oil paint, covering all or much of
a painting is almost always both flat and infinitely spatial. The space is shallow
in all of the work in which the rectangular plane is stressed. Rothko's space is
shallow and the soft rectangles are parallel to the plane, but the space is almost
traditionally illusionistic. In Reinhardt's paintings, just back from the plane of
the canvas, there is a flat plane and this seems in turn indefinitely deep. Pollock's
paint is obviously on the canvas, and the space is mainly that made by any
marks on a surface, so that it is not very descriptive and illusionistic. Noland's
concentric bands are not as specifically paint-on-a-surface as Pollock's paint, but
the bands flatten the literal space more. As flat and unillusionistic as Noland's
paintings are, the bands do advance and recede. Even a single circle will warp
the surface to it, will have a little space behind it.

Except for a complete and unvaried field of color or marks, anything spaced
in a rectangle and on a plane suggests something in and on something else,
something in its surround, which suggests an object or figure in its space, in
which these are clearer instances of a similar world - that's the main purpose
of painting. The recent paintings aren't completely single. There are a few
dominant areas, Rothko's rectangles or Noland's circles, and there is the area
around them. There is a gap between the main forms, the most expressive parts,
and the rest of the canvas, the plane and the rectangle. The central forms still
occur in a wider and indefinite context, although the singleness of the paintings
abridges the general and solipsistic quality of earlier work. Fields are also usually
not limited, and they give the appearance of sections cut from something
indefinitely larger.

Oil paint and canvas aren't as strong as commercial paints and as the colors
and surfaces of materials, especially if the materials are used in three dimensions.
Oil and canvas are familiar and, like the rectangular plane, have a certain quality
and have limits. The quality is especially identified with art.

The new work obviously resembles sculpture more than it does painting, but
*t is nearer to painting. Most sculpture is like the painting which preceded



812 Institutions and Objections

Pollock, Rothko, Still and Newman. The newest thing about it is its broad scale.
Its materials are somewhat more emphasized than before. The imagery involves
a couple of salient resemblances to other visible things and a number of more
oblique references, everything generalized to compatibility. The parts and the
space are allusive, descriptive and somewhat naturalistic. [ . . . ]

Most sculpture is made part by part, by addition, composed. The main parts
remain fairly discrete. They and the small parts are a collection of variations,
slight through great. There are hierarchies of clarity and strength and of
proximity to one or two main ideas. Wood and metal are the usual materials,
either alone or together, and if together it is without much of a contrast. There
is seldom any color. The middling contrast and the natural monochrome are
general and help to unify the parts.

There is little of any of this in the new three-dimensional work. So far the
most obvious difference within this diverse work is between that which is
something of an object, a single thing, and that which is open and extended,
more or less environmental. There isn't as great a difference in their nature as
in their appearance, though. Oldenburg and others have done both. There are
precedents for some of the characteristics of the new work. The parts are usually
subordinate and not separate in Arp's sculpture and often in Brancusi's.
Duchamp's ready-mades and other Dada objects are also seen at once and not
part by part. Cornell's boxes have too many parts to seem at first to be
structured. Part-by-part structure can't be too simple or too complicated. It has
to seem orderly. The degree of Arp's abstraction, the moderate extent of his
reference to the human body, neither imitative nor very oblique, is unlike the
imagery of most of the new three-dimensional work. Duchamp's bottle-drying
rack is close to some of it. The work of Johns and Rauschenberg and assemblage
and low-relief generally, Ortman's reliefs for example, are preliminaries. Johns's
few cast objects and a few of Rauschenberg's works, such as the goat with the
tire, are beginnings.
* * *

Stella's shaped paintings involve several important characteristics of three-
dimensional work. The periphery of a piece and the lines inside correspond.
The stripes are nowhere near being discrete parts. The surface is farther from
the wall than usual, though it remains parallel to it. Since the surface is
exceptionally unified and involves little or no space, the parallel plane is
unusually distinct. The order is not rationalistic and underlying but is simply
order, like that of continuity, one thing after another. A painting isn't an image.
The shapes, the unity, projection, order and color are specific, aggressive and
powerful.

Painting and sculpture have become set forms. A fair amount of their meaning
isn't credible. The use of three dimensions isn't the use of a given form. There
hasn't been enough time and work to see limits. So far, considered most widely,
three dimensions are mostly a space to move into. The characteristics of three
dimensions are those of only a small amount of work, little compared to painting
and sculpture. A few of the more general aspects may persist, such as the work's
being like an object or being specific, but other characteristics are bound to



VIIa Objecthood and Reductivism 813

develop. Since its range is so wide, three-dimensional work will probably divide
into a number of forms. At any rate, it will be larger than painting and much
larger than sculpture, which, compared to painting, is fairly particular, much
nearer to what is usually called a form, having a certain kind of form. Because
the nature of three dimensions isn't set, given beforehand, something credible
can be made, almost anything. Of course something can be done within a given
form, such as painting, but with some narrowness and less strength and
variation. Since sculpture isn't so general a form, it can probably be only what
it is now - which means that if it changes a great deal it will be something
else; so it is finished.

Three dimensions are real space. That gets rid of the problem of illusionism
and of literal space, space in and around marks and colors - which is riddance
of one of the salient and most objectionable relics of European art. The several
limits of painting are no longer present. A work can be as powerful as it can
be thought to be. Actual space is intrinsically more powerful and specific than
paint on a flat surface. Obviously, anything in three dimensions can be any
shape, regular or irregular, and can have any relation to the wall, floor, ceiling,
room, rooms or exterior or none at all. Any material can be used, as is or
painted.

A work needs only to be interesting. Most works finally have one quality. In
earlier art the complexity was displayed and built the quality. In recent painting
the complexity was in the format and the few main shapes, which had been
made according to various interests and problems. A painting by Newman is
finally no simpler than one by Cezanne. In the three-dimensional work the
whole thing is made according to complex purposes, and these are not scattered
but asserted by one form. It isn't necessary for a work to have a lot of things
to look at, to compare, to analyze one by one, to contemplate. The thing as a
whole, its quality as a whole, is what is interesting. The main things are alone
and are more intense, clear and powerful. They are not diluted by an inherited
format, variations of a form, mild contrasts and connecting parts and areas.
European art had to represent a space and its contents as well as have sufficient
unity and aesthetic interest. Abstract painting before 1946 and most subsequent
painting kept the representational subordination of the whole to its parts.
Sculpture still does. In the new work the shape, image, color and surface are
single and not partial and scattered. There aren't any neutral or moderate areas
or parts, any connections or transitional areas. The difference between the new
work and earlier painting and present sculpture is like that between one of
Brunelleschi's windows in the Badia di Fiesole and the facade of the Palazzo
Rucellai, which is only an undeveloped rectangle as a whole and is mainly a
collection of highly ordered parts. [ . . . ]



5 Robert Morris (b. 1931) 'Notes on Sculpture 1-3'

Like Judd, Morris argues a claim to the Modernist inheritance in competition with the
claims made by critics such as Greenberg and Fried on behalf of the abstract painting



814 Institutions and Objections

and sculpture of the 1960s. Although he begins by expanding the term 'sculpture' to
cover a wider-than-normal range of avant-garde practices, he comes to adopt Judd's
designation of them as 'three-dimensional work'. However, unlike Judd's his arguments
were marked by an interest in gestalt theory and the European tradition of construction
in art. His principal interests lie in the character of the sculptural object or situation as
a determinant upon the spectator's experience, and, increasingly, in the exemplary
character of forming techniques. Traditional Modernist theory tends implicitly or expli-
citly to distinguish the values of Modernism from the interests of scientific and technical
modernization. To Morris, on the other hand, manufacture is an activity definitive of
human existence; it follows that the use of industrial materials and processes should
be seen as entirely natural to the modern artist. First published in three issues of
Artforum: vol. 4, no. 6, February 1966, pp. 42-4; vol. 5, no. 2, October 1966, pp.
20-3; vol. 5, no. 10, Summer 1967. Parts I and II were printed as conventional essays,
from which the present versions are taken; part III as a series of nineteen isolated and
non-sequential paragraphs, of which ten are reprinted here. (For 'Notes on Sculpture,
Part 4' see VIIb3.)



Part I



'What comes into appearance must segregate in order to appear.'

Goethe



[ . . . ] In the interest of differences it seems time that some of the distinctions
sculpture has managed for itself be articulated. To begin in the broadest possible
way it should be stated that the concerns of sculpture have been for some time
not only distinct from but hostile to those of painting. The clearer the nature
of the values of sculpture becomes the stronger the opposition appears. Certainly
the continuing realization of its nature has had nothing to do with any dialectical
evolution that painting has enunciated for itself. The primary problematic
concerns with which advanced painting has been occupied for about half a
century have been structural. The structural element has been gradually revealed
to be located within the nature of the literal qualities of the support. It has
been a long dialogue with a limit. Sculpture, on the other hand, never having
been involved with illusionism could not possibly have based the efforts of fifty
years upon the rather pious, if somewhat contradictory, act of giving up this
illusionism and approaching the object. Save for replication, which is not to be
confused with illusionism, the sculptural facts of space, light, and materials have
always functioned concretely and literally. Its allusions or references have not
been commensurate with the indicating sensibilities of painting. If painting has
sought to approach the object, it has sought equally hard to dematerialize itself
on the way. Clearer distinctions between sculpture's essentially tactile nature
and the optical sensibilities involved in painting need to be made.

Tatlin was perhaps the first to free sculpture from representation and establish
it as an autonomous form both by the kind of image, or rather non-image, he
employed and by his literal use of materials. He, Rodchenko, and other
Constructivists refuted Apollinaire's observation that 'a structure becomes archi-
tecture, and not sculpture, when its elements no longer have their justification
in nature.' At least the earlier works of Tatlin and other Constructivists made



VIIa Objecthood and Reductivism 815

references to neither the figure nor architecture. In subsequent years Gabo,
and to a lesser extent Pevsner and Vantongerloo, perpetuated the Constructivist
ideal of a non-imagistic sculpture that was independent of architecture. This
autonomy was not sustained in the work of the greatest American sculptor, the
late David Smith. Today there is a reassertion of the non-imagistic as an
essential condition. [. . .]

[. . .] Mondrian went so far as to claim that 'Sensations are not transmissible,
or rather, their purely qualitative properties are not transmissible. The same,
however, does not apply to relations between sensations. . . . Consequently only
relations between sensations can have an objective value . . .' This may be
ambiguous in terms of perceptual facts but in terms of looking at art it is
descriptive of the condition that obtains. It obtains because art objects have
clearly divisible parts that set up the relationships. Such a condition suggests
the alternative question: Could a work exist that has only one property?
Obviously not, since nothing exists that has only one property. A single, pure
sensation cannot be transmissible precisely because one perceives simultaneously
more than one property as parts in any given situation: if color, then also
dimension; if flatness, then texture, etc. However, certain forms do exist that,
if they do not negate the numerous relative sensations of color to texture, scale
to mass, etc., do not present clearly separated parts for these kinds of relations
to be established in terms of shapes. Such are the simpler forms that create
strong gestalt sensations. Their parts are bound together in such a way that they
offer a maximum resistance to perceptual separation. In terms of solids, or forms
applicable to sculpture, these gestalts are the simpler polyhedrons. [ . . . ] In the
simpler regular polyhedrons, such as cubes and pyramids, one need not move
around the object for the sense of the whole, the gestalt, to occur. One sees
and immediately 'believes' that the pattern within one's mind corresponds to
the existential fact of the object. Belief in this sense is both a kind of faith in
spatial extension and a visualization of that extension. In other words, it is those
aspects of apprehension that are not coexistent with the visual field but rather
the result of the experience of the visual field. The more specific nature of this
belief and how it is formed involve perceptual theories of 'constancy of shape,'
'tendencies toward simplicity,' kinesthetic clues, memory traces, and physiologi-
cal factors regarding the nature of binocular parallax vision and the structure
of the retina and brain. Neither the theories nor the experiences of gestalt effects
relating to three-dimensional bodies are as simple and clear as they are for
two-dimensions. But experience of solids establishes the fact that, as in flat
forms, some configurations are dominated by wholeness, others tend to separate
into parts. This becomes clear if the other types of polyhedrons are considered.
In the complex regular type there is a weakening of visualization as the number
of sides increases, A sixty-four-sided figure is difficult to visualize, yet because
of its regularity one senses the whole, even if seen from a single viewpoint.
Simple irregular polyhedrons, such as beams, inclined planes, truncated py-
ramids, are relatively more easy to visualize and sense as wholes. The fact that
some are less familiar than the regular geometric forms does not affect the
formation of a gestalt. Rather, the irregularity becomes a particularizing quality.



816 Institutions and Objections

Complex irregular polyhedrons (for example, crystal formations) if they are
complex and irregular enough can frustrate visualization almost completely, in
which case it is difficult to maintain one is experiencing a gestalt. Complex
irregular polyhedrons allow for divisibility of parts insofar as they create weak
gestalts. They would seem to return one to the conditions of works that, in
Mondrian's terms, transmit relations easily in that their parts separate. Complex
regular polyhedrons are more ambiguous in this respect. The simpler regular
and irregular ones maintain the maximum resistance to being confronted as
objects with separate parts. They seem to fail to present lines of fracture by
which they could divide for easy part-to-part relationships to be established. I
term these simple regular and irregular polyhedrons "unitary" forms. Sculpture
involving unitary forms, being bound together as it is with a kind of energy
provided by the gestalt, often elicits the complaint among critics that such works
are beyond analysis.

Characteristic of a gestalt is that once it is established all the information
about it, qua gestalt, is exhausted. (One does not, for example, seek the gestalt
of a gestalt.) Furthermore, once it is established it does not disintegrate. One
is then both free of the shape and bound to it. Free or released because of the
exhaustion of information about it, as shape, and bound to it because it remains
constant and indivisible.

Simplicity of shape does not necessarily equate with simplicity of experience.
Unitary forms do not reduce relationships. They order them. If the predominant,
hieratic nature of the unitary form functions as a constant, all those particula-
rizing relations of scale, proportion, etc., are not thereby canceled. Rather they
are bound more cohesively and indivisibly together. The magnification of this
single most important sculptural value - shape - together with greater unification
and integration of every other essential sculptural value makes, on the one hand,
the multipart, inflected formats of past sculpture extraneous, and on the other,
establishes both a new limit and a new freedom for sculpture.

Part II

Q; Why didn't you make it larger so that it would loom over the observer?

A: I was not making a monument.

Q: Then why didn't you make it smaller so that the observer could see over

the top?
A: I was not making an object.
- Tony Smith's replies to questions about his six-foot steel cube.

The size range of useless three-dimensional things is a continuum between the
monument and the ornament. Sculpture has generally been thought of as those
objects not at the polarities but falling between. The new work being done today
falls between the extremes of this size continuum. Because much of it presents
an image of neither figurative nor architectonic reference, the works have been
described as 'structures' or 'objects.' The word structure applies either to
anything or to how a thing is put together. Every rigid body is an object. A



i



VIIa Objecthood and Reductivism 817

particular term for the new work is not as important as knowing what its values
and standards are.

In the perception of relative size the human body enters into the total
continuum of sizes and establishes itself as a constant on that scale. One knows
immediately what is smaller and what is larger than himself. It is obvious, yet
important, to take note of the fact that things smaller than ourselves are seen
differently than things larger. The quality of intimacy is attached to an object
in a fairly direct proportion as its size diminishes in relation to oneself. The
quality of publicness is attached in proportion as the size increases in relation
to oneself. This holds true so long as one is regarding the whole of a large
thing and not a part. The qualities of publicness or privateness are imposed on
things. This is because of our experience in dealing with objects that move away
from the constant of our own size in increasing or decreasing dimension. Most
ornaments from the past, Egyptian glassware, Romanesque ivories, etc., con-
sciously exploit the intimate mode by highly resolved surface incident. The
awareness that surface incident is always attended to in small objects allows for
the elaboration of fine detail to sustain itself. Large sculptures from the past
that exist now only in small fragments invite our vision to perform a kind of
magnification (sometimes literally performed by the photograph) that gives
surface variation on these fragments the quality of detail it never had in the
original whole work. The intimate mode is essentially closed, spaceless, com-
pressed, and exclusive.

While specific size is a condition that structures one's response in terms of
the more or less public or intimate, enormous objects in the class of monuments
elicit a far more specific response to size qua size. That is, besides providing
the condition for a set of responses, large-sized objects exhibit size more
specifically as an element. It is the more conscious appraisal of size in monu-
ments that makes for the quality of 'scale.' The awareness of scale is a function
of the comparison made between that constant, one's body size, and the object.
Space between the subject and the object is implied in such a comparison. In
this sense space does not exist for intimate objects. A larger object includes
more of the space around itself than does a smaller one. It is necessary literally
to keep one's distance from large objects in order to take the whole of any one
view into one's field of vision. The smaller the object the closer one approaches
it and, therefore, it has correspondingly less of a spatial field in which to exist
for the viewer. It is this necessary greater distance of the object in space from
our bodies, in order that it be seen at all, that structures the non-personal or
public mode. However, it is just this distance between object and subject that
creates a more extended situation, for physical participation becomes necessary.
Just as there is no exclusion of literal space in large objects, neither is there an
exclusion of the existing light.

Things on the monumental scale, then, include more terms necessary for their
apprehension than objects smaller than the body, namely, the literal space in
which they exist and the kinesthetic demands placed upon the body-

A simple form like a cube will necessarily be seen in a more public way as
its size increases from that of our own. It accelerates the valence ot intimacy



818 Institutions and Objections

as its size decreases from that of one's own body. This is true even if the surface,
material, and color are held constant. In fact it is just these properties of surface,
color, material, that get magnified into details as size is reduced. Properties that
are not read as detail in large works become detail in small works. Structural
divisions in work of any size are another form of detail. [. . .] There is an
assumption here of different kinds of things becoming equivalent. The term
'detail' is used here in a special and negative sense and should be understood
to refer to all factors in a work that pull it toward intimacy by allowing specific
elements to separate from the whole, thus setting up relationships within the
work. Objections to the emphasis on color as a medium foreign to the physicality
of sculpture have also been raised previously, but in terms of its function as a
detail a further objection can be raised. That is, intense color, being a specific
element, detaches itself from the whole of the work to become one more internal
relationship. The same can be said of emphasis on specific, sensuous material
or impressively high finishes. A certain number of these intimacy-producing
relations have been gotten rid of in the new sculpture. Such things as process
showing through traces of the artist's hand have obviously been done away with.
But one of the worst and most pretentious of these intimacy-making situations
in some of the new work is the scientistic element that shows up generally in
the application of mathematical or engineering concerns to generate or inflect
images. This may have worked brilliantly for Jasper Johns (and he is the
prototype for this kind of thinking) in his number and alphabet paintings, in
which the exhaustion of a logical system closes out and ends the image and
produces the picture. But appeals to binary mathematics, tensegrity techniques,
mathematically derived modules, progressions, etc., within a work are only
another application of the Cubist aesthetic of having reasonableness or logic for
the relating parts. The better new work takes relationships out of the work and
makes them a function of space, light, and the viewer's field of vision. The
object is but one of the terms in the newer aesthetic. It is in some way more
reflexive because one's awareness of oneself existing in the same space as the
work is stronger than in previous work, with its many internal relationships.
One is more aware than before that he himself is establishing relationships as
he apprehends the object from various positions and under varying conditions
of light and spatial context. Every internal relationship, whether it be set up
by a structural division, a rich surface, or what have you, reduces the public,
external quality of the object and tends to eliminate the viewer to the degree
that these details pull him into an intimate relation with the work and out of
the space in which the object exists.

While the work must be autonomous in the sense of being a self-contained
unit for the formation of the gestalt, the indivisible and undissolvable whole,
the major aesthetic terms are not in but dependent upon this autonomous object
and exist as unfixed variables that find their specific definition in the particular
space and light and physical viewpoint of the spectator. Only one aspect of the
work is immediate: the apprehension of the gestalt. The experience of the work
necessarily exists in time. The intention is diametrically opposed to Cubism with




VHa Objecthood and Reductivism 819

its concern for simultaneous views in one plane. Some of the new work has expanded
the terms of sculpture by a more emphatic focusing on the very conditions
under which certain kinds of objects are seen. The object itself is carefully
placed in these new conditions to be but one of the terms. The sensuous object,
resplendent with compressed internal relations, has had to be rejected. That
many considerations must be taken into account in order that the work keep its
place as a term in the expanded situation hardly indicates a lack of interest in
the object itself. But the concerns now are for more control of and/or cooper-
ation of the entire situation. Control is necessary if the variables of object, light,
space, body, are to function. The object itself has not become less important.
It has merely become less self important. [. . .]



Part III Notes and Nonsequiturs

Structures. Such work is often related to other focuses but further, or more
strongly, emphasizes its 'reasons' for parts, inflections, or other variables. The
didacticism of projected systems or added information beyond the physical
existence of the work is either explicit or implicit. Sets, series, modules
permutations or other simple systems are often made use of. Such work often
transcends its didacticism to become rigorous. Sometimes there is a puritanical
scepticism of the physical in it. The lesser work is often stark and austere,
rationalistic and insecure.

The trouble with painting is not its inescapable illusionism per se. But this
inherent illusionism brings with it a non-actual elusiveness or indeterminate
allusiveness. The mode has become antique. Specifically, what is antique about
it is the divisiveness of experience which marks on a flat surface elicit. There
are obvious cultural and historical reasons why this happens. For a long while
the duality of thing and allusion sustained itself under the force of profuse
organizational innovations within the work itself. But it has worn thin and its
premises cease to convince. Duality of experience is not direct enough. That
which has ambiguity built into it is not acceptable to an empirical and pragmatic
outlook. That the mode itself - rather than lagging quality - is in default seems
to be shown by the fact that some of the best painting today does not bother
to emphasize actuality or literalness through shaping of the support.

It is not in the uses of new, exotic materials that the present work differs much
from past work. It is not even in the non-hierarchic, non-compositional struc-
turing, since this was clearly worked out in painting. The difference lies in
the kind of order which underlies the forming of this work. This order is not
based on previous art orders, but is an order so basic to the culture that its
obviousness makes it nearly invisible. The new three-dimensional work has
grasped the cultural infrastructure of forming itself which has been in use, and
developing, since Neolithic times and culminates in the technology of industrial
production.



820 Institutions and Objections

There is some justification for lumping together the various focuses and
intentions of the new three-dimensional work. Morphologically there are com-
mon elements: symmetry, lack of traces of process, abstractness, non-hierarchic
distribution of parts, non-anthropomorphic orientations, general wholeness.
These constants probably provide the basis for a general imagery. The imagery
involved is referential in a broad and special way: it does not refer to past
sculptural form. Its referential connections are to manufactured objects and not
to previous art. In this respect the work has affinities with Pop art. But the
abstract work connects to a different level of the culture.

Much work is made outside the studio. Specialized factories and shops are used
- much the same as sculpture has always utilized special craftsmen and processes.
The shop methods of forming generally used are simple if compared to the
techniques of advanced industrial forming. At this point the relation to ma-
chine-type production lies more in the uses of materials than in methods of
forming. That is, industrial and structural materials are often used in their more
or less naked state, but the methods of forming employed are more related to
assisted hand craftsmanship. Metalwork is usually bent, cut, welded. Plastic is
just beginning to be explored for its structural possibilities; often it functions
as surfacing over conventional supporting materials. Contact molding of rein-
forced plastics, while expensive, is becoming an available forming method which
offers great range for direct structural uses of the material. Vacuum forming is
the most accessible method for forming complex shapes from sheeting. It is still
expensive. Thermoforming the better plastics - and the comparable method for
metal, matched die stamping - is still beyond the means of most artists. Mostly
the so-called industrial processes employed are at low levels of sophistication.
This affects the image in that the most accessible types of forming lend
themselves to the planar and the linear.

The most obvious unit, if not the paradigm, of forming up to this point is the
cube or rectangular block. This, together with the right angle grid as method
of distribution and placement, offers a kind of 'morpheme' and 'syntax' which
are central to the cultural premise of forming. There are many things which
have come together to contribute to making rectangular objects and right angle
placement the most useful means of forming. The mechanics of production is
one factor: from the manufacture of mud bricks to metallurgical processes
involving continuous flow of raw material which gets segmented, stacked, and
shipped. The further uses of these 'pieces' from continuous forms such as sheets
to fabricate finished articles encourage maintenance of rectangularity to eliminate
waste.

Tracing forming from continuous stock to units is one side of the picture.
Building up larger wholes from initial bits is another. The unit with the fewest
sides which inherently orients itself to both plumb and level and also close packs
with its members is the cubic or brick form. There is good reason why it has
survived to become the 'morpheme' of so many manufactured things. It also



viia Objecthood and Reductivism 821

i presents perhaps the simplest ordering of part to whole. Rectangular groupings
of any number imply potential extension; they do not seem to imply incomple-
tion, no matter how few their number or whether they are distributed as discrete
units in space or placed in physical contact with each other. In the latter case
the larger whole which is formed tends to be morphologically the same as the
units from which it is built up. From one to many the whole is preserved so
long as a grid-type ordering is used. Besides these aspects of manipulation, there
are a couple of constant conditions under which this type of forming and
distributing exists: a rigid base land mass and gravity. Without these two terms
stability and the clear orientation of horizontal and vertical might not be so
relevant. Under different conditions other systems of physical ordering might
occur. Further work in space, as well as deep ocean stations, may alter this
most familiar approach to the shaping and placing of things as well as the
orientation of oneself with respect to space and objects.

Such work which has the feel and look of openness, extendibility, accessibility,
publicness, repeatability, equanimity, directness, immediacy, and has been
formed by clear decision rather than groping craft would seem to have a few
social implications, none of which are negative. Such work would undoubtedly
be boring to those who long for access to an exclusive specialness, the experience
of which reassures their superior perception.

The rectangular unit and grid as a method of physical extension are also the
most inert and least organic. For the structural forms now needed in
architecture and demanded by high speed travel the form is obviously
obsolete. The more efficient compression-tension principles generally involve
the organic form of the compound curve. In some way this form indicates
its high efficiency - i.e., the 'work' involved in the design of stressed forms
is somehow projected. The compound curve works, whereas planar surfaces
- both flat and round - do not give an indication of special strength through
design. Surfaces under tension are anthropomorphic: they are under the
stresses of work much as the body is in standing. Objects which do not
project tensions state most clearly their separateness from the human. They
are more clearly objects. It is not the cube itself which exclusively fulfills
this role of independent object - it is only the form that most obviously
does it well. Other regular forms which invariably involve the right angle at
some point function with equal independence. The way these forms are
oriented in space is, of course, equally critical in the maintenance of their
independence. The visibility of the principles of structural efficiency can be
a factor which destroys the object's independence. This visibility impinges
on the autonomous quality and alludes to performance of service beyond the
existence of the object. What the new art has obviously not taken from
industry is this teleological focus which makes tools and structures invariably
simple. Neither does it wish to imitate an industrial 'look.' This is trivial.
What has been grasped is the reasonableness of certain forms which have
been in use for so long.



822 Institutions and Objections

New conditions under which things must exist are already here. So are the
vastly extended controls of energy and information and new materials for
forming. The possibilities for future forming throw into sharp relief present
forms and how they have functioned. In grasping and using the nature of made
things the new three-dimensional art has broken the tedious ring of 'artiness'
circumscribing each new phase of art since the Renaissance. It is still art.
Anything that is used as art must be defined as art. The new work continues
the convention but refuses the heritage of still another art-based order of making
things. The intentions are different, the results are different, so is the experi-
ence.



6 Michael Fried (b. 1939) 'Art and ObjecthootT

This was Fried's riposte to the claims of Judd and Morris, whom he designates as
literaiists'. Attacking what he identifies as a corrupted sensibility, Fried reiterates the
'abstractionist' account of Modernism and of its distinguishing characteristics and
virtues. In Fried's view it is a symptom of the decadence of literaiist art that it
theatricalizes the relation between object and beholder, whereas the experience of
authentic Modernist art involves the suspension both of objecthood and of the sense
of duration. First published in Artforum, Summer 1967, from which the present text is
drawn. This special issue devoted to 'American Sculpture' also included the third of
Morris's 'Notes on Sculpture' (see VIIa5), LeWitt's 'Paragraphs on Conceptual Art' (VIIa7)
and an essay by Robert Smithson on The Development of an Air Terminal Site'.
Publication of Fried's essay did much to dramatize a bifurcation within the Modernist
tradition, and to make clear how deep the roots of this division lay within the conflicting
philosophical commitments of Idealism and Materialism.



Edwards's journals frequently explored and tested a meditation he seldom
allowed to reach print; if all the world were annihilated, he wrote . . . and
a new world were freshly created, though it were to exist in every
particular in the same manner as this world, it would not be the same.
Therefore, because there is continuity, which is time, 'it is certain with
me that the world exists anew every moment; that the existence of things
every moment ceases and is every moment renewed.' The abiding
assurance is that 'we every moment see the same proof of a God as we
should have seen if we had seen Him create the world at first.'

Perry Miller, Jonathan Edwards




I



The enterprise known variously as Minimal Art, ABC Art, Primary Structures,
and Specific Objects is largely ideological. It seeks to declare and occupy a
position - one that can be formulated in words, and in fact has been formulated
by some of its leading practitioners. If this distinguishes it from modernist
painting and sculpture on the one hand, it also marks an important difference
between Minimal Art - or, as I prefer to call it, literaiist art - and Pop or Op



VIIa Objecthood and Reductivism 823

Art on the other. From its inception, literaiist art has amounted to something
more than an episode in the history of taste. It belongs rather to the history -
almost the natural history - of sensibility; and it is not an isolated episode but
the expression of a general and pervasive condition. Its seriousness is vouched
for by the fact that it is in relation both to modernist painting and modernist
sculpture that literaiist art defines or locates the position it aspires to occupy.
(This, I suggest, is what makes what it declares something that deserves to be
called a position.) Specifically, literaiist art conceives of itself as neither one nor
the other; on the contrary, it is motivated by specific reservations, or worse,
about both; and it aspires, perhaps not exactly, or not immediately, to displace
them, but in any case to establish itself as an independent art on a footing with
either.

The literaiist case against painting rests mainly on two counts: the relational
character of almost all painting; and the ubiquitousness, indeed the virtual
inescapability, of pictorial illusion. In Donald Judd's view,

when you start relating parts, in the first place, you're assuming you have a
vague whole - the rectangle of the canvas - and definite parts, which is all
screwed up, because you should have a definite whole and maybe no parts, or very
few. 1

The more the shape of the support is emphasized, as in recent modernist
painting, the tighter the situation becomes. [ . . . ] Painting is here seen as an
art on the verge of exhaustion, one in which the range of acceptable solutions
to a basic problem - how to organize the surface of the picture - is severely
restricted. The use of shaped rather than rectangular supports can, from the
literaiist point of view, merely prolong the agony. The obvious response is to
give up working on a single plane in favor of three dimensions. [. . .]

The literaiist attitude toward sculpture is more ambiguous. Judd, for example,
seems to think of what he calls Specific Objects as something other than
sculpture, while Robert Morris conceives of his own unmistakably literaiist work
as resuming the lapsed tradition of Constructivist sculpture established by
Tatlin, Rodchenko, Gabo, Pevsner, and Vantongerloo. But this and other
disagreements are less important than the views Judd and Morris hold in
common. Above all they are opposed to sculpture that, like most painting, is
'made part by part, by addition, composed' and in which 'specific elements . . .
separate from the whole, thus setting up relationships within the work.' (They
would include the work of David Smith and Anthony Caro under this descrip-
tion.) It is worth remarking that the 'part-by-part' and 'relational' character of
most sculpture is associated by Judd with what he calls anthropomorphism: 'A
beam thrusts; a piece of iron follows a gesture; together they form a naturalistic
and anthropomorphic image. The space corresponds.' Against such 'multipart,
inflected' sculpture Judd and Morris assert the values of wholeness, singleness,
and indivisibility - of a work's being, as nearly as possible, 'one thing,' a single
'Specific Object.' [...] For both Judd and Morris ... the critical factor is
shape. Morris's 'unitary forms' are polyhedrons that resist being grasped other
than as a single shape: the gestalt simply is the 'constant, known shape.' And



824 Institutions and Objections

shape itself is, in his system, 'the most important sculptural value.' Similarly,
speaking of his own work, Judd has remarked that

the big problem is that anything that is not absolutely plain begins to have parts
in some way. The thing is to be able to work and do different things and yet not
break up the wholeness that a piece has. To me the piece with the brass and the
five verticals is above all that shape.

The shape is the object: at any rate, what secures the wholeness of the object
is the singleness of the shape. It is, I believe, this emphasis on shape that
accounts for the impression, which numerous critics have mentioned, that Judd's
and Morris's pieces are hollow.



II

Shape has also been central to the most important painting of the past several
years. In several recent essays I have tried to show how, in the work of Noland,
Olitski, and Stella, a conflict has gradually emerged between shape as a
fundamental property of objects and shape as a medium of painting. Roughly,
the success or failure of a given painting has come to depend on its ability to
hold or stamp itself out or compel conviction as shape - that, or somehow to
stave off or elude the question of whether or not it does so. Olitski's early spray
paintings are the purest example of paintings that either hold or fail to hold as
shapes; while in his more recent pictures, as well as in the best of Noland's
and Stella's recent work, the demand that a given picture hold as shape is staved
off or eluded in various ways. What is at stake in this conflict is whether the
paintings or objects in question are experienced as paintings or as objects: and
what decides their identity as painting is their confronting of the demand that
they hold as shapes. Otherwise they are experienced as nothing more than
objects. This can be summed up by saying that modernist painting has come
to find it imperative that it defeat or suspend its own objecthood, and that the
crucial factor in this undertaking is shape, but shape that must belong to painting
- it must be pictorial, not, or not merely, literal. Whereas literalist art stakes
everything on shape as a given property of objects, if not, indeed, as a kind of
object in its own right. It aspires, not to defeat or suspend its own objecthood,
but on the contrary to discover and project objecthood as such.

In his essay 'Recentness of Sculpture' Clement Greenberg discusses the effect
of presence, which, from the start, has been associated with literalist work. 2

Presence can be conferred by size or by the look of non-art. Furthermore,
what non-art means today, and has meant for several years, is fairly specific.
In 'After Abstract Expressionism' Greenberg wrote that 'a stretched or tacked-up
canvas already exists as a picture - though not necessarily as a successful one.' 3
For that reason, as he remarks in 'Recentness of Sculpture,' the 'look of non-art
was no longer available to painting.' Instead, 'the borderline between art and
non-art had to be sought in the three-dimensional, where sculpture was, and
where everything material that was not art also was.' Greenberg goes on to say:



VIIa Objecthood and Reductivism 825

The look of machinery is shunned now because it does not go far enough towards
the look of non-art, which is presumably an 'inert' look that offers the eye a
minimum of 'interesting* incident - unlike the machine look, which is arty by
comparison (and when I think of Tinguely I would agree with this). Still, no
matter how simple the object may be, there remain the relations and interrelations
of surface, contour, and spatial interval. Minimal works are readable as art, as
almost anything is today - including a door, a table, or a blank sheet of paper. . , .
Yet it would seem that a kind of art nearer the condition of non-art could not be
envisaged or ideated at this moment.

The meaning in this context of 'the condition of non-art' is what I have been
calling objecthood. It is as though objecthood alone can, in the present circum-
stances, secure something's identity, if not as non-art, at least as neither painting
nor sculpture; or as though a work of art - more accurately, a work of modernist
painting or sculpture - were in some essential respect not an object.

There is, in any case, a sharp contrast between the literalist espousal of
objecthood - almost, it seems, as an art in its own right - and modernist
painting's self-imposed imperative that it defeat or suspend its own objecthood
through the medium of shape. In fact, from the perspective of recent modernist
painting, the literalist position evinces a sensibility not simply alien but anti-
thetical to its own: as though, from that perspective, the demands of art and
the conditions of objecthood are in direct conflict.

Here the question arises: What is it about objecthood as projected and
hypostatized by the literalists that makes it, if only from the perspective of
recent modernist painting, antithetical to art?



Ill

The answer I want to propose is this: the literalist espousal of objecthood
amounts to nothing other than a plea for a new genre of theatre; and theatre
is now the negation of art.

Literalist sensibility is theatrical because, to begin with, it is concerned
with the actual circumstances in which the beholder encounters literalist
work. Morris makes this explicit. Whereas in previous art 'what is to be had
from the work is located strictly within [it],' the experience of literalist art is
of an object in a situation - one that, virtually by definition, includes the beholder.

Morris believes that this awareness is heightened by 'the strength of the
constant, known shape, the gestalt,' against which the appearance of the piece
from different points of view is constantly being compared. It is intensified also
by the large scale of much literalist work [ . . . ] The larger the object the more
we are forced to keep our distance from it:

It is this necessary, greater distance of the object in space from our bodies, in
order that it be seen at all, that structures the nonpersonal or public mode [which
Morris advocates]. However, it is just this distance between object and subject
that creates a more extended situation, because physical participation becomes
necessary.



826 Institutions and Objections

The theatricality of Morris's notion of the 'nonpersonal or public mode' seems
obvious: the largeness of the piece, in conjunction with its nonrelational, unitary
character, distances the beholder - not just physically but psychically. It is, one
might say, precisely this distancing that makes the beholder a subject and the
piece in question ... an object. But it does not follow that the larger the piece
the more securely its 'public' character is established; on the contrary, 'beyond
a certain size the object can overwhelm and the gigantic scale becomes the
loaded term.' Morris wants to achieve presence through objecthood, which
requires a certain largeness of scale, rather than through size alone [. . .] ...
the things that are literalist works of art must somehow confront the beholder
- they must, one might almost say, be placed not just in his space but in his
way. None of this, Morris maintains,

indicates a lack of interest in the object itself. But the concerns now are for more
control of . . . the entire situation. Control is necessary if the variables of object,
light, space, body, are to function. The object has not become less important. It
has merely become less self-important.

It is, I think, worth remarking that 'the entire situation' means exactly that: all
of it - including, it seems, the beholder's body. There is nothing within his
field of vision - nothing that he takes note of in any way - that, as it were,
declares its irrelevance to the situation, and therefore to the experience, in
question. On the contrary, for something to be perceived at all is for it to be
perceived as part of that situation. Everything counts - not as part of the object,
but as part of the situation in which its objecthood is established and on which
that objecthood at least partly depends.



IV

Furthermore, the presence of literalist art, which Greenberg was the first to
analyze, is basically a theatrical effect or quality - a kind of stage presence. It
is a function, not just of the obtrusiveness and, often, even aggressiveness of
literalist work, but of the special complicity that that work extorts from the
beholder. Something is said to have presence when it demands that the beholder
take it into account, that he take it seriously - and when the fulfillment of that
demand consists simply in being aware of it and, so to speak, in acting
accordingly. (Certain modes of seriousness are closed to the beholder by the
work itself, i.e., those established by the finest painting and sculpture of the
recent past. But, of course, those are hardly modes of seriousness in which most
people feel at home, or that they even find tolerable.) Here again the experience
of being distanced by the work in question seems crucial: the beholder knows
himself to stand in an indeterminate, open-ended - and unexacting - relation
as subject to the impassive object on the wall or floor. In fact, being distanced
by such objects is not, I suggest, entirely unlike being distanced, or crowded,
by the silent presence of another person; the experience of coming upon literalist
objects unexpectedly - for example, in somewhat darkened rooms - can be
strongly, if momentarily, disquieting in just this way.



VIIa Objecthood and Reductivism 827

There are three main reasons why this is so. First, the size of much literalist
work, as Morris's remarks imply, compares fairly closely with that of the human
body. [. . .] Second, the entities or beings encountered in everyday experience
in terms that most closely approach the literalist ideals of the nonrelational, the
unitary and the wholistic are other persons. Similarly, the literalist predilection
for symmetry, and in general for a kind of order that 'is simply order . . . one
thing after another,' is rooted, not, as Judd seems to believe, in new philoso-
phical and scientific principles, whatever he takes these to be, but in nature.
And third, the apparent hollowness of most literalist work - the quality of
having an inside - is almost blatantly anthropomorphic. [. . .]



I am suggesting, then, that a kind of latent or hidden naturalism, indeed
anthropomorphism, lies at the core of literalist theory and practice. The concept
of presence all but says as much, though rarely so nakedly as in Tony Smith's
statement, 'I didn't think of them [i.e., the sculptures he 'always' made] as
sculptures but as presences of a sort.' The latency or hiddenness of the
anthropomorphism has been such that the literalists themselves have, as we have
seen, felt free to characterize the modernist art they oppose, e.g., the sculpture
of David Smith and Anthony Caro, as anthropomorphic - a characterization
whose teeth, imaginary to begin with, have just been pulled. By the same token,
however, what is wrong with literalist work is not that it is anthropomorphic
but that the meaning and, equally, the hiddenness of its anthropomorphism are
incurably theatrical. [. . .] The crucial distinction that I am proposing so far is
between work that is fundamentally theatrical and work that is not. It is theatricality
that, whatever the differences between them, links artists like Bladen and
Grosvenor, both of whom have allowed 'gigantic scale [to become] the loaded
term' (Morris), with other, more restrained figures like Judd, Morris, Andre,
McCracken, LeWitt and - despite the size of some of his pieces - Tony Smith. 4
And it is in the interest, though not explicitly in the name, of theatre that
literalist ideology rejects both modernist painting and, at least in the hands of
its most distinguished recent practitioners, modernist sculpture.

In this connection Tony Smith's description of a car ride taken at night on
the New Jersey Turnpike before it was finished makes compelling reading [see
VIA 16] [. . .] What seems to have been revealed to Smith that night was the
pictorial nature of painting - even, one might say, the conventional nature of
art. And this Smith seems to have understood not as laying bare the essence of
art, but as announcing its end. In comparison with the unmarked, unlit, all but
Unstructured turnpike - more precisely, with the turnpike as experienced from
within the car, traveling on it - art appears to have struck Smith as almost
absurdly small ('All art today is an art of postage stamps,' he has said),
circumscribed, conventional. . . . There was, he seems to have felt, no way to
'frame' his experience on the road, that is, no way to make sense of it in terms
of art, to make art of it at least as art then was. Rather, 'you just have to
experience it' - as it happens, as it merely is. (The experience alone is what



828 Institutions and Objections

matters.) There is no suggestion that this is problematic in any way. The
experience is clearly regarded by Smith as wholly accessible to everyone, not
just in principle but in fact, and the question of whether or not one has really
had it does not arise. [. . .]

. . . what was Smith's experience on the turnpike? Or to put the same question
another way, if the turnpike, airstrips, and drill ground are not works of art,
what are they? - What, indeed, if not empty, or 'abandoned', situations? And
what was Smith's experience if not the experience of what I have been calling
theatre? It is as though the turnpike, airstrips, and drill ground reveal the
theatrical character of literalist art, only without the object, that is, without the
art itself- as though the object is needed only within a room (or, perhaps, in
any circumstances less extreme than these). In each of the above cases the object
is, so to speak, replaced by something: for example, on the turnpike by the
constant onrush of the road, the simultaneous recession of new reaches of dark
pavement illumined by the onrushing headlights, the sense of the turnpike itself
as something enormous, abandoned, derelict, existing for Smith alone and for
those in the car with him. . . . This last point is important. On the one hand,
the turnpike, airstrips, and drill ground belong to no one; on the other, the
situation established by Smith's presence is in each case felt by him to be his.
Moreover, in each case being able to go on and on indefinitely is of the essence.
What replaces the object - what does the same job of distancing or isolating
the beholder, of making him a subject, that the object did in the closed room
- is above all the endlessness, or objectlessness, of the approach or on-rush or
perspective. It is the explicitness, that is to say, the sheer persistence, with
which the experience presents itself as directed at him from outside (on the
turnpike from outside the car) that simultaneously makes him a subject - makes
him subject - and establishes the experience itself as something like that of an
object, or rather, of objecthood. [. . .]

VI

Smith's account of his experience on the turnpike bears witness to theatre's
profound hostility to the arts, and discloses, precisely in the absence of the
object and in what takes its place, what might be called the theatricality of
objecthood. By the same token, however, the imperative that modernist painting
defeat or suspend its objecthood is at bottom the imperative that it defeat or
suspend theatre. And this means that there is a war going on between theatre
and modernist painting, between the theatrical and the pictorial - a war that,
despite the literalists' explicit rejection of modernist painting and sculpture, is
not basically a matter of program and ideology but of experience, conviction,
sensibility. [ . . . ]

The starkness and apparent irreconcilability of this conflict is something new.
I remarked earlier that objecthood has become an issue for modernist painting
only within the past several years. This, however, is not to say that before the
present situation came into being, paintings, or sculptures for that matter, simply
were objects. It would, I think, be closer to the truth to say that they simply



VIIa Objecthood and Reductivism 829

were not. The risk, even the possibility, of seeing works of art as nothing more
than objects did not exist. That this possibility began to present itself around
1960 was largely the result of developments within modernist painting. Roughly,
the more nearly assimilable to objects certain advanced painting had come to
seem, the more the entire history of painting since Manet could be understood
- delusively, I believe - as consisting in the progressive (though ultimately
inadequate) revelation of its essential objecthood, 5 and the more urgent became
the need for modernist painting to make explicit its conventional - specifically,
its pictorial - essence by defeating or suspending its own objecthood through
the medium of shape. The view of modernist painting as tending toward
objecthood is implicit in Judd's remark, 'The new [i.e., literalist] work obviously
resembles sculpture more than it does painting, but it is nearer to painting';
and it is in this view that literalist sensibility in general is grounded. Literalist
sensibility is, therefore, a response to the same developments that have largely
compelled modernist painting to undo its objecthood - more precisely, the same
developments seen differently, that is, in theatrical terms, by a sensibility already
theatrical, already (to say the worst) corrupted or perverted by theatre. Similarly,
what has compelled modernist painting to defeat or suspend its own objecthood
is not just developments internal to itself, but the same general, enveloping,
infectious theatricality that corrupted literalist sensibility in the first place and
in the grip of which the developments in question - and modernist painting in
general - are seen as nothing more than an uncompelling and presenceless kind
of theatre. It was the need to break the fingers of this grip that made objecthood
an issue for modernist painting.

Objecthood has also become an issue for modernist sculpture. This is true
despite the fact that sculpture, being three-dimensional, resembles both ordinary
objects and literalist work in a way that painting does not. Almost ten years
ago Clement Greenberg summed up what he saw as the emergence of a new
sculptural 'style,' whose master is undoubtedly David Smith, in the following
terms:

To render substance entirely optical, and form, whether pictorial, sculptural, or
architectural, as an integral part of ambient space - this brings anti-illusionism
full circle. Instead of the illusion of things, we are now offered the illusion of
modalities: namely, that matter is incorporeal, weightless, and exists only optically
like a mirage. 6

Since 1960 this development has been carried to a succession of climaxes by
the English sculptor Anthony Caro, whose work is far more specifically resistant
to being seen in terms of objecthood than that of David Smith. A characteristic
sculpture by Caro consists, I want to say, in the mutual and naked juxtaposition
of the I-beams, girders, cylinders, lengths of piping, sheet metal, and grill that
it comprises rather than in the compound object that they compose. The mutual
inflection of one element by another, rather than the identity of each, is what
is crucial - though of course altering the identity of any element would be at
least as drastic as altering its placement. [ . . . ] The individual elements bestow
significance on one another precisely by virtue of their juxtaposition: it is in



830 Institutions and Objections

this sense, a sense inextricably involved with the concept of meaning, that
everything in Caro's art that is worth looking at is in its syntax. Caro's
concentration upon syntax amounts, in Greenberg's view, to 'an emphasis on
abstractness, on radical unlikeness to nature." 7 And Greenberg goes on to remark,
'No other sculptor has gone as far from the structural logic of ordinary
ponderable things.' It is worth emphasizing, however, that this is a function of
more than the lowness, openness, part-by-partness, absence of enclosing profiles
and centers of interest, unperspicuousness, etc., of Caro's sculptures. Rather
they defeat, or allay, objecthood by imitating, not gestures exactly, but the
efficacy of gesture; like certain music and poetry, they are possessed by the
knowledge of the human body and how, in innumerable ways and moods, it
makes meaning. It is as though Caro's sculptures essentialize meaningfulness as
such - as though the possibility of meaning what we say and do alone makes
his sculpture possible. All this, it is hardly necessary to add, makes Caro's art
a fountainhead of antiliteralist and antitheatrical sensibility. [. . .]



VII

At this point I want to make a claim that I cannot hope to prove or substantiate
but that I believe nevertheless to be true: viz., that theatre and theatricality are
at war today, not simply with modernist painting (or modernist painting and
sculpture), but with art as such - and to the extent that the different arts can
be described as modernist, with modernist sensibility as such. This claim can
be broken down into three propositions or theses:

1 The success, even the survival, of the arts has come increasingly to depend on
their ability to defeat theatre. This is perhaps nowhere more evident than within
theatre itself, where the need to defeat what I have been calling theatre has
chiefly made itself felt as the need to establish a drastically different relation
to its audience, (The relevant texts are, of course, Brecht and Artaud.) For
theatre has an audience - it exists for one - in a way the other arts do not; in
fact, this more than anything else is what modernist sensibility finds intolerable
in theatre generally. Here it should be remarked that literalist art, too, possesses
an audience, though a somewhat special one: that the beholder is confronted by
literalist work within a situation that he experiences as his means that there is
an important sense in which the work in question exists for him alone, even if
he is not actually alone with the work at the time. [. . .]

It is the overcoming of theatre that modernist sensibility finds most exalting
and that it experiences as the hallmark of high art in our time. There is,
however, one art that, by its very nature, escapes theatre entirely - the movies.
This helps explain why movies in general, including frankly appalling ones, are
acceptable to modernist sensibility whereas all but the most successful painting,
sculpture, music, and poetry is not. Because cinema escapes theatre - automat-
ically, as it were - it provides a welcome and absorbing refuge to sensibilities
at war with theatre and theatricality. At the same time, the automatic, guaranteed
character of the refuge - more accurately, the fact that what is provided is a



VIIa Objecthood and Reductivism 831

refuge from theatre and not a triumph over it, absorption not conviction -
means that the cinema, even at its most experimental, is not a modernist art.

2 Art degenerates as it approaches the condition of theatre. Theatre is the
common denominator that binds a large and seemingly disparate variety of
activities to one another, and that distinguishes those activities from the radically
different enterprises of the modernist arts. Here as elsewhere the question of
value or level is central. For example, a failure to register the enormous
difference in quality between, say, the music of Carter and that of Cage or
between the paintings of Louis and those of Rauschenberg means that the real
distinctions - between music and theatre in the first instance and between
painting and theatre in the second - are displaced by the illusion that the barriers
between the arts are in the process of crumbling (Cage and Rauschenberg being
seen, correctly, as similar) and that the arts themselves are at last sliding towards
some kind of final, implosive, hugely desirable synthesis. Whereas in fact the
individual arts have never been more explicitly concerned with the conventions
that constitute their respective essences.

3 The concepts of quality and value - and to the extent that these are central
to art, the concept of art itself- are meaningful, or wholly meaningful, only within
the individual arts. What lies between the arts is theatre. It is, I think, significant
that in their various statements the literalists have largely avoided the issue of
value or quality at the same time as they have shown considerable uncertainty
as to whether or not what they are making is art. To describe their enterprise
as an attempt to establish a new art does not remove the uncertainty; at most
it points to its source. Judd himself has as much as acknowledged the proble-
matic character of the literalist enterprise by his claim, 'A work needs only to
be interesting.' For Judd, as for literalist sensibility generally, all that matters
is whether or not a given work is able to elicit and sustain (his) interest. Whereas
within the modernist arts nothing short of conviction - specifically, the conviction
that a particular painting or sculpture or poem or piece of music can or cannot
support comparison with past work within that art whose quality is not in doubt

- matters at all. (Literalist work is often condemned - when it is condemned

- for being boring. A tougher charge would be that it is merely interesting.)

The interest of a given work resides, in Judd's view, both in its character as
a whole and in the sheer specificity of the materials of which it is made [. . .]
Like Judd's Specific Objects and Morris's gestalts or unitary forms, Smith's
cube is always of further interest; one never feels that one has come to the end
of it; it is inexhaustible. It is inexhaustible, however, not because of any fullness

- that is the inexhaustibility of art - but because there is nothing there to
exhaust. It is endless the way a road might be: if it were circular, for example.

Endlessness, being able to go on and on, even having to go on and on, is
central both to the concept of interest and to that of objecthood. In fact, it
seems to be the experience that most deeply excites literalist sensibility, and
that literalist artists seek to objectify in their work - for example, by the
repetition of identical units (Judd's 'one thing after another'), which carries the
implication that the units in question could be multiplied ad infinitum. Smith's



832 Institutions and Objections

account of his experience on the unfinished turnpike records that excitement
all but explicitly. [. . .]

Here finally I want to emphasize something that may already have become
clear: the experience in question persists in time, and the presentment of
endlessness that, I have been claiming, is central to literalist art and theory is
essentially a presentment of endless, or indefinite, duration. Once again Smith's
account of his night drive is relevant . . . Morris, too, has stated explicitly, 'The
experience of the work necessarily exists in time' - though it would make no
difference if he had not. The literalist preoccupation with time - more precisely,
with the duration of the experience - is, I suggest, paradigmatically theatrical: as
though theatre confronts the beholder, and thereby isolates him, with the
endlessness not just of objecthood but of time; or as though the sense which,
at bottom, theatre addresses is a sense of temporality, of time both passing and
to come, simultaneously approaching and receding, as if apprehended in an infinite
perspective . . . 9 This preoccupation marks a profound difference between lit-
eralist work and modernist painting and sculpture. It is as though one's
experience of the latter has no duration - not because one in fact experiences
a picture by Noland or Olitski or a sculpture by David Smith or Caro in no
time at all, but because at every moment the work itself is wholly manifest. [ . . . ]
It is this continuous and entire presentness, amounting, as it were, to the
perpetual creation of itself, that one experiences as a kind of instantaneousness:
as though if only one were infinitely more acute, a single infinitely brief instant
would be long enough to see everything, to experience the work in all its depth
and fullness, to be forever convinced by it. (Here it is worth noting that the
concept of interest implies temporality in the form of continuing attention
directed at the object, whereas the concept of conviction does not.) I want to
claim that it is by virtue of their presentness and instantaneousness that
modernist painting and sculpture defeat theatre. In fact, I am tempted far
beyond my knowledge to suggest that, faced with the need to defeat theatre, it
is above all to the condition of painting and sculpture - the condition, that is,
of existing in, indeed of secreting or constituting, a continuous and perpetual
present - that the other contemporary modernist arts, most notably poetry and
music, aspire.

VIII

This essay will be read as an attack on certain artists (and critics) and as a
defense of others. And of course it is true that the desire to distinguish between
what is to me the authentic art of our time and other work, which, whatever
the dedication, passion, and intelligence of its creators, seems to me to share
certain characteristics associated here with the concepts of literalism and theatre,
has largely motivated what I have written. In these last sentences, however, I
want to call attention to the utter pervasiveness - the virtual universality - of
the sensibility or mode of being that I have characterized as corrupted or
perverted by theatre. We are all literalists most or all of our lives. Presentness
is grace.



VIIa Objecthood and Reductivism 833



This was said by Judd in an interview with Bruce Glaser, edited by Lucy R. Lippard and
published as 'Questions to Stella and Judd, 1 Art News, LXV, no. 5, September 1966. The remarks
attributed in the present essay to Judd and Morris have been taken from this interview, from
Judd's essay 'Specific Objects/ Arts Yearbook, 8, 1965, or from Robert Morris's essays, 'Notes
on Sculpture' and 'Notes on Sculpture, Part V ... I should add that in laying out what seems
to me the position Judd and Morris hold in common I have ignored various differences
between them, and have used certain remarks in contexts for which they may not have been
intended. [ . . . ]

Published in the catalogue to the Los Angeles County Museum of Art's exhibition, 'American
Sculpture of the Sixties.'

[ . . . ] In its broad outline this is undoubtedly correct. There are, however, certain qualifications
that can be made.

To begin with, it is not quite enough to say that a bare canvas tacked to a wall is not 'necessarily'
a successful picture; it would, I think, be less of an exaggeration to say that it is not conceivably
one. It may be countered that future circumstances might be such as to make it a successful
painting; but I would argue that, for that to happen, the enterprise of painting would have to
change so drastically that nothing more than the name would remain. (It would require a far
greater change than that that painting has undergone from Manet to Noland, Olitski, and Stella!)
Moreover, seeing something as a painting in the sense that one sees the tacked-up canvas as a
painting, and being convinced that a particular work can stand comparison with the painting of
the past whose quality is not in doubt, are altogether different experiences: it is, I want to say,
as though unless something compels conviction as to its quality it is no more than trivially or
nominally a painting. This suggests that flatness and the delimitation of flatness ought not to be
thought of as the 'irreducible essence of pictorial art' but rather as something like the minimal
conditions for something's being seen as a painting; and that the crucial question is not what these
minimal and, so to speak, timeless conditions are, but rather what, at a given moment, is capable
of compelling conviction, of succeeding as painting. This is not to say that painting has no essence;
it is to claim that that essence - i.e., that which compels conviction - is largely determined by,
and therefore changes continually in response to, the vital work of the recent past. The essence
of painting is not something irreducible. Rather, the task of the modernist painter is to discover
those conventions that, at a given moment, alone are capable of establishing his work's identity
as painting.

[ . . . ] I would argue that what modernism has meant is that the two questions - What
constitutes the art of painting? And what constitutes good painting? - are no longer separable;
the first disappears, or increasingly tends to disappear, into the second. [. . .]
It is theatricality, too, that links all these artists to other figures as disparate as Kaprow, Cornell,
Rauschenberg, Oldenburg, Flavin, Smithson, Kienholz, Segal, Samaras, Christo, Kusama ... the
list could go on indefinitely.

One way of describing this view might be to say that it draws something like a false inference
from the fact that the increasingly explicit acknowledgment of the literal character of the support
has been central to the development of modernist painting: namely, that literalness as such is an
artistic value of supreme importance. [ . . . ]
'The New Sculpture,' Art and Culture, Boston, 1961, p. 144.

This and the following remark are taken from Greenberg's essay, 'Anthony Caro,' Arts Yearbook,
8, 1965. [...]

Exactly how the movies escape theatre is a beautiful question, and there is no doubt but that a
phenomenology of the cinema that concentrated on the similarities and differences between it
and the theatre - e.g., that in the movies the actors are not physically present, the film itself is
projected away from us, the screen is not experienced as a kind of object existing, so to speak,
in a specific physical relation to us, etc. - would be extremely rewarding. [ . . . ]
The connection between spatial recession and some such experience of temporality - almost as
if the first were a kind of natural metaphor for the second - is present in much Surrealist painting
(e.g., De Chirico, Dali, Tanguy, Magritte . . . ). Moreover, temporality - manifested, for example,
as expectation, dread, anxiety, presentiment, memory, nostalgia, stasis - is often the explicit
subject of their paintings. There is, in fact, a deep affinity between literalists and Surrealist



834 Institutions and Objections

sensibility . . . Both employ imagery that is at once holistic and, in a sense, fragmentary,
incomplete; both resort to a similar anthropomorphizing of objects or conglomerations of objects
. . . both are capable of achieving remarkable effects of 'presence'; and both tend to deploy and
isolate objects and persons in situations - the closed room and the abandoned artificial landscape
are as important to Surrealism as to literalism. . . . This affinity can be summed up by saying
that Surrealist sensibility, as manifested in the work of certain artists, and literalist sensibility are
both theatrical [ . . . ]



7 Sol LeWitt (b. 1928) 'Paragraphs on Conceptual Art'

LeWitt's work is characterized by the use of repetition and permutation and by the
systematic exclusion of any individuality of touch. This is not, however, to say that
LeWitfs output should be unproblematically identified with a tradition of rationalism in
twentieth-century art. At the time this text was written his typical works were open-
framed, rectangular structures presented in series. In 1968 he began formulating
proposals for wall drawings, to be executed according to his instructions. Although the
notion of a 'Conceptual Art' had been variously canvassed since the early 1960s,
publication of this text provided the first public grounds for recognition of a movement.
First published in Artforum, vol. 5, no. 10, Summer 1967, pp. 79-83, from which the
present text is taken.

[. . .] I will refer to the kind of art in which I am involved as conceptual art.
In conceptual art the idea or concept is the most important aspect of the work. 1
When an artist uses a conceptual form of art, it means that all of the planning
and decisions are made beforehand and the execution is a perfunctory affair.
The idea becomes a machine that makes the art. This kind of art is not
theoretical or illustrative of theories; it is intuitive, it is involved with all types
of mental processes and it is purposeless. It is usually free from the dependence
on the skill of the artist as a craftsman. It is the objective of the artist who is
concerned with conceptual art to make his work mentally interesting to the
spectator, and therefore usually he would want it to become emotionally dry.
There is no reason to suppose however, that the conceptual artist is out to bore
the viewer. It is only the expectation of an emotional kick, to which one
conditioned to expressionist art is accustomed, that would deter the viewer from
perceiving this art.

Conceptual art is not necessarily logical. The logic of a piece or series of
pieces is a device that is used at times only to be ruined. Logic may be used
to camouflage the real intent of the artist, to lull the viewer into the belief that
he understands the work, or to infer a paradoxical situation (such as logic vs.
illogic). 2 The ideas need not be complex. Most ideas that are successful are
ludicrously simple. Successful ideas generally have the appearance of simplicity
because they seem inevitable. In terms of idea the artist is free to even surprise
himself. Ideas are discovered by intuition.

What the work of art looks like isn't too important. It has to look like
something if it has physical form. No matter what form it may finally have it
must begin with an idea. It is the process of conception and realization with



VHa Objecthood and Reductivism 835

which the artist is concerned. Once given physical reality by the artist the work
is open to the perception of all, including the artist. (I use the word 'perception'
to mean the apprehension of the sense data, the objective understanding of the
idea and simultaneously a subjective interpretation of both.) The work of art
can only be perceived after it is completed.

Art that is meant for the sensation of the eye primarily would be called
perceptual rather than conceptual. This would include most optical, kinetic,
light and color art.

Since the functions of conception and perception are contradictory (one pre-,
the other postfact) the artist would mitigate his idea by applying subject-
ive judgment to it. If the artist wishes to explore his idea thoroughly, then
arbitrary or chance decisions would be kept to a minimum, while caprice,
taste and other whimsies would be eliminated from the making of the art.
The work does not necessarily have to be rejected if it does not look well.
Sometimes what is initially thought to be awkward will eventually be visually
pleasing.

To work with a plan that is pre-set is one way of avoiding subjectivity. It
also obviates the necessity of designing each work in turn. The plan would
design the work. Some plans would require millions of variations, and some a
limited number, but both are finite. Other plans imply infinity. In each case
however, the artist would select the basic form and rules that would govern the
solution of the problem. After that the fewer decisions made in the course of
completing the work, the better. This eliminates the arbitrary, the capricious,
and the subjective as much as possible. That is the reason for using this method.

When an artist uses a multiple modular method he usually chooses a simple
and readily available form. The form itself is of very limited importance; it
becomes the grammar for the total work. In fact it is best that the basic unit
be deliberately uninteresting so that it may more easily become an intrinsic part
of the entire work. Using complex basic forms only disrupts the unity of the
whole. Using a simple form repeatedly narrows the field of the work and
concentrates the intensity to the arrangement of the form. This arrangement
becomes the end while the form becomes the means.

Conceptual art doesn't really have much to do with mathematics, philosophy
or any other mental discipline. The mathematics used by most artists is simple
arithmetic or simple number systems. The philosophy of the work is implicit
in the work and is not an illustration of any system of philosophy.

It doesn't really matter if the viewer understands the concepts of the artist
by seeing the art. Once out of his hand the artist has no control over the way
a viewer will perceive the work. Different people will understand the same thing
in a different way.

Recently there has been much written about minimal art, but I have not
discovered anyone who admits to doing this kind of thing. There are other art
forms around called primary structures, reductive, rejective, cool, and mini-art.
No artist I know will own up to any of these either. Therefore I conclude that
it is part of a secret language that art critics use when communicating with each
other through the medium of art magazines. [ . . . ]



836 Institutions and Objections

If the artist carries through his idea and makes it into visible form, then all
the steps in the process are of importance. The idea itself, even if not made
visual is as much a work of art as any finished product. All intervening steps
- scribbles, sketches, drawings, failed work, models, studies, thoughts, conver-
sations - are of interest. Those that show the thought process of the artist are
sometimes more interesting than the final product.

Determining what size a piece should be is difficult. If an idea requires three
dimensions then it would seem any size would do. The question would be what
size is best. If the thing were made gigantic then the size alone would be
impressive and the idea may be lost entirely. Again, if it is too small, it may
become inconsequential. The height of the viewer may have some bearing on
the work and also the size of the space into which it will be placed. The artist
may wish to place objects higher than the eye level of the viewer, or lower. I
think the piece must be large enough to give the viewer whatever information
he needs to understand the work and placed in such a way that will facilitate
this understanding. (Unless the idea is of impediment and requires difficulty of
vision or access.)

Space can be thought of as the cubic area occupied by a three-dimensional
volume. Any volume would occupy space. It is air and cannot be seen. It is the
interval between things that can be measured. The intervals and measurements
can be important to a work of art. If certain distances are important they will
be made obvious in the piece. If space is relatively unimportant it can be
regularized and made equal (things placed equal distances apart), to mitigate
any interest in interval. Regular space might also become a metric time element,
a kind of regular beat or pulse. When the interval is kept regular whatever is
irregular gains more importance.

Architecture and three-dimensional art are of completely opposite natures.
The former is concerned with making an area with a specific function. Archi-
tecture, whether it is a work of art or not, must be utilitarian or else fail
completely. Art is not utilitarian. When three-dimensional art starts to take on
some of the characteristics of architecture such as forming utilitarian areas it
weakens its function as art. When the viewer is dwarfed by the large size of a
piece this domination emphasizes the physical and emotive power of the form
at the expense of losing the idea of the piece.

New materials are one of the great afflictions of contemporary art. Some
artists confuse new materials with new ideas. There is nothing worse than seeing
art that wallows in gaudy baubles. By and large most artists who are attracted
to these materials are the ones that lack the stringency of mind that would
enable them to use the materials well. It takes a good artist to use new materials
and make them into a work of art. The danger is, I think, in making the
physicality of the materials so important that it becomes the idea of the work
(another kind of expressionism).

Three-dimensional art of any kind is a physical fact. This physicality is its
most obvious and expressive content. Conceptual art is made to engage the mind
of the viewer rather than his eye or emotions. The physicality of a three-dimen-
sional object then becomes a contradiction to its non-emotive intent. Color,



VIIa Objecthood and Reductivism 837

surface, texture, and shape only emphasize the physical aspects of the work.
Anything that calls attention to and interests the viewer in this physicality is a
deterrent to our understanding of the idea and is used as an expressive device.
The conceptual artist would want to ameliorate this emphasis on materiality as
much as possible or to use it in a paradoxical way. (To convert it into an idea.)
This kind of art then, should be stated with the most economy of means. Any
idea that is better stated in two dimensions should not be in three dimensions.
Ideas may also be stated with numbers, photographs, or words or any way the
artist chooses, the form being unimportant.

These paragraphs are not intended as categorical imperatives but the ideas
stated are as close as possible to my thinking at this time. 3 These ideas are the
result of my work as an artist and are subject to change as my experience
changes. I have tried to state them with as much clarity as possible. If the
statements I make are unclear it may mean the thinking is unclear. Even while
writing these ideas there seemed to be obvious inconsistencies (which I have
tried to correct, but others will probably slip by). I do not advocate a conceptual
form of art for all artists. I have found that it has worked well for me while
other ways have not. It is one way of making art: other ways suit other artists.
Nor do I think all conceptual art merits the viewer's attention. Conceptual art
is only good when the idea is good.

In other forms of art the concept may be changed in the process of execution.

Some ideas are logical in conception and illogical perceptually.

I dislike the term 'work of art' because I am not in favor of work and the term sounds pretentious.

But I don't know what other term to use.



8 Sol LeWitt 'Sentences on Conceptual Art'

By the time this text was published, Conceptual Art was widely recognized as an
international avant-garde movement with a large number of adherents, and incorporating
a number of theoretical positions in addition to LeWitt's. The 'Sentences' were originally
published in Art-Language, vol. 1, no. 1, Coventry, May 1969 (for this opening issue
alone designated The Journal of Conceptual Art').



Conceptual Artists are mystics rather than rationalists. They leap to con-
clusions that logic cannot reach.
Rational judgements repeat rational judgements.
Illogical judgements lead to new experience.
Formal Art is essentially rational.

Irrational thoughts should be followed absolutely and logically.
If the artist changes his mind midway through the execution of the piece
he compromises the result and repeats past results.

The artist's will is secondary to the process he initiates from idea to
completion. His wilfulness may only be ego.

When words such as painting and sculpture are used, they connote a whole
tradition and imply a consequent acceptance of this tradition, thus placing



838 Institutions and Objections

limitations on the artist who would be reluctant to make art that goes
beyond the limitations.
9 The concept and idea are different. The former implies a general direction
while the latter are the components. Ideas implement the concept.

10 Ideas alone can be works of art; they are in a chain of development that
may eventually find some form. All ideas need not be made physical.

11 Ideas do not necessarily proceed in logical order. They may set one off in
unexpected directions but an idea must necessarily be completed in the
mind before the next one is formed.

12 For each work of art that becomes physical there are many variations that
do not.

13 A work of art may be understood as a conductor from the artist's mind to
the viewer's. But it may never reach the viewer, or it may never leave the
artist's mind.

14 The words of one artist to another may induce an ideas chain, if they share
the same concept.

15 Since no form is intrinsically superior to another, the artist may use any
form, from an expression of words, (written or spoken) to physical reality,
equally.

16 If words are used, and they proceed from ideas about art, then they are
art and not literature, numbers are not mathematics.

17 All ideas are art if they are concerned with art and fall within the
conventions of art.

18 One usually understands the art of the past by applying the conventions of
the present thus misunderstanding the art of the past.

19 The conventions of art are altered by works of art.

20 Successful art changes our understanding of the conventions by altering
our perceptions.

21 Perception of ideas leads to new ideas.

22 The artist cannot imagine his art, and cannot perceive it until it is
complete.

23 One artist may mis-perceive (understand it differently than the artist) a
work of art but still be set off in his own chain of thought by that
misconstrual.

24 Perception is subjective.

25 The artist may not necessarily understand his own art. His perception is
neither better nor worse than that of others.

26 An artist may perceive the art of others better than his own.

27 The concept of a work of art may involve the matter of the piece or the
process in which it is made.

28 Once the idea of the piece is established in the artist's mind and the final
form is decided, the process is carried out blindly. There are many
side-effects that the artist cannot imagine. These may be used as ideas for
new works.

29 The process is mechanical and should not be tampered with. It should run
its course.



VHa Objecthood and Reductivism 839

30 There are many elements involved in a work of art. The most important
are the most obvious.

31 If an artist uses the same form in a group of works, and changes the
material, one would assume the artist's concept involved the material.

32 Banal ideas cannot be rescued by beautiful execution.

33 It is difficult to bungle a good idea.

34 When an artist learns his craft too well he makes slick art.

35 These sentences comment on art, but are not art.



9 Robert Barry (b. 1936) Interview with Arthur R. Rose

In January 1969 the avant-garde dealer Seth Siegelaub staged an exhibition in a
temporarily empty office space in New York. The exhibition was given the title of its
duration, 'January 5-31 1969'. The artists involved were Robert Barry, Douglas Huebler,
Joseph Kosuth and Lawrence Weiner, each represented by a small selection of recent
works, with others documented in an accompanying catalogue. Among those listed
were Weiner's One Standard Air Force dye marker thrown into the sea and Barry's 88
mc Carrier Wave (FM). To provide publicity for the exhibition, the artists concocted four
interviews, using the Duchampian name 'Arthur R. Rose' for their fictitious interlocutor.
These were originally published in Arts Magazine, vol. 43, no. 4, New York, February
1969, pp. 22-3. Barry here gives voice to that extreme form of reductivism which was
characteristic of some American forms of post-Minimal and Conceptual Art.

Q: How did you arrive at the kind of work you are now doing?

BARRY: It's a logical continuation of my earlier work. A few years ago when
I was painting, it seemed that paintings would look one way in one place
and, because of lighting and other things, would look different in another
place. Although it was the same object, it was another work of art. Then I
made paintings which incorporated as part of their design the wall on which
they hung. I finally gave up painting for the wire installations (two of
which are in the show). Each wire installation was made to suit the place in
which it was installed. They cannot be moved without being destroyed.

Color became arbitrary. I started using thin transparent nylon monofilament.
Eventually the wire became so thin that it was virtually invisible. This led
to my use of a material which is invisible, or at least not perceivable in a
traditional way. Although this poses problems, it also presents endless possi-
bilities. It was at this point that I discarded the idea that art is necessarily
something to look at.

Q; If your work is not perceivable, how does anyone deal with it or even know
of its existence?

BARRY: I'm not only questioning the limits of our perception, but the actual
nature of perception. These forms certainly do exist, they are controlled and
have their own characteristic. They are made of various kinds of energy which
exist outside the narrow arbitrary limits of our own senses. I use various
devices to produce the energy, detect it, measure it, and define its form.



840 Institutions and Objections

By just being in this show, I'm making known the existence of the work.
I'm presenting these things in an artistic situation using the space and the
catalogue. I think this will be less of a problem as people become more
acclimated to this art. As with any art, an interested person reacts in a personal
way based on his own experience and imagination. Obviously, I can't control
that.

Q: Exactly what kind of energy do you use?

BARRY: One kind of energy is electromagnetic waves. There is a piece in the
show which uses the carrier wave of a radio station for a prescribed length
of time, not as a means of transmitting information, but rather as an object.
Another piece uses the carrier wave of a citizens band transmitter to bridge
two distant points in New York and Luxembourg several times during the
run of the show. Because of the position of the sun and favorable atmospheric
conditions during January - the month of the show - this piece could be
made. At another time, under different conditions, other locations would have
to be used. There are two smaller carrier wave pieces which have just enough
power to fill the exhibition space. They are very different in character, one
being AM, the other being FM, but both will occupy the same space at the
same time - such is the nature of the material.

Also in the show will be a room filled with ultrasonic sound. I've also used
microwaves and radiation. There are many other possibilities which I intend
to explore - and I'm sure there are a lot of things we don't yet know about,
which exist in the space around us, and, though we don't see or feel them,
we somehow know they are out there.



10 Joseph Kosuth (b. 1945) 'Art after Philosophy'

With the publication of this essay Kosuth successfully claimed a position as spokesman
for the avant-garde idea of 'art as idea'. His extreme form of Modernist autonomy thesis
is harnessed to a revaluation and revision of art history which posits Duchamp's
readymades - rather than the paintings of Manet or Cezanne or the moment of Cubism
- as the significant point of initiation of the modern. Following its initial publication,
however, the essay was widely understood as a form of manifesto for an 'Analytical'
tendency within the wider Conceptual Art movement. In the summer of 1969 Kosuth
was invited to act as American Editor of the journal Art-Language, and he was to be
associated with Art & Language until 1976 (see VIIbI and 4). 'Art after Philosophy' was
originally published in three parts in Studio international, vol. 178, nos. 915-17,
London, October, November, December 1969, pp. 134-7, 160-1, 212-13. It has been
much reprinted. Its theoretical argument is restricted to the first part, from which the
present text is taken.

'The fact that it has recently become fashionable for physicists themselves to
be sympathetic towards religion . . . marks the physicists' own lack of confidence
in the validity of their hypotheses, which is a reaction on their part from the
anti-religious dogmatism of nineteenth-century scientists, and a natural outcome
of the crisis through which physics has just passed.' - A. J. Aver.



VIIa Objecthood and Reductivism 841

' . . . once one has understood the Tractatus there will be no temptation to
concern oneself any more with philosophy, which is neither empirical like science
nor tautological like mathematics; one will, like Wittgenstein in 1918, abandon
philosophy, which, as traditionally understood, is rooted in confusion.' - J. O.
Urmson.

Traditional philosophy, almost by definition, has concerned itself with the
unsaid. The nearly exclusive focus on the said by twentieth-century analytical
linguistic philosophers is the shared contention that the unsaid is unsaid because
it is unsayable. Hegelian philosophy made sense in the nineteenth century and
must have been soothing to a century that was barely getting over Hume, the
Enlightenment, and Kant. 1 Hegel's philosophy was also capable of giving cover
for a defence of religious beliefs, supplying an alternative to Newtonian mech-
anics, and fitting in with the growth of history as a discipline, as well as
accepting Darwinian Biology. 2 He appeared to give an acceptable resolution to
the conflict between theology and science, as well.

The result of Hegel's influence has been that a great majority of contemporary
philosophers are really little more than historians of philosophy, Librarians of
the Truth, so to speak. One begins to get the impression that there 'is nothing
more to be said.' And certainly if one realizes the implications of Wittgenstein's
thinking, and the thinking influenced by him and after him, 'Continental'
philosophy need not seriously be considered here. 3
* * *

The twentieth century brought in a time which could be called 'the end of
philosophy and the beginning of art'. I do not mean that, of course, strictly
speaking, but rather as the 'tendency' of the situation. Certainly linguistic
philosophy can be considered the heir to empiricism, but it's a philosophy in
one gear. 4 And there is certainly an 'art condition' to art preceding Duchamp,
but its other functions or reasons-to-be are so pronounced that its ability to
function clearly as art limits its art condition so drastically that it's only
minimally art. In no mechanistic sense is there a connection between philos-
ophy's 'ending' and art's 'beginning', but I don't find this occurence entirely
coincidental. Though the same reasons may be responsible for both occurences
the connection is made by me. I bring this all up to analyse art's function and
subsequently its viability. And I do so to enable others to understand the
reasoning of my - and, by extension, other artists' - art, as well as to provide
a clearer understanding of the term 'Conceptual art'. 5

The Function of Art

The main qualifications to the lesser position of painting is that advances in
art are certainly not always formal ones.' - Donald Judd (1963).

'Half or more of the best new work in the last few years has been neither
painting nor sculpture.' - Donald Judd (1965).

'Everything sculpture has, my work doesn't.' - Donald Judd (1967).

'The idea becomes a machine that makes the art.' - Sol LeWitt (1965).



842 Institutions and Objections

'The one thing to say about art is that it is one thing. Art is art-as-art and
everything else is everything else. Art as art is nothing but art. Art is not what
is not art.' - Ad Reinhardt (1963).

'The meaning is the use.' - Wittgenstein.

'A more functional approach to the study of concepts has tended to replace
the method of introspection. Instead of attempting to grasp or describe concepts
bare, so to speak, the psychologist investigates the way in which they function
as ingredients in beliefs and in judgements.' - Irving M. Copi.

'Meaning is always a presupposition of function.' - T. Segerstedt.

' ... the subject-matter of conceptual investigations is the meaning of certain
words and expressions - and not the things and states of affairs themselves
about which we talk, when using those words and expressions.' - G. H. Von
Wright.

'Thinking is radically metaphoric. Linkage by analogy is its constituent law
or principle, its causal nexus, since meaning only arises through the causal
contexts by which a sign stands for (takes the place of) an instance of a sort.
To think of anything is to take it as of a sort (as a such and such) and that
'as' brings in (openly or in disguise) the analogy, the parallel, the metaphoric
grapple or ground or grasp or draw by which alone the mind takes hold. It
takes no hold if there is nothing for it to haul from, for its thinking is the haul,
the attraction of likes.' - I. A, Richards.

In this section I will discuss the separation between aesthetics and art; consider
briefly Formalist art (because it is a leading proponent of the idea of aesthetics
as art), and assert that art is analogous to an analytic proposition, and that it
is art's existence as a tautology which enables art to remain 'aloof from
philosophical presumptions.

It is necessary to separate aesthetics from art because aesthetics deals with
opinions on perception of the world in general. In the past one of the two
prongs of art's function was its value as decoration. So any branch of philosophy
which dealt with 'beauty' and thus, taste, was inevitably duty bound to discuss
art as well. Out of this 'habit' grew the notion that there was a conceptual
connection between art and aesthetics, which is not true. This idea never
drastically conflicted with artistic considerations before recent times, not only
because the morphological characteristics of art perpetuated the continuity of
this error, but as well, because the apparent other 'functions' of art (depiction
of religious themes, portraiture of aristocrats, detailing of architecture, etc.) used
art to cover up art.

When objects are presented within the context of art (and until recently
objects always have been used) they are as eligible for aesthetic consideration
as are any objects in the world, and an aesthetic consideration of an object
existing in the realm of art means that the object's existence or functioning in
an art context is irrelevant to the aesthetic judgement.

The relation of aesthetics to art is not unlike that of aesthetics to architecture,
in that architecture has a very specific function and how 'good' its design is is
primarily related to how well it performs its function. Thus, judgements on



VHa Objecthood and Reductivism 843

what it looks like correspond to taste, and we can see that throughout history
different examples of architecture are praised at different times depending on
the aesthetics of particular epochs. Aesthetic thinking has even gone so far as
to make examples of architecture not related to 'art' at all, works of art in
themselves (e.g. the pyramids of Egypt).

Aesthetic considerations are indeed always extraneous to an object's function
or 'reason to be'. Unless of course, that object's 'reason to be' is strictly
aesthetic. An example of a purely aesthetic object is a decorative object, for
decoration's primary function is 'to add something to, so as to make more
attractive; adorn; ornament', 6 and this relates directly to taste. And this leads
us directly to 'Formalist' art and criticism/ Formalist art (painting and sculp-
ture) is the vanguard of decoration, and, strictly speaking, one could reasonably
assert that its art condition is so minimal that for all functional purposes it is
not art at all, but pure exercises in aesthetics. Above all things Clement
Greenberg is the critic of taste. Behind every one of his decisions is an aesthetic
judgement, with those judgements reflecting his taste. And what does his taste
reflect? The period he grew up in as a critic, the period 'real' for him: the
fifties. 8

How else can one account for, given his theories - if they have any logic to
them at all, - his disinterest in Frank Stella, Ad Reinhardt, and others applicable
to his historical scheme? Is it because [ . .] their work doesn't suit his taste?

But in the philosophic tabula rasa of art, 'if someone calls it art,' as Don
Judd has said, 'it's art.' Given this, formalist painting and sculpture can be
granted an 'art condition', but only by virtue of its presentation in terms of its
art idea (e.g. a rectangularly-shaped canvas stretched over wooden supports and
stained with such and such colours, using such and such forms, giving such
and such a visual experience, etc.). If one looks at contemporary art in this light
one realizes the minimal creative effort taken on the part of formalist artists
specifically, and all painters and sculptors (working as such today) generally.

This brings us to the realization that formalist art and criticism accepts as a
definition of art one which exists solely on morphological grounds. While a vast
quantity of similarly looking objects or images (or visually related objects or
images) may seem to be related (or connected) because of a similarity of
visual/experiential 'readings', one cannot claim from this an artistic or concep-
tual relationship.

It is obvious then that formalist criticism's reliance on morphology leads
necessarily with a bias toward the morphology of traditional art. And in this
sense their criticism is not related to a 'scientific method' or any sort of
empiricism (as Michael Fried, with his detailed descriptions of paintings and
other 'scholarly' paraphernalia would want us to believe). Formalist criticism is
no more than an analysis of the physical attributes of particular objects which
happen to exist in a morphological context. But this doesn't add any knowledge
(or facts) to our understanding of the nature or function of art. And nor does
it comment on whether or not the objects analysed are even works of art, in
that formalist critics always by-pass the conceptual element in works of art.
Exactly why they don't comment on the conceptual element in works of art is



844 Institutions and Objections

precisely because formalist art is only art by virtue of its resemblance to earlier
works of art. It's a mindless art. Or, as Lucy Lippard so 'succinctly described
Jules Olitski's paintings: 'they're visual Muzak' 9

Formalist critics and artists alike do not question the nature of art, but as I
have said elsewhere: 'Being an artist now means to question the nature of art.
If one is questioning the nature of painting, one cannot be questioning the
nature of art. If an artist accepts painting (or sculpture) he is accepting the
tradition that goes with it. That's because the word art is general and the word
painting is specific. Painting is a kind of art. If you make paintings you
are already accepting (not questioning) the nature of art. One is then accept-
ing the nature of art to be the European tradition of a painting-sculpture
dichotomy.' 10

The strongest objection one can raise against a morphological justification for
traditional art is that morphological notions of art embody an implied a priori
concept of art's possibilities. And such an a priori concept of the nature of art
(as separate from analytically framed art propositions or 'work' which I will
discuss later) makes it, indeed, a priori: impossible to question the nature of
art. And this questioning of the nature of art is a very important concept in
understanding the function of art.

The function of art, as a question, was first raised by Marcel Duchamp. In
fact it is Marcel Duchamp whom we can credit with giving art its own identity.
(One can certainly see a tendency toward this self-identification of art beginning
with Manet and Cezanne through to Cubism, 11 but their works are timid and
ambiguous by comparison with Duchamp's). 'Modern' art and the work before
seemed connected by virtue of their morphology. Another way of putting it
would be that art's 'language' remained the same, but it was saying new things.
The event that made conceivable the realization that it was possible to 'speak
another language' and still make sense in art was Marcel Duchamp's first
unassisted Readymade. With the unassisted Readymade, art changed its focus
from the form of the language to what was being said. Which means that it
changed the nature of art from a question of morphology to a question of
function. This change - one from 'appearance' to 'conception' - was the
beginning of 'modern' art and the beginning of 'conceptual' art. All art (after
Duchamp) is conceptual (in nature) because art only exists conceptually.

The 'value' of particular artists after Duchamp can be weighed according to
how much they questioned the nature of art; which is another way of saying
'what they added to the conception of art' or what wasn't there before they
started. Artists question the nature of art by presenting new propositions as to
art's nature. And to do this one cannot concern oneself with the handed-down
'language' of traditional art, as this activity is based on the assumption that
there is only one way of framing art propositions. But the very stuff of art is
indeed greatly related to 'creating' new propositions.

The case is often made - particularly in reference to Duchamp - that objects
of art (such as the readymades, of course, but all art is implied in this) are
judged as objets d'art in later years and the artists' intentions become irrelevant.
Such an argument is the case of a preconceived notion ordering together not



VIIa Objecthood and Reductivism 845

necessarily related facts. The point is this: aesthetics, as we have pointed out,
are conceptually irrelevant to art. Thus, any physical thing can become objet
d'art, that is to say, can be considered tasteful, aesthetically pleasing, etc. But
this has no bearing on the object's application to an art context; that is, its
functioning in an art context. (E.g. if a collector takes a painting, attaches legs,
and uses it as a dining-table it's an act unrelated to art or the artist because,
as art, that wasn't the artist's intention.)

And what holds true for Duchamp's work applies as well to most of the art
after him. In other words, the value of Cubism - for instance - is its idea in
the realm of art, not the physical or visual qualities seen in a specific painting,
or the particularization of certain colours or shapes. For these colours and shapes
are the art's 'language', not its meaning conceptually as art. To look upon a
Cubist 'masterwork' now as art is nonsensical, conceptually speaking, as far as
art is concerned. (That visual information which was unique in Cubism's
language has now been generally absorbed and has a lot to do with the way in
which one deals with painting 'linguistically'. [E.g. what a Cubist painting meant
experimentally and conceptually to, say, Gertrude Stein, is beyond our specu-
lation because the same painting then 'meant' something different than it does
now.]) The 'value' now of an original Cubist painting is not unlike, in most
respects, an original manuscript by Lord Byron, or The Spirit of St Louis as it
is seen in the Smithsonian Institute. (Indeed, museums fill the very same
function as the Smithsonian Institute - why else would the Jeu de Paume wing
of the Louvre exhibit Cezanne's and van Gogh's palettes as proudly as they do
their paintings?) Actual works of art are little more than historical curiosities.
As far as art is concerned van Gogh's paintings aren't worth any more than his
palette is. They are both 'collector's items'. 12

Art 'lives' through influencing other art, not by existing as the physical residue
of an artist's ideas. The reason why different artists from the past are 'brought
alive' again is because some aspect of their work becomes 'useable' by living
artists. That there is no 'truth' as to what art is seems quite unrealized.

What is the function of art, or the nature of art? If we continue our analogy
of the forms art takes as being art's language one can realize then that a work
of art is a kind of proposition presented within the context of art as a comment
on art. We can then go further and analyse the types of 'propositions'.

A. J. Ayer's evaluation of Kant's distinction between analytic and synthetic
is useful to us here: 'A proposition is analytic when its validity depends solely
on the definitions of the symbols it contains, and synthetic when its validity is
determined by the facts of experience.' 13 The analogy I will attempt to make is
one between the art condition and the condition of the analytic proposition. In
that they don't appear to be believable as anything else, or be about anything
(other than art) the forms of art most clearly finally referable only to art have
been forms closest to analytical propositions.

Works of art are analytic propositions. That is, if viewed within their context
- as art - they provide no information what-so-ever about any matter of fact.
A work of art is a tautology in that it is a presentation of the artist's intention,
that is, he is saying that that particular work of art is art, which means, is a



846 Institutions and Objections

definition of art. Thus, that it is art is true a priori (which is what Judd means
when he states that 'if someone calls it art, it's art').

Indeed, it is nearly impossible to discuss art in general terms without talking
in tautologies - for to attempt to 'grasp' art by any other 'handle' is to merely
focus on another aspect or quality of the proposition which is usually irrelevant
to the art work's 'art condition'. One begins to realize that art's 'art condition'
is a conceptual state. That the language forms which the artist frames his
propositions in are often 'private' codes or languages is an inevitable outcome
of art's freedom from morphological constrictions; and it follows from this that
one has to be familiar with contemporary art to appreciate it and understand
it. Likewise one understands why the 'man on the street' is intolerant to artistic
art and always demands art in a traditional 'language'. (And one understands
why formalist art sells 'like hot cakes'.) Only in painting and sculpture did the
artists all speak the same language. What is called 'Novelty Art' by the
Formalists is often the attempt to find new languages, although a new language
doesn't necessarily mean the framing of new propositions: e.g. most kinetic and
electronic art.

Another way of stating in relation to art what Ayer asserted about the analytic
method in the context of language would be the following: The validity of
artistic propositions is not dependent on any empirical, much less any aesthetic,
presupposition about the nature of things. For the artist, as an analyst, is not
directly concerned with the physical properties of things. He is concerned only
with the way (1) in which art is capable of conceptual growth and (2) how his
propositions are capable of logically following that growth. 14 In other words, the
propositions of art are not factual, but linguistic in character - that is, they do
not describe the behaviour of physical, or even mental objects; they express
definitions of art, or the formal consequences of definitions of art. Accordingly,
we can say that art operates on a logic. For we shall see that the characteristic
mark of a purely logical enquiry is that it is concerned with the formal
consequences of our definitions (of art) and not with questions of empirical fact. 13

To repeat, what art has in common with logic and mathematics is that it is
a tautology; i.e., the 'art idea' (or 'work') and art are the same and can be
appreciated as art without going outside the context of art for verification.

On the other hand, let us consider why art cannot be (or has difficulty when
it attempts to be) a synthetic proposition. Or, that is to say, when the truth or
falsity of its assertion is verifiable on empirical grounds. Ayer states: ' . . . The
criterion by which we determine the validity of an a priori or analytical
proposition is not sufficient to determine the validity of an empirical or synthetic
proposition. For it is characteristic of empirical propositions that their validity
is not purely formal. To say that a geometrical proposition, or a system of
geometrical propositions, is false, is to say that it is self-contradictory. But an
empirical proposition, or a system of empirical propositions, may be free from
contradiction, and still be false. It is said to be false, not because it is formally
defective, but because it fails to satisfy some material criterion.' 16

The unreality of 'realistic' art is due to its framing as an art proposition in
synthetic terms: one is always tempted to 'verify' the proposition empirically.



VIIa Objecthood and Reductivism 847

Realism's synthetic state does not bring one to a circular swing back into a
dialogue with the larger framework of questions about the nature of art (as does
the work of Malevich, Mondrian, Pollock, Reinhardt, early Rauschenberg, Johns,
Lichtenstein, Warhol, Andre, Judd, Flavin, LeWitt, Morris, and others), but
rather, one is flung out of art's 'orbit' into the infinite space' of the human
condition.

Pure Expressionism, continuing with Ayer's terms, could be considered as
such: 'A sentence which consisted of demonstrative symbols would not express
a genuine proposition. It would be a mere ejaculation, in no way characterizing
that to which it was supposed to refer.' Expressionist works are usually such
'ejaculations' presented in the morphological language of traditional art. If
Pollock is important it is because he painted on loose canvas horizontally to the
floor. What isn't important is that he later put those drippings over stretchers
and hung them parallel to the wall. (In other words what is important in art is
what one brings to it, not one's adoption of what was previously existing.) What
is even less important to art is Pollock's notions of 'self-expression' because
those kinds of subjective meanings are useless to anyone other than those
involved with him personally. And their 'specific' quality puts them outside of
art's context.

[. . .] As Ayer has stated: 'There are no absolutely certain empirical proposi-
tions. It is only tautologies that are certain. Empirical questions are one and all
hypotheses, which may be confirmed or discredited in actual sense-experience.
And the propositions in which we record the observations that verify these
hypotheses are themselves hypotheses which are subject to the test of further
sense-experience. Thus there is no final proposition.' 17

What one finds all throughout the writings of Ad Reinhardt is this very similar
thesis of 'art-as-art', and that 'art is always dead, and a "living" art is a
deception' 18 Reinhardt had a very clear idea about the nature of art, and his
importance is far from being recognized.

Forms of art that can be considered synthetic propositions are verifiable by
the world, that is to say, to understand these propositions one must leave the
tautological-like framework of art and consider 'outside' information. But to
consider it as art it is necessary to ignore this same outside information, because
outside information (experiential qualities, to note) have their own intrinsic
worth. And to comprehend this worth one does not need a state of 'art
condition'.

From this it is easy to realize that art's viability is not connected to the
presentation of visual (or other) kinds of experience. That that may have been
one of art's extraneous functions in the preceding centuries is not unlikely. After
all, man in even the nineteenth-century lived in a fairly standardized visual
environment. That is, it was ordinarily predictable as to what he would be
coming into contact with day after day. His visual environment in the part of
the world in which he lived was fairly consistent. In our time we have an
experientially drastically richer environment. One can fly all over the earth in
a matter of hours and days, not months. We have the cinema, and colour
television, as well as the man-made spectacle of the lights of Las Vegas or the



848 Institutions and Objections

skyscrapers of New York City. The whole world is there to be seen, and the
whole world can watch man walk on the moon from their living rooms. Certainly
art or objects of painting and sculpture cannot be expected to compete expert
entially with this?

The notion of 'use' is relevant to art and its 'language'. Recently the box o r
cube form has been used a great deal within the context of art. (Take for instance
its use by Judd, Morris, LeWitt, Bladen, Smith, Bell, and McCracken - not
even mentioning the quantity of boxes and cubes that came after.) The difference
between all the various uses of the box or cube form is directly related to the
differences in the intentions of the artists. Further, as is particularly seen in
Judd's work, the use of the box or cube form illustrates very well our earlier
claim that an object is only art when placed in the context of art.

A few examples will point this out. One could say that if one of Judd's box
forms was seen filled with debris, seen placed in an industrial setting, or even
merely seen sitting on a street corner, it would not be identified with art. It
follows then that understanding and consideration of it as an art work is
necessary a priori to viewing it in order to 'see' it as a work of art. Advance
information about the concept of art and about an artist's concepts is necessary
to the appreciation and understanding of contemporary art. Any and all of the
physical attributes (qualities) of contemporary works if considered separately
and/or specifically are irrelevant to the art concept. The art concept (as Judd
said, though he didn't mean it this way) must be considered in its whole. To
consider a concept's parts is invariably to consider aspects that are irrelevant to
its art condition - or like reading parts of a definition.

It comes as no surprise that the art with the least fixed morphology is the
example from which we decipher the nature of the general term 'art'. For where
there is a context existing separately of its morphology and consisting of its
function one is more likely to find results less conforming and predictable. It
is in modern art's possession of a 'language' with the shortest history that the
plausibility of the abandonment of that 'language' becomes most possible. It is
understandable then that the art that came out of Western painting and sculpture
is the most energetic, questioning (of its nature), and the least assuming of all
the general 'art' concerns. In the final analysis, however, all of the arts have
but (in Wittgenstein's terms) a 'family' resemblance.

Yet the various qualities relatable to an 'art condition' possessed by poetry,
the novel, the cinema, the theatre, and various forms of music, etc., is that
aspect of them most relatable to the function of art as asserted here. f. . .]

'We see now that the axioms of a geometry are simply definitions, and that
the theorems of a geometry are simply the logical consequences of these
definitions. A geometry is not in itself about physical space; in itself it cannot
be said to be "about" anything. But we can use a geometry to reason about
physical space. That is to say, once we have given the axioms a physical
interpretation, we can proceed to apply the theorems to the objects which satisfy
the axioms. Whether a geometry can be applied to the actual physical world or
not, is an empirical question which falls outside the scope of geometry itself
There is no sense, therefore, in asking which of the various geometries known



VIIa Objecthood and Reductivism 849
to us are false and which are true. In so far as they are all free from
contradiction, they are all true. The proposition which states that a certain
application of a geometry is possible is not itself a proposition of that geometry
All that the geometry itself tells us is that if anything can be brought under
the definitions, it will also satisfy the theorems. It is therefore a purely logical
system, and its propositions are purely analytic propositions.' - A. J. Ayer 19

Here then I propose rests the viability of art. In an age when traditional
philosophy is unreal because of its assumptions, art's ability to exist will depend
not only on its not performing a service - as entertainment, visual (or other)
experience, or decoration - which is something easily replaced by kitsch culture
and technology, but rather, it will remain viable by not assuming a philosophical
stance; for in art's unique character is the capacity to remain aloof from
philosophical judgements. It is in this context that art shares similarities with
logic, mathematics and, as well, science. But whereas the other endeavours are
useful, art is not. Art indeed exists for its own sake.

In this period of man, after philosophy and religion, art may possibly be one
endeavour that fulfills what another age might have called 'man's spiritual
needs'. Or, another way of putting it might be that art deals analogously with
the state of things 'beyond physics' where philosophy had to make assertions.
And art's strength is that even the preceding sentence is an assertion, and cannot
be verified by art. Art's only claim is for art. Art is the definition of art.



.A



Morton White, The Age of Analysis, Mentor Books, New York, p. 14
Ibid., p. 15.

I mean by this Existentialism and Phenomenology. Even Merleau-Ponty, with his middle-of-the-
road position between Empiricism and Rationalism, cannot express his philosophy without the
use of words (thus using concepts); and following this, how can one discuss experience without
sharp distinctions between ourselves and the world?

The task such philosophy has taken upon itself is the only 'function' it could perform without
making philosophic assertions.

I would like to make it clear, however, that I intend to speak for no one else. I arrived at these
conclusions alone, and indeed, it is from this thinking that my art since 1966 (if not before)
evolved. Only recently did I realize after meeting Terry Atkinson that he and Michael Baldwin
share similar, though certainly not identical, opinions to mine.
Webster's New World Dictionary of the American Language.

The conceptual level of the work of Kenneth Noland, Jules Olitski, Morris Louis, Ron Davis,
Anthony Caro, John Hoyland, Dan Christensen et al is so dismally low, that any that is there
is supplied by the critics promoting it. This is seen later.

Michael Fried's reasons for using Greenberg's rationale reflect his background (and most of the
other formalist critics) as a 'scholar', but more of it is due to his desire, I suspect, to bring his
scholarly studies into the modern world. One can easily sympathize with his desire to connect,
say, Tiepolo with Jules Olitski. One should never forget, however, that an historian loves history
more than anything, even art.

Lucy Lippard . . . , in her Hudson Review review of the last painting exhibition of the Whitney

Annual.

Tour interviews', by Arthur R. Rose; Arts Magazine, February 1969.

As Terry Atkinson pointed out in his introduction to Art-Language (vol. 1, no. 1), the Cubists

never questioned (/art had morphological characteristics, but which ones in painting were acceptable.

When someone 'buys' a Flavin he isn't buying a light show, for if he was he could just go to

a hardware store and get the goods for considerably less. He isn't 'buying' anything. He is

subsidizing Flavin's activity as an artist.



850 Institutions and Objections

U A. J. Aver, Language, Truth, and Logic, Dover, New York, p. 78.

14 Ibid., p" 57.

15 Ibid., p. 57.

16 Ibid., p. 90.

17 Ibid., p. 94.

18 Ad Reinhardt's retrospective catalogue {Jewish Museum) written by Lucy Lippard, p. 12.

19 Aver, p. 82.



11 Daniel Buren (b. 1938), Olivier Mosset (b. 1944),
Michel Parmentier (b. 1938) and Niele Toroni
(b. 1937) Statement

This text was issued as a flyer on the occasion of a joint demonstration by the four
artists at the Salon de la Jeune Peinture, Musee d'Art Moderne, Paris, on 3 January
1967. As a form of strategically reduced 'signature' each artist was represented by a
simple stylistic motif deployed on canvases of identical size: Buren by vertical red and
white stripes; Mosset by a black circle on a white ground; Parmentier by horizontal
bands of grey and white; and Toroni by square blue imprints of a flat brush on a white
ground. The work was withdrawn at the end of the day. During the following year Buren,
Mosset and Toroni continued to paint the 'same' paintings. At the time of writing the
work of Buren and Toroni remains identifiable through their respective use of the same
basic motifs. English translation published in Michel Claura, 'Paris Commentary', Studio
international, vol. 177, no. 907, London, January 1969, p. 47.

Because painting is a game,

Because painting is the application (consciously or otherwise) of the rules of

composition,

Because painting is the freezing of movement,

Because painting is the representation (or interpretation or appropriation or

disputation or presentation) of objects,

Because painting is a springboard for the imagination,

Because painting is spiritual illustration,

Because painting is justification,

Because painting serves an end,

Because to paint is to give aesthetic value to flowers, women, eroticism, the

daily environment, art, dadaism, psychoanalysis and the war in Vietnam,

We are not painters.



12 Daniel Buren (b. 1938) 'Beware'

In this essay, written for the catalogue of a Conceptual Art exhibition, Buren aimed both
to distance himself from a Conceptual Art tendency and to establish the distinctive
character of his own project. His declared aim is to reduce painting to an essential
state, by this means to effect a rupture with traditional concepts of development in art,
and to reinstate painting as a practice of theory as distinct from decoration or craft.
First published as 'Mise en garde' in Konzeption/Conception, Stadtisches Museum,



VII a Objecthood and Reductivism 851

Leverkusen, July-August 1969; revised and extended January 1970; this revised text
was translated by Charles Harrison and published in full in Studio International, vol.
179, no. 920, London, March 1970, pp. 100-4, from which the present version is
taken. (Italicized passages within square brackets signify Buren's 1970 revisions of the
1969 original. The extensions to this original version have largely been eliminated from
the present text, however.)



II What is this work?

Vertically striped sheets of paper, the bands of which are 8.7 cms wide,
alternate white and colored, are stuck over internal and external surfaces: walls,
fences, display windows, etc.; and/or cloth/canvas support, vertical stripes,
white and colored bands each 8.7 cms, the two ends covered with dull white
paint.

I record that this is my work for the last four years, without any evolution
or way out. This is the past: it does not imply either that it will be the same
for another ten or fifteen years or that it will change tomorrow. [. . .]

[. . .] The points to be examined are described below and each will require
to be examined separately and more thoroughly later. . . .

a) The Object, the Real, Illusion. Any art tends to decipher the world, to
visualize an emotion, nature, the subconscious, etc. . . . Can we pose a question
rather than replying always in terms of hallucinations? This question would be:
can one create something that is real, nonillusionistic, and therefore not an
art-object? One might reply - and this is a real temptation for an artist - in a
direct and basic fashion to this question and . . . believe the problem solved,
because it was raised, and [for example] present no object but a concept. This
is responding too directly to need, it is mistaking a desire for reality, it is making
like an artist. In fact, instead of questioning or acquainting oneself with the
problem raised, one provides a solution, and what a solution! One avoids the
issue and passes on to something else. Thus does art progress from form to
form, from problems raised to problems salved, accruing successive layers of
concealment. To do away with the object as an illusion - the real problem -
through its replacement by a concept [or an idea] - Utopian or ideal(istic) or
imaginary solution - is to believe in a moon made of green cheese, to achieve
one of those conjuring tricks so beloved of twentieth-century art. Moreover it
can be affirmed, with reasonable confidence, that as soon as a concept is
announced, and especially when it is "exhibited as art," under the desire to do
away with the object, one merely replaces it in fact. The exhibited concept
becomes ideal-object, which brings us once again to art as it is, i.e., the illusion
of something and not the thing itself. In the same way that writing is less and
less a matter of verbal transcription, painting should no longer be the vague
vision/illusion, even mental, of a phenomenon (nature, subconsciousness, geo-
metry . . . ) but VISUALITY of the painting itself In this way we arrive at a
notion that is thus allied more to a method and not to any particular inspiration;
a method which requires - in order to make a direct attack on the problems of
the object properly so-called - that painting itself should create a mode, a



852 Institutions and Objections

specific system, that would no longer direct attention, but that is 'produced to
be looked at.'

b) The Form. As to the internal structure of the proposition, the contradic-
tions are removed from it; no 'tragedy' occurs on the reading surface, no
horizontal line, for example, chances to cut through a vertical line. Only the
imaginary horizontal line of delimitation of the work at the top and at the
bottom 'exists,' but in the same way that it 'exists' only by mental reconstruc-
tion, it is mentally demolished simultaneously, as it is evident that the external
size is arbitrary (a point that we shall explain later on).

The succession of vertical bands is also arranged methodically, always the
same [xj/,x,j/,jf,y,x,j/,x,j/, l r, etc. . . . ], thus creating no composition on the inside
of the surface or area to be looked at, or, if you like, a minimum or zero or
neutral composition. These notions are understood in relation to art in general
and not through internal considerations. This neutral painting however is not
freed from obligations. On the contrary, thanks to its neutrality or absence of
style, it is extremely rich in information about itself (its exact position as regards
other work) and especially information about other work; thanks to the absence
of any formal problem its potency is all expended upon the realms of thought.
One may also say that this painting no longer has any plastic character, but that
it is indicative or critical Among other things, indicative/critical of its own
process. This zero/neutral degree of form is 'binding' in the sense that the total
absence of conflict eliminates all concealment (all mythification or secrecy) and
consequently brings silence. One should not take neutral painting for uncom-
mitted painting.

Lastly, this formal neutrality would not be formal at all if the internal
structure of which we have just spoken (vertical white and colored bands) was
linked to the external form (size of the surface presented to view). The internal
structure being immutable, if the exterior form were equally so, one would soon
arrive at the creation of a quasi-religious archetype which, instead of being
neutral, would become burdened with a whole weight of meanings, one of which
- and not the least - would be as the idealized image of neutrality. On the
other hand, the continual variation of the external form implies that it has no
influence on the internal structure, which remains the same in every case. The
internal structure remains uncomposed and without conflict. If, however, the
external form or shape did not vary, a conflict would immediately be established
between the combination or fixed relationship of the bandwidths, their spacing
(internal structure), and the general size of the work. This type of relationship
would be inconsistent with an ambition to avoid the creation of an illusion. We
would be presented with a problem all too clearly defined - here that of
neutrality to zero degree - and no longer with the thing itself posing a question,
in its own terms.

Finally, we believe confidently in the validity of a work or framework
questioning its own existence, presented to the eye. The framework, which we
have just analyzed clinically, has in fact no importance whatsoever in terms of
form or shape; it is at zero level, a minimum but essential level. We shall see
later how we shall work to cancel out the form itself so far as possible. In other



i



VHa Objecthood and Reductivism 853

words, it is time to assert that formal problems have ceased to interest us, j n i s
assertion is the logical consequence of actual work produced over four years
where the formal problem was forced out and disqualified as a pole of interest.
Art is the form that it takes. The form must unceasingly renew itself to insure
the development of what we call new art. A change of form has so often led
us to speak of a new art that one might think that inner meaning and form
were/are linked together in the mind of the majority - artists and critics. \ w,
if we start from the assumption that new, i.e., 'other,' art is in fact never more
than the same thing in a new guise, the heart of the problem is exposed. To
abandon the search for a new form at any price means trying to abandon the
history of art as we know it: it means passing from the Mythical to the Historical,
from the Illusion to the Real.

c) Color. In the same way that the work which we propose could not possibly
be the image of some thing (except itself, of course), and for the reasons defined
above could not possibly have a finalized external form, there cannot be one
single and definitive color. The color, if it was fixed, would mythify the
proposition and would become the zero degree of color X, just as there is navy
blue, emerald green or canary yellow.

One color and one color only, repeated indefinitely or at least a great number
of times, would then take on multiple and incongruous meanings. All the colors
are therefore used simultaneously, without any order of preference, but syste-
matically.

That said, we note that if the problem of form (as pole of interest) is dissolved
by itself, the problem of color, considered as subordinate or as self-generating at
the outset of the work and by the way it is used, is seen to be of great importance.
The problem is to divest it of all emotional or anecdotal import. [. . .]

d) Repetition. The consistency - i.e., the exposure to view in different places
and at different times, as well as the personal work, for four years - obliges us
to recognize manifest visual repetition at first glance. We say at 'first glance,'
as we have already learned from sections (a) and (b) that there are divergences
between one work and another; however, the essential, that is to say the internal,
structure remains immutable. One may therefore, with certain reservations,
speak of repetition. This repetition provokes two apparently contradictory
considerations: on the one hand, the reality of a certain form (described above),
and on the other hand, its cancelling-out by successive and identical confront-
ations, which themselves negate any originality that might be found in this form,
despite the systematization of the work. We know that a single and unique
'picture' as described above, although neutral, would be charged by its very
uniqueness with a symbolic force that would destroy its vocation of neutrality.
Likewise by repeating an identical form, or identical color, we would fall into
the pitfalls mentioned in sections (b) and (c). Moreover we would be burdened
with every unwanted religious tension if we undertook to idealize such a
proposition or allowed the work to take on the ancedotal interest of a test of
strength in response to a stupid bet.

There remains only one possibility; the repetition of this neutral form, with
the divergences we have already mentioned. This repetition, thus conceived, has



854 Institutions and Objections



the effect of reducing to a minimum the potency, however slight, of the proposed
form such as it is, of revealing that the external form (shifting) has no effect
on the internal structure (alternate repetition of the bands) and of highlighting
the problem raised by the color in itself. This repetition also reveals in point
of fact that visually there is no formal evolution - even though there is a change
- and that, in the same way that no 'tragedy' or composition or tension is to
be seen in the clearly defined scope of the work exposed to view (or presented
to the eye), no tragedy or tension is perceptible in relation to the creation itself.
The tensions abolished in the very surface of the 'picture' have also been
abolished - up to now - in the time category of this production. The repetition
is the ineluctable means of legibility of the proposition itself

This is why, if certain isolated artistic forms have raised the problem of
neutrality, they have never been pursued in depth to the full extent of their
proper meaning. By remaining 'unique' they have lost the neutrality we believe
we can discern in them. (Among others, we are thinking of certain canvases by
Cezanne, Mondrian, Pollock, Newman, Stella.)

Repetition also teaches us that there is no perfectibility. A work is at zero
level or it is not at zero level. To approximate means nothing. In these terms,
the few canvases of the artists mentioned can be considered only as empirical
approaches to the problem. Because of their empiricism they have been unable
to divert the course of the 'history' of art, but have rather strengthened the
idealistic nature of art history as a whole.

e) Differences. With reference to the preceding section, we may consider that
repetition would be the right way (or one of the right ways) to put forward our
work in the internal logic of its own endeavor. Repetition, apart from what its
use revealed to us, should, in fact, be envisaged as a 'method' and not as an
end. v A method that definitively rejects, as we have seen, any repetition of the
mechanical type, i.e., the geometric repetition (superimposable in every way,
including color) of a like thing (color + form/shape). To repeat in this sense
would be to prove that a single example already has an energy that denies all
neutrality, and that repetition could change nothing.

One rabbit repeated 10,000 times would give no notion whatever of neutrality
or zero degree, but eventually the identical image, 10,000 times, of the same
rabbit. The repetition that concerns us is therefore fundamentally the presen-
tation of the same thing, but under an objectively different aspect. To sum up,
manifestly it appears to us of no interest always to show precisely the same
thing and from that to deduce that there is repetition. The repetition that
interests us is that of a method and not a mannerism (or trick): it is a repetition
with differences. One could even say that it is these differences that make the
repetition, and that it is not a question of doing the same in order to say that
it is identical to the previous - which is a tautology (redundancy) - but rather
a repetition of differences with a view to a same (thing).

f) Anonymity. From the . . . preceding sections there emerges a relationship
which itself leads to certain considerations; this is the relationship that may
exist between the 'creator' and the proposition we are attempting to define.



VHa Objecthood and Reductivism 855

First fact to be established: he is no longer the owner of his work. Furthermore
it is not his work, but a work. The neutrality of the purpose - 'painting as the
subject of painting' - and the absence from it of considerations of style forces
us to acknowledge a certain anonymity. This is obviously not anonymity in the
person who proposes this work, which once again would be to solve a problem
by presenting it in a false light - why should we be concerned to know the
name of the painter of the Avignon Pietd ~ but of the anonymity of the work
itself as presented. This work being considered as common property, there can
be no question of claiming the authorship thereof, possessively, in the sense
that there are authentic paintings by Courbet and valueless forgeries. As we
have remarked, the projection of the individual is nil; we cannot see how he
could claim his work as belonging to him. In the same way we suggest that the
same proposition made by X or Y would be identical to that made by the author
of this text. If you like, the study of past work forces us to admit that there is
no longer, as regards the form defined above - when it is presented - any truth
or falsity in terms of conventional meaning that can be applied to both these
terms relating to a work of art. [. . .] It may also be said that the work of
which we speak, because neutral/anonymous, is indeed the work of someone,
but that this someone has no importance whatsoever [since he never reveals
himself], or, if you like, the importance he may have is totally archaic. Whether
he signs 'his' work or not, it nevertheless remains anonymous.

g) The Viewpoint ~ the Location. Lastly, one of the external consequences of
our proposition is the problem raised by the location where the work is shown.
In fact the work, as it is seen to be without composition and as it presents no
accident to divert the eye, becomes itself the accident in relation to the place
where it is presented. The indictment of any form considered as such, and the
judgment against such forms on the facts established in the preceding para-
graphs, leads us to question the finite space in which this form is seen. It is
established that the proposition, in whatever location it be presented, does not
'disturb' that location. The place in question appears as it is. It is seen in its
actuality. This is partly due to the fact that the proposition is not distracting.
Furthermore, being only its own subject matter, its own location is the prop-
osition itself, which makes it possible to say, paradoxically: the proposition in
question 'has no real location.'

In a certain sense, one of the characteristics of the proposition is to reveal
the 'container' in which it is sheltered. One also realizes that the influence of
the location upon the significance of the work is as slight as that of the work
upon the location.

This consideration, in course of work, has led us to present the proposition
in a number of very varied places. If it is possible to imagine a constant
relationship between the container (location) and the contents (the total prop-
osition), this relationship is always annulled or reinvoked by the next presenta-
tion. This relationship then leads to two inextricably linked although apparently
contradictory problems:

i) revelation of the location itself as a new space to be deciphered;

ii) the questioning of the proposition itself, insofar as its repetition (see



856 Institutions and Objections

sections [d] and [e]) in different 'contexts/ visible from different viewpoints,
leads us back to the central issue: What is exposed to view? What is the nature
of it? The multifariousness of the locations where the proposition is visible
permits us to assert the unassailable persistence that it displays in the very
moment when its nonstyle appearance merges it with its support.

It is important to demonstrate that while remaining in a very well-defined
cultural field - as if one could do otherwise - it is possible to go outside the
cultural location in the primary sense (gallery, museum, catalogue . . . ) without
the proposition, considered as such, immediately giving way. This strengthens
our conviction that the work proposed, insofar as it raises the question of
viewpoint, is posing what is in effect a new question, since it has been commonly
assumed that the answer follows as a matter of course.

We cannot get bogged down here in the implications of this idea: we will
merely observe for the record that all the works that claim to do away with the
object (Conceptual or otherwise) are essentially dependent upon the single
viewpoint from which they are 'visible,' a priori considered (or even not
considered at all) as ineluctable. A considerable number of works of art (the
most exclusively idealist, e.g., Ready-mades of all kinds) 'exist' only because the
location in which they are seen is taken for granted as a matter of course.

In this way, the location assumes considerable importance by its fixity and
its inevitability; becomes the 'frame' (and the security that presupposes) at the
very moment when they would have us believe that what takes place inside
shatters all the existing frames (manacles) in the attaining of pure 'freedom. 1 A
clear eye will recognize what is meant by freedom in art, but an eye that is a
little less educated will see better what it is all about when it has adopted the
following idea: that the location (outside or inside) where a work is seen is its
frame (its boundary).

Ill Preamble

One might ask why so many precautions must be taken instead of merely putting
one's work out in the normal fashion, leaving comment to the critics and other
professional gossip columnists. The answer is very simple: complete rupture
with art - such as it is envisaged, such as it is known, such as it is practised
- has become the only possible means of proceeding along the path of no return
upon which thought must embark; and this requires a few explanations. This
rupture requires as a first priority the revision of the history of art as we know
it, or, if you like, its radical dissolution. Then if one rediscovers any durable
and indispensable criteria they must be used not as a release from the need to
imitate or to sublimate, but as a [reality] that should be restated. A [reality] in
fact which, although already 'discovered' would have to be challenged, therefore
to be created. For it may be suggested that, at the present time [all the realities]
that it has been possible to point out to us or that have been recognized, are
not known. To recognize the existence of a problem certainly does not mean
the same as to know it. Indeed, if some problems have been solved empirically
(or by rule of thumb), we cannot then say that we know them, because the very



VIIa Objecthood and Reductivism 857

empiricism that presides over this kind of discovery obscures the solution in a
maze of carefully maintained enigmas.

But artworks and the practice of art have served throughout, in a parallel
direction, to signal the existence of certain problems. This recognition of their
existence can be called practice. The exact knowledge of these problems will be
called theory (not to be confused with all the aesthetic 'theories' that have been
bequeathed to us by the history of art).

It is this knowledge or theory that is now indispensable for a perspective upon
the rupture - a rupture that can then pass into the realm of fact. The mere
recognition of the existence of pertinent problems will not suffice for us. It may
be affirmed that all art up to the present day has been created on the one hand
only empirically and on the other out of idealistic thinking. If it is possible to
think again or to think and create theoretically/scientifically, the rupture will be
achieved and thus the word 'art' will have lost the meanings - numerous and
divergent - which at present encumber it. We can say, on the basis of the
foregoing, that the rupture, if any, can be (can only be) epistemological. This
rupture is/will be the resulting logic of a theoretical work at the moment when
the history of art (which is still to be made) and its application are/will be
envisaged theoretically: theory and theory alone, as we well know, can make
possible a revolutionary practice. Furthermore, not only is/will theory be
indissociable from its own practice, but again it may/will be able to give rise
to other original kinds of practice.

Finally, as far as we are concerned, it must be clearly understood that when
theory is considered as producer/ creator, the only theory or theoretic practice is the
result presented/ the painting or, according to Althusser's definition: 'Theory: a
specific form of practice.'

We are aware that this exposition of facts may be somewhat didactic;
nevertheless we consider it indispensable to proceed in this way at this time.



1



VIlB

Attitudes to Form



1 Terry Atkinson (b. 1939) and Michael Baldwin
(b. 1945) 'Air Show'

In 1968 the formation of Art & Language gave a name to the various collaborative
practices which had developed between four English artists: Atkinson, Baldwin, David
Bainbridge and Harold Hurrell. One of the group's typical procedures was to propose
a theoretical model which pursued the implications of some current avant-garde works
or proposals, and then to subject this to logical and speculative examination. In the
process, new conceptual objects were generated which were intentionally resistant to
normal critical procedures (see VIIb4). In the present essay a volume of air is taken as
a hypothetical object. The implication is that the conceptual framework within which an
object is singled out determines what kind of object it is that is singled out. References
in the text to the 'air-conditioning situation' are to a contemporary, and comparable,
project; the 'perusal tradition', with its attendant 'rhapsody', indicates the conventional
condition of spectatorship. The argument is conducted with an eye to American Mod-
ernism, and particularly to the forms of object proposed by the Minimalists. The present
text is taken from the booklet Frameworks - Air Conditioning, written in 1967 and
published as a limited edition by Art & Language Press, Coventry, in 1968. This was
reprinted with some corrections in Art & Language, Eindhoven (van Abbe Museum),
1980, pp. 1-14, from which the present text is taken.

The fog bank is a macroscopic aggregate. There is no theoretical primacy here
for this macroscopic aspect. That is, its importance or unimportance is shown
up by raising and answering internal questions to the framework.

There is no rhapsody here.

The macroscopic aggregate can be subjected to a micro-reductive examination.
The horizontal dimensions of a 'column' of air, atmosphere, 'void', etc, can be
indicated and established (for all 'external' and practical purposes) by a visible
demarcation in terms of horizontal dimensions, axis, etc. This could be done
in a number of ways: e.g. through the indication of some points of contiguity
with other 'things', or through the computation of a particular physical magni-
tude - e.g. temperature or pressure differences, etc. (this is not necessarily to
advocate an instrumental situation). None of this is to say that a complete, if



VHb Attitudes to Form 859

only 'factual' or constructual, specification is to be expected.

Obviously, when one talks of a column, there is some reference to a visual
situation (from whence the vocabulary may or may not find support). There is
a comparison to be made here between the 'air-conditioning situation 1 and the
fog bank, in which the obvious physical differences between the 'matter' which
constitutes the indicators of this or that 'boundary' can be made out. This is
not to describe the difference between boundaries per se, nor is it to exclude
the possibility of regarding 'boundaries' as 'entifications' of geometrical gaps.

Mostly, anyway, the questions of 'demarcation' are external ones of a practical
nature. Still, they remain securely rooted in the perusal tradition, so long as
one considers them in the context of particularizing characteristics at an
observational level.

A lot of emphasis was placed on the microscopic mechanical aspects of
procedure and process in the air-conditioning situation; it's easy to raise and
answer the same sort of question here. The objection to doing this is based in
a rejection of the problems of 'visualization' (and 'identification' in that context)
on theoretical grounds. The microscopic picture has a counterweight origin in
the macroscopic aspect of a situation. Whilst articulation on and identification
of air as a 'thing' conforms to this tradition, the molecular mechanical concept
of 'particle', 'flux' (of energy), and the 'thing', 'particle' identity systems appear
to be incompatible. What is interesting about thermodynamics is that it is
restricted to the formulation of necessary conditions for an occurrence . . .

There is a challenge to the million years habit of identifying 'things'. The
recognizance of something as something is another question bound up with
aspects of things, and not solely with 'identification' per se. The structure of
kinetic theory, for example, is built on the (extralinguistic, extralogical) mech-
anics of so-called 'common-sense' objects. There is a rooted assumption that
the laws and concepts of Newtonian mechanics, 'proved' by experience to be
valid for 'day to day objects', continue to have the same meaning beyond the
macroscopic-microscopic domain as they do within it. The kinetic theory
represents the micro-reductive approach to the study of the properties of
material aggregates. It interprets thermal phenomena in terms of properties and
interactions of the constituents of material assemblies. Thermodynamics, on the
other hand, is not based on any definite assumptions as to the ultimate
constitution of matter. The foundations are in very few general empirical
principles (appertaining to the behaviour of complex thermal systems).

Since the Greeks, speculation concerning the identity of matter has run
directly toward the atomic theory. Bridgman held that there seems to be no
logical or empirical justification for this. Rather, it seemed to him that it was
a psychological fact that the search to 'identify' things demands the atomic
particle concept. Persistently, even in a science like meteorology, which treats
critically of thermal systems, the methodological and definitory approach is such
that it draws exclusively from the kinetic theory of identity. (It is of interest
to point out, here, that the meteorological phenomena which are most disruptive,
etc. are usually those with a visible aspect (macroscopic). 'Invisible fog' is
self-contradictory in all common contexts of usage - (i.e. 'Invisible' contradicts



n



860 Institutions and Objections

the formal signs 'fog' or 'cloud' . And both signs refer to the characteristics (in
terms of 'visibility') of the meteorological objects to which they are assigned.)

The point here is not to make the gravamen of the discussion that people
compulsively picture both assemblies which are such that they do fit the
'picturing' function and assemblies such that they do not. The suggestion is,
rather, that the concept of identities like flux of heat and flux of energy might
be inchoative; and that not only in the sense that the identity of heat and energy
may be made clearer. This is a case of wondering about various aspects - the
heat/energy identity is only held out on the grounds of a possible analogy with
a situation internally relevant to these considerations: the prime consideration
is that in the further development of what at the moment appear to be
'enigmatic' entities, there might be raised interpellations concerning e.g. the
concept of identity, etc. One of the big troubles in seeking extrapolations is that
it is the function of extrapolations to explain and explanation always involves
reducing terms to something familiar. And we do not want to get casuistically
stuck with 'picturing', or with the pure or the alloy of visualization.

The air will have volume, determined by what we call the thermo-dynamic
factors in the situation. Here we are talking about the fact that experience has
learnt us to expect that everything has a volume and a temperature. It would
be relevant here to examine the concepts of volume and temperature. Volume
is calculated by measuring the various lengths and then multiplying the resulting
measurements (height, length, width). The proper definition of length is that
it is an extensive concept; that is larger amounts can be formed by reduplicating
smaller amounts. [. . .]

f . . . ] we measure temperature by the same sort of unit that we use to measure
volume, namely a unit of length. Defining temperature by relating it to
expansion characteristics of particular materials is in most respects a satisfactory
definition. But should a proper definition of temperature involve only an
arbitrary specification of only a unit and not of a whole scale? The problem of
the temperature scale was solved conceptually by the Second Law of Thermo-
dynamics. The law revealed how a selected temperature unit could be redupli-
cated without reference to the particular properties of a particular substance,
thereby giving temperature a fundamental definition.

It is relevant, here, to consider how far the conviction that atomic theories
support the means whereby any phenomenon may be described and explained
(and the view that theories are for explanation at all) corresponds to the one
which seems to indicate a preoccupation of artists with 'exegesis' etc. from
entities which paradigmatically instantiate assertions like ' ... is over there, in
that place' etc; and how much can be shown up of a theoretical situation which
is at most gerrymandered.

Schlesinger writes in his book 'Method in the Physical Sciences': ' . . . This
conviction was shared by a number of other philosophers, notable among them
Pierre Duhem. They argue that a priori metaphysical doctrines and empirical
evidence was what motivated scientists in their search for atomic theories to
explain heat phenomena. The metaphysical doctrines in question derived, ac-
cording to Mach and Duhem, from the mechanistic world view, which per-



VIIb Attitudes to Form 861

meated all nineteenth century philosophy, a view in which mechanics was
regarded as the most fundamental of all the sciences. Those who shared this
belief in the superior status of mechanics were naturally keen to accept the
hypothesis of the atomic theory of matter. It enabled them with the aid of kinetic
theory, to explain thermal phenomena in terms of the mechanical properties of
the molecules, thus reducing the science of heat to the science of mechanics.
They believed that ultimately all science would be reduced to mechanics'.

It might be suggested that infatuation with the art 'object' (in the obdurate
'material' sense of 'object') had a connection with an analogous psychological
fact. There has been a strong prejudice to correlate the category of 'existence'
with a mechanical explanation and to glorify that category in non-cognitive
contexts. There is, in this glorification, an inured disparagement of the category
of possibility. The constants of the present situation are in no way held up in
the concept of 'enduring substances'. Those invariant connections or categories
are assumed which are capable of indicating and supporting (and of functioning
as paradigms) developments (etc.) in the theoretical situation. (And this is not
to put in a plea for some revision of the necessary questions of interpretation.)
. . . There is little point in dwelling on prognostications concerning relevant
procedures and attitudes - certainly in so far as one could easily fall into a
dialectical carve-up of the various fields and purposes, etc. there is a danger of
constantly asking outside questions. [. . .]

[. . .] The theory is satisfactorily fomented on a lot of axes. One is that of
'mention' - i.e. that a 'thing' is mentioned fulfils (or may fulfil) a condition for
its coming up for the count. (And it should be pointed out here that 'mention'
is distinct from 'use'.) That this or that achieves 'mention' presupposes no
external questions about it. And there is no indication of its being defective in
any way (e.g. being fictional, etc.). To argue a distinction between a construct
of the air-show theory and those of the perusal situation is pointless: one would
have to argue through the common confusion centering on the mutual depend-
ence of opposite determinations. Syncretism is difficult with concepts which (on
analogy with terms) remain multiply ambiguous. And this is one way to look
at a lot of the concepts which enter much of the outside question-raising. [ . . . ]

Note

The specificity of a work as an indication of the legitimacy etc. of the mode
which carries it: the preference statements which push up properties like those
fall into theological esthetics (Pythagorean) rather than any other discipline.
Similarly with the things which are said for 'simple forms', etc.

It is obvious that the elements of a given framework (and this includes the
constituents of construct contexts) are not at all bound to an eleminative
specifying system. There is a case for a new type of element specification (which
might go towards ameliorating the problematic character of external questions)
which does not presuppose a certain ontological or physical status (depending
on the context) for it to come-up for the count. This is perhaps to look at
the syntagmatic and syntactical aspects of internal questions (certainly in the



862 Institutions and Objections

theoretical situation), viz. the introduction of certain terms, and the rejection
of certain questions which, with respect to the framework itself, are devoid of
cognitive content. And this, synallagmatically related to the internal introduction
of new descriptive terms, etc. which provide an appropriate and consistent
non-eliminative context for nomological implication (say) to get pulled out. (If
one talked of new 'specifications' there would be no hint of 'additional ele-
ments'.) A reassertion is that the acceptance of a framework is not an invitation
to ask outside questions. [ . . . ]

One point is that this approach, falling into a methodological framework,
offers one a purchase on various assertions of material implication, irrespective
of the mode in which this or that assertion might find its range of application
and irrespective of its structural or theoretical position, etc. Certainly, in much
work which purports to be theoretical, there is a failure to analyse the meanings
of nomological (implications) conditionals (i.e. those conditionals which express
causal connection). (And all this is in the connection of inside questions.) The
framework might be a lot more catholic than it looks. [. . .]
* * *

The characteristic 'perusal situation 1 , together with its analytically explicated
notions of 'proximity 1 , 'remoteness 1 and 'visibility', 'identify-ability,' etc. (and
'operational 1 definition) is one where assertive objects and eccentric detail can
only be shouted down with contrasting rhapsodies and requirements, or with
partial 'paradigms' of alternatives ('smooth' places, etc.). A mode which takes
a far less catholic view of these notions and concepts is just as well qualified
to come up for the count.

The question could be asked whether or not the entities one is considering
are theoretical ones (about which only internal questions are to be asked - as
they may be in the theoretical framework). Certainly, so far as the tenets of the
perusal situation are concerned. The point is that external questions are of little
cognitive value.

It seems wrong that all the entities which are to come up for the count should
be 'translatable' into the 'perusal situation' (i.e. the direct 'observation' situ-
ation). It is not for us to decide whether or not this or that thing is 'operationally
respectable 1 . (From now on, the strict phenomenalist is going to object that we
are dealing with theoretical fictions in those situations where one didn't go
around with instruments, etc. - filling in the referential blanks, so to speak.)
We don't comprehend here any generalized (i.e. with an overall application)
definite rules of construction. Now, forgetting the strong objection that to
predicate 'exists 1 , etc. of anything says nothing, to say that ' ... is a real thing'
isn't the same as saying '. . . . is made of real gold', etc. (This is not to say that
assertions like the former are necessarily legitimate.) Anyway, saying it isn't
much, but it is to deny that a concept which is not 'operationally' defined can
only get justification for being around by being well established in a theory -
there is not only one sort of non-operational concept (i.e. non-perusal concept)
and there is not only one sort of theoretical entity. The concept of a line of
electric force (the term 'force' itself is a metaphorical one (cf. Turbayne, 'The
Myth of Metaphor')) has as much right to come up for the count as any other



VIIb Attitudes to Form 863

(concept) but its status remains different from those concepts which are not
purely fictional (e.g. logical constructions, etc.).

A concept which is different, but not all that different from that of a line of
electric force is that of 'the sensibility of the 60s 1 (it doesn't matter whether or
not one approves of it here) which is just a 'useful' fiction: providing people
with some sort of picture to help them in discerning distribution, etc. of various
constructs, etc.

A conceivably persistent objection that there has so far been no indication
that one is concerned with anything other than 'fictional entities 1 (in so far as
it doesn't seem to matter if that's what they are), whereas paintings, sculptures,
series of numbers, etc. on boards, etc. are 'real 1 things - concrete entities -
offering actual, concrete experiences, etc., can be answered only by the evincing
of at least possible instrumental tests, etc. or by bringing in 'imaginability'
criteria. When a statement is made, to the effect that, say, a sculpture is made
of 'real' gold, or that it's a 'real' solid, etc. there is an implication that it's not
made of an imitation, or that it's not defective in some way, etc. Something
like that can be said of the things in a framework - but not about the things
themselves. It's said of the concept of the thing. The question as to whether
or not one can say that something is 'real' here is not one that comes up
naturally; the circumstances in which the question might arise would be those
in which one is looking for concepts 1 defects (e.g. being fictional).

The objector would just be asserting that these 'things' don't occur in the
series clouds, paintings, bricks, and molecules - the perusal situation.

No one is likely to deny that microscopic particles are acceptable in the
aesthetic domain, no less than bricks, etc., but one might expect some resistance
to the view that things which don't even come within the range of instrumental
operations (or some kind, however gerrymandered, of 'verificationist' theory,
etc.) still qualify for the count. It's no more than a contingent fact that people
are incapable of differentiating between temperatures of, say, 50C and 51C of
the surface of two objects without the use of 'instruments 1 of some sort: it is
maintained here that the 'things 1 which come up for the count ('Air Show 1 -
not 'air-conditioned rooms') get their meanings from the part they play in the
theory: and this is to suggest that there are theoretical reasons why it is pointless
to hope for an entry into the perusal - even 'observational' - situation.
* * *

A question to be asked is, how many axes of interpretation are to be entertained
in this connection? Another is, how far away has one got here from 'frameworks'?
It seems that we don't just have to open-up criteria of 'acceptability'.



2 Robert Smithson (1938-1973) 'A Sedimentation of
the Mind: Earth Projects'

Like his artistic works, Smithson's writings of the later 1960s combine eclecticism,
imaginativeness and irony in their critical address to the categories and protocols of
a more standard Modernist aesthetics. His early 'earth projects' were not simply



864 Institutions and Objections

proposals for forms of site-specific work; more significantly, they were strategic incur-
sions into the no-man's-land between the aesthetic preserves of Modernism and the
disregarded margins of the modern industrial world. In turn r Smithson explored the
natural world as the ground on which the ideological character of our concepts is
revealed. This essay was originally published in Artforum, New York, September 1968;
reprinted in N. Holt (ed.), The Writings of Robert Smithson, New York, 1979, pp. 82-91,
from which the present text is taken. (Smithson refers to texts by T. Smith and Fried
printed in VIa16 and VIIa6 respectively.)

The earth's surface and the figments of the mind have a way of disintegrating
into discrete regions of art. Various agents, both fictional and real, somehow
trade places with each other - one cannot avoid muddy thinking when it comes
to earth projects, or what I will call 'abstract geology.' One's mind and the
earth are in a constant state of erosion, mental rivers wear away abstract banks,
brain waves undermine cliffs of thought, ideas decompose into stones of
unknowing, and conceptual crystallizations break apart into deposits of gritty
reason. Vast moving faculties occur in this geological miasma, and they move
in the most physical way. This movement seems motionless, yet it crushes the
landscape of logic under glacial reveries. This slow flowage makes one conscious
of the turbidity of thinking. Slump, debris slides, avalanches all take place within
the cracking limits of the brain. The entire body is pulled into the cerebral
sediment, where particles and fragments make themselves known as solid
consciousness. A bleached and fractured world surrounds the artist. To organize
this mess of corrosion into patterns, grids, and subdivisions is an esthetic process
that has scarcely been touched. [. . .]

Primary Envelopment

At the low levels of consciousness the artist experiences undifferentiated or
unbounded methods of procedure that break with the focused limits of rational
technique. Here tools are undifferentiated from the material they operate on,
or they seem to sink back into their primordial condition. Robert Morris . . .
sees the paint brush vanish into Pollock's 'stick,' and the stick dissolve into
'poured paint' from a container used by Morris Louis. What then is one to do
with the container} This entropy of technique leaves one with an empty limit,
or no limit at all. All differentiated technology becomes meaningless to the artist
who knows this state. 'What the Nominalists call the grit in the machine,' says
T. E. Hulme in Cinders, 'I call the fundamental element of the machine.' The
rational critic of art cannot risk this abandonment into 'oceanic' undifferentia-
tion, he can only deal with the limits that come after this plunge into such a
world of non-containment.

At this point I must return to what I think is an important issue, namely
Tony Smith's 'car ride' on the 'unfinished turnpike.' 'This drive was a revealing
experience. The road and much of the landscape was artificial, and yet it couldn't
be called a work of art.' ... He is talking about a sensation, not the finished
work of art; this doesn't imply that he is anti-art. Smith is describing the state
of his mind in the 'primary process' of making contact with matter. This process



7



VHb Attitudes to Form 865

is called by Anton Ehrenzweig 'dedifferentiation,' and it involves a suspended
question regarding 'limitlessness' (Freud's notion of the 'oceanic') that goes back
to Civilization and its Discontents. Michael Fried's shock at Smith's experiences
shows that the critic's sense of limit cannot risk the rhythm of dedifferentiation
that swings between 'oceanic' fragmentation and strong determinants. Ehrenz-
weig says that in modern art this rhythm is 'somewhat onesided' - toward the
oceanic. Allan Kaprow's thinking is a good example - 'Most humans, it seems,
still put up fences around their acts and thoughts'. . . . Fried thinks he knows
who has the 'finest' fences around their art. Fried claims he rejects the 'infinite,'
but this is Fried writing in Artforum, February 1967 on Morris Louis, 'The
dazzling blankness of the untouched canvas at once repulses and engulfs the
eye, like an infinite abyss, the abyss that opens up behind the least mark that
we make on a flat surface, or would open up if innumerable conventions both
of art and practical life did not restrict the consequences of our act within
narrow bounds.' The 'innumerable conventions' do not exist for certain artists
who do exist within a physical 'abyss.' Most critics cannot endure the suspension
of boundaries between what Ehrenzweig calls the 'self and the non-self.' They
are apt to dismiss Malevich's Non Objective World as poetic debris, or only refer
to the 'abyss' as a rational metaphor 'within narrow bounds.' The artist who is
physically engulfed tries to give evidence of this experience through a limited
(mapped) revision of the original unbounded state. I agree with Fried that limits
are not part of the primary process that Tony Smith was talking about. There
is different experience before the physical abyss than before the mapped revision.
Nevertheless, the quality of Fried's fear (dread) is high, but his experience of
the abyss is low - a weak metaphor - 'like an infinite abyss.'

The bins or containers of my Non-Sites gather in the fragments that are
experienced in the physical abyss of raw matter. The tools of technology become
a part of the Earth's geology as they sink back into their original state. Machines
like dinosaurs must return to dust or rust. One might say a 'de-architecturing'
takes place before the artist sets his limits outside the studio or the room.



From Steel to Rust

As 'technology' and 'industry' began to become an ideology in the New York
Art World in the late '50s and early '60s, the private studio notions of 'craft'
collapsed. The products of industry and technology began to have an appeal to
the artist who wanted to work like a 'steel welder' or a 'laboratory technician.'
This valuation of the material products of heavy industry, first developed by
David Smith and later by Anthony Caro, led to a fetish for steel and aluminum
as a medium (painted or unpainted). Molded steel and cast aluminum are machine
manufactured, and as a result they bear the stamp of technological ideology. Steel
is a hard, tough metal, suggesting the permanence of technological values. It is
composed of iron alloyed with various small percentages of carbon; steel may be
alloyed with other metals, nickel, chromium, etc., to produce specific properties
such as hardness and resistance to rusting. Yet, the more I think about steel



866 Institutions and Objections

itself, devoid of the technological refinements, the more rust becomes the
fundamental property of steel. Rust itself is a reddish brown or reddish yellow
coating that often appears on 'steel sculpture,' and is caused by oxidation (an
interesting non-technological condition), as during exposure to air or moisture;
it consists almost entirely of ferric oxide, Fe 2 3 and ferric hydroxide, Fe(OH) 3 .
In the technological mind rust evokes a fear of disuse, inactivity, entropy, and
ruin. Why steel is valued over rust is a technological value, not an artistic one.

By excluding technological processes from the making of art, we began to
discover other processes of a more fundamental order. The breakup or frag-
mentation of matter makes one aware of the sub-strata of the Earth before it is
overly refined by industry into sheet metal, extruded I-beams, aluminum
channels, tubes, wire, pipe, cold-rolled steel, iron bars, etc. I have often thought
about non-resistant processes that would involve the actual sedimentation of
matter or what I called 'Pulverizations 1 back in 1966. Oxidation, hydration,
carbonatization, and solution (the major processes of rock and mineral disinte-
gration) are four methods that could be turned toward the making of art. The
smelting process that goes into the making of steel and other alloys separates
'impurities' from an original ore, and extracts metal in order to make a more
'ideal' product. Burnt-out ore or slag-like rust is as basic and primary as the
material smelted from it. Technological ideology has no sense of time other than
its immediate 'supply and demand,' and its laboratories function as blinders to
the rest of the world. Like the refined 'paints' of the studio, the refined 'metals'
of the laboratory exist within an 'ideal system.' Such enclosed 'pure' systems
make it impossible to perceive any other kinds of processes other than the ones
of differentiated technology.

Refinement of matter from one state to another does not mean that so-called
'impurities' of sediment are 'bad' - the earth is built on sedimentation and
disruption. A refinement based on all the matter that has been discarded by the
technological ideal seems to be taking place. The coarse swathes of tar on Tony
Smith's plywood mock-ups are no more or less refined than the burnished or
painted steel of David Smith. Tony Smith's surfaces display more of a sense
of the 'prehistoric world' that is not reduced to ideals and pure gestalts. The
fact remains that the mind and things of certain artists are not 'unities,' but
things in a state of arrested disruption. One might object to 'hollow' volumes
in favor of 'solid materials,' but no materials are solid, they all contain caverns
and fissures. Solids are particles built up around flux, they are objective illusions
supporting grit, a collection of surfaces ready to be cracked. All chaos is put
into the dark inside of the art. By refusing 'technological miracles' the artist
begins to know the corroded moments, the carboniferous states of thought, the
shrinkage of mental mud, in the geologic chaos - in the strata of esthetic
consciousness. The refuse between mind and matter is a mine of information.

The Dislocation of Craft - And Fall of the Studio

Plato's Timaeus shows the demiurge or the artist creating a model order, with
his eyes fixed on a non-visual order of ideas, and seeking to give the purest



VIIb Attitudes to Form 867

representation of them. The 'classical' notion of the artist copying a perfect
mental model has been shown to be an error. The modern artist in his 'studio,'
working out an abstract grammar within the limits of his 'craft,' is trapped in
but another snare. When the fissures between mind and matter multiply into
an infinity of gaps, the studio begins to crumble and fall like The House of
Usher, so that mind and matter get endlessly confounded. Deliverance from the
confines of the studio frees the artist to a degree from the snares of craft and
the bondage of creativity. Such a condition exists without any appeal to 'nature.'
Sadism is the end product of nature, when it is based on the biomorphic order
of rational creation. The artist is fettered by this order, if he believes himself
to be creative, and this allows for his servitude which is designed by the vile
laws of Culture. Our culture has lost its sense of death, so it can kill both
mentally and physically, thinking all the time that it is establishing the most
creative order possible.

The Dying Language

The names of minerals and the minerals themselves do not differ from each
other, because at the bottom of both the material and the print is the beginning
of an abysmal number of fissures. Words and rocks contain a language that
follows a syntax of splits and ruptures. Look at any word long enough and you
will see it open up into a series of faults, into a terrain of particles each
containing its own void. [ . . . ]



The Wreck of Former Boundaries

The strata of the Earth is a jumbled museum. Embedded in the sediment is a
text that contains limits and boundaries which evade the rational order, and
social structures which confine art. In order to read the rocks we must become
conscious of geologic time, and of the layers of prehistoric material that is
entombed in the Earth's crust. When one scans the ruined sites of prehistory
one sees a heap of wrecked maps that upsets our present art historical limits.
A rubble of logic confronts the viewer as he looks into the levels of the
sedimentations. The abstract grids containing the raw matter are observed as
something incomplete, broken and shattered.
* * *



The Value of Time

For too long the artist has been estranged from his own 'time.' Critics, by
focusing on the 'art object,' deprive the artist of any existence in the world of
both mind and matter. The mental process of the artist which takes place in
time is disowned, so that a commodity value can be maintained by a system
independent of the artist. Art, in this sense, is considered 'timeless' or a product
of 'no time at all'; this becomes a convenient way to exploit the artist out of



^f



868 Institutions and Objections

his rightful claim to his temporal processes. The arguments for the contention
that time is unreal is a fiction of language, and not of the material of time or
art. Criticism, dependent on rational illusions, appeals to a society that values
only commodity type art separated from the artist's mind. By separating art
from the 'primary process,' the artist is cheated in more ways than one. Separate
'things,' 'forms,' 'objects,' 'shapes,' etc., with beginnings and endings are mere
convenient fictions: there is only an uncertain disintegrating order that tran-
scends the limits of rational separations. The fictions erected in the eroding
time stream are apt to be swamped at any moment. The brain itself resembles
an eroded rock from which ideas and ideals leak.

[ . . . ] Any critic who devalues the time of the artist is the enemy of art and
the artist. The stronger and clearer the artist's view of time the more he will
resent any slander on this domain. By desecrating this domain, certain critics
defraud the work and mind of the artist. Artists with a weak view of time are
easily deceived by this victimizing kind of criticism, and are seduced into some
trivial history. An artist is enslaved by time, only if the time is controlled by
someone or something other than himself. The deeper an artist sinks into the
time stream the more it becomes oblivion; because of this, he must remain close
to the temporal surfaces. Many would like to forget time altogether, because it
conceals the 'death principle' (every authentic artist knows this). Floating in
this temporal river are the remnants of art history, yet the 'present' cannot
support the cultures of Europe, or even the archaic or primitive civilizations;
it must instead explore the pre- and post-historic mind; it must go into the
places where remote futures meet remote pasts.



3 Robert Morris (b. 1931) 'Notes on Sculpture 4:
Beyond Objects'

Written two years after the third of Morris's 'Notes on Sculpture' (VIIa5), this text marks
a shift in preoccupations in that it theorizes an anti-formal tendency within the American
avant-garde which had its counterparts in England and on the European continent.
Morris's critique of the concept of the finished artistic product may be seen as extending
the critique of relational composition pursued in his and Judd's earlier writings. Here
he pursues the McLuhanite notion that developments in the formal characteristics of
artistic work are connected to broad changes in the nature of perception. What Morris
intends by the practice of art is not a form of craft leading to the production of objects,
but a restless agency in this process of change. First published in Artforum, New York,
April 1969, pp. 50-4 r from which the present text is taken.



II



Then, the field of vision assumes a peculiar structure. In the center there
is the favored object, fixed by our gaze; its form seems clear, perfectly
defined in all its details. Around the object, as far as the limits of the
field of vision, there is a zone we do not look at, but which, nevertheless,



VIIb Attitudes to Form 869

we see with an indirect, vague, inattentive vision ... If it is not something
to which we are accustomed, we cannot say what it is, exactly, that we
see in this indirect vision.

Ortega Y Gasset

Our attempt at focusing must give way to the vacant all-embracing stare.

Anton Ehrenzweig

If one notices one's immediate visual field, what is seen? Neither order nor
disorder. Where does the field terminate? In an indeterminate peripheral zone,
none the less actual or unexperienced for its indeterminacy, that shifts with
each movement of the eyes. What are the contents of any given sector of one's
visual field? A heterogeneous collection of substances and shapes, neither
incomplete nor especially complete (except for the singular totality of figures
or moving things). Some new art now seems to take the conditions of the visual
field itself (figures excluded) and uses these as a structural basis for the art.
Recent past art took the conditions within individual things - specific extension
and shape and wholeness of one material - for the project of reconstituting
objects as art. The difference amounts to a shift from a figure-ground perceptual
set to that of the visual field. Physically, it amounts to a shift from discrete,
homogeneous objects to accumulations of things or stuff, sometimes very
heterogeneous. It is a shift that is on the one hand closer to the phenomenal
fact of seeing the visual field and on the other is allied to the heterogeneous
spread of substances that make up that field. In another era, one might have
said that the difference was between a figurative and landscape mode. Fields of
stuff which have no central contained focus and extend into or beyond the
peripheral vision offer a kind of 'landscape' mode as opposed to a self-contained
type of organization offered by the specific object.

Most of the new work under discussion is still a spread of substances or
things that is clearly marked off from the rest of the environment and there is
not any confusion about where the work stops. In this sense, it is discrete but
not object-like. It is still separate from the environment so in the broadest sense
is figure upon a ground. Except for some outside work which removes even the
frame of the room itself, here the 'figure' is literally the 'ground.' But work
that extends to the peripheral vision cannot be taken in as a distinct whole and
in this way has a different kind of discreteness from objects. The lateral spread
of some of the work subverts either a profile or plan view reading. (In the past
I have spread objects or structures into a 25 to 30 foot square area and the
work was low enough to have little or no profile and no plan view was possible
even when one was in the midst of the work. But in these instances, the
regularity of the shape and homogeneity of the material held the work together
as a single chunk.) Recent work with a marked lateral spread and no regularized
units or symmetrical intervals tends to fracture into a continuity of details. Any
overall wholeness is a secondary feature often established only by the limits of
the room. It is only with this type of recent work that heterogeneity of material



870 Institutions and Objections

has become a possibility again; now any substances or mixtures of substances
and the forms or states these might take - rods, particles, dust, pulpy, wet, dry,
etc., are potentially useable. Previously, it was one or two materials and a single
or repetitive form to contain them. Any more and the work began to engage in
part to part and part to whole relationships. Even so, Minimal art, with two or
three substances, gets caught in plays of relationships between transparencies
and solids, voids and shadows and the parts separate and the work ends in a
kind of demure and unadmitted composition.

Besides lateral spread, mixing of materials, and irregularity of substances, a
reading other than a critical part to part or part to whole is emphasized by the
indeterminate aspect of work which has physically separate parts or is loose or
flexible. Implications of constant change are in such work. Previously, indeter-
minacy was a characteristic of perception in the presence of regularized objects
- i.e., each point of view gave a different reading due to perspective. In the
work in question indeterminacy of arrangement of parts is a literal aspect of
the physical existence of the thing.

The art under discussion relates to a mode of vision which Ehrenzweig terms
variously as scanning, syncretistic, or dedifferentiated - a purposeful detachment
from holistic readings in terms of gestalt-bound forms. This perceptual mode
seeks significant clues out of which wholeness is sensed rather than perceived
as an image and neither randomness, heterogeneity of content, nor indetermin-
ancy are sources of confusion for this mode. It might be said that the work in
question does not so much acknowledge this mode as a way of seeing as it
hypostatizes it into a structural feature of the work itself. By doing this, it has
used a perceptual accomodation to replace specific form or image control and
projection. This is behind the sudden release of materials that are soft or
indeterminate or in pieces which heretofore would not have met the gestalt-
oriented demand for an imagistic whole. It is an example of art's restructuring
of perceptual relevance which subsequently results in an almost effortless release
of a flood of energetic work.



i



III



Yet perception has a history; it changes during our life and even within
a very short span of time; more important, perception has a different
structure on different levels of mental life and varies according to the level
which is stimulated at one particular time. Only in our conscious
experience has it the firm and stable structure which the gestalt
psychologists postulated.

Anton Ehrenzweig

. . . catastrophies of the past accompanied by electrical discharges and
followed by radioactivity could have produced sudden and multiple
mutations of the kind achieved today by experimenters . . . The past of
mankind, and of the animal kingdoms, too, must now be viewed in the



VIIb Attitudes to Form 871

light of the experience of Hiroshima and no longer from the portholes of
the Beagle,

Immanuel Velikovsky

Changes in form can be thought of as a vertical scale. When art changes, there
are obvious form changes. Perceptual and structural changes can be thought of
as a horizontal scale, a horizon even. These changes have to go with relevance
rather than forms. And the sense of a new relevance is the aspect that quickly
fades. Once a perceptual change is made, one does not look at it but uses it to
see the world. It is only visible at the point of recognition of the change. After
that, we are changed by it but have also absorbed it. The impossibility of
reclaiming the volitivity of perceptual change leaves art historical explanations
to pick the bones of dead forms. In this sense, all art dies with time and is
impermanent whether it continues to exist as an object or not. A comparison
of '50s and '60s art that throws into relief excessive organic forms opposed to
austere geometric ones can only be a lifeless formal comparison. And the present
moves away from Minimal art are not primarily formal ones. The changes
involve a restructuring of what is relevant.

What was relevant to the '60s was the necessity of reconstituting the object
as art. Objects were an obvious first step away from illusionism, allusion and
metaphor. They are the clearest type of artificial independent entity, obviously
removed and separate from the anthropomorphic. It is not especially surprising
that art driving toward greater concreteness and away from the illusory would
fasten on the essentially idealistic imagery of the geometric. Of all the conceiv-
able or experienceable things, the symmetrical and geometric are most easily
held in the mind as forms. The demand for images that could be mentally
controlled, manipulated, and above all, isolated was on the one hand an esthetic
preconception and on the other a methodological necessity. Objects provided
the imagistic ground out of which '60s art was materialized. And to construct
objects demands preconception of a whole image. Art of the '60s was an art of
depicting images. But depiction as a mode seems primitive because it involves
implicitly asserting forms as being prior to substances. 1 If there is no esthetic
investment in the priority of total images then projection or depiction of form
is not a necessary mode. And if the method of working does not demand
prethought images, then geometry, and consequently objects, is not a preferential
form and certainly not a necessary one to any method except construction.

Certain art is now using as its beginning and as its means, stuff, substances
in many states - from chunks, to particles, to slime, to whatever - and
pre-thought images are neither necessary nor possible. Alongside this approach
is chance, contingency, indeterminacy - in short, the entire area of process.
Ends and means are brought together in a way that never existed before in art.
In a very qualified way, Abstract Expressionism brought the two together. But
with the exception of a few artists, notably Pollock and Louis, the formal
structure of Cubism functioned as an end toward which the activity invariably
converged and in this sense was a separate end, image, or form prior to the
activity. Any activity, with perhaps the exception of unfocused play, projects



872 Institutions and Objections

some more or less specific end and in this sense separates the process from the
achievement. But images need not be identified with ends in art. Although
priorities do exist in the work under discussion, they are not preconceived
imagistic ones. The priorities have to do with acknowledging and even predicting
perceptual conditions for the work's existence. Such conditions are neither forms
nor ends nor part of the process. Yet they are priorities and can be intentions.
The work . . . involves itself with these considerations - that which is studio-
produced as well as that which deals with existing exterior zones of the world.
The total separation of ends and means in the production of objects, as well as
the concern to make manifest idealized mental images, throws extreme doubt
on the claim that the Pragmatic attitude informs Minimal art of the '60s. To
begin with the concrete physicality of matter rather than images allows for a
change in the entire profile of three-dimensional art: from particular forms, to
ways of ordering, to methods of production and, finally, to perceptual relevance.

So far all art has made manifest images whether it arrived at them (as the
art in question) or began with them. The open, lateral, random aspect of the
present work does in fact provide a general sort of image. Even more than this,
it recalls an aspect of Pollock's imagery by these characteristics. Elsewhere I
have made mention of methodological ties to Pollock through emphasis in the
work on gravity and a direct use of materials. But to identify its resultant 'field'
aspect very closely with Pollock's work is to focus on too narrow a formalistic
reading. Similar claims were made when Minimal art was identified with the
forms found in previous Constructivism.

One aspect of the work worth mentioning is the implied attack on the iconic
character of how art has always existed. In a broad sense art has always been
an object, static and final, even though structurally it may have been a depiction
or existed as a fragment. What is being attacked, however, is something more
than art as icon. Under attack is the rationalistic notion that art is a form of
work that results in a finished product. Duchamp, of course, attacked the
Marxist notion that labour was an index of value, but Readymades are tradi-
tionally iconic art objects. What art now has in its hands is mutable stuff which
need not arrive at the point of being finalized with respect to either time or
space. The notion that work is an irreversible process ending in a static
icon-object no longer has much relevance.

The detachment of art's energy from the craft of tedious object production
has further implications. This reclamation of process refocuses art as an energy
driving to change perception. (From such a point of view the concern with
'quality' in art can only be another form of consumer research - a conservative
concern involved with comparisons between static, similar objects within closed
sets.) The attention given to both matter and its inseparableness from the process
of change is not an emphasis on the phenomenon of means. What is revealed
is that art itself is an activity of change, of disorientation and shift, of violent
discontinuity and mutability, of the willingness for confusion even in the service
of discovering new perceptual modes.

At the present time the culture is engaged in the hostile and deadly act of
immediate acceptance of all new perceptual art moves, absorbing through



VIIb Attitudes to Form 873

institutionalized recognition every art act. The work discussed has not been
excepted.

1 This reflects a certain cultural experience as much as a philosophic or artistic assertion. An
advanced technological, urban environment is a totally manufactured one. Interaction with the
environment tends more and more toward information processing in one form or another and
away from interactions involving transformations of matter. The very means and visibility for
material transformations become more remote and recondite. Centers for production are increas-
ingly located outside the urban environment in what are euphemistically termed 'industrial parks.'
In these grim, remote areas the objects of daily use are produced by increasingly obscure processes
and the matter transformed is increasingly synthetic and unidentifiable. As a consequence our
immediate surroundings tend to be read as 'forms' that have been punched out of unidentifiable,
indestructible plastic or unfamiliar metal alloys. It is interesting to note that in an urban
environment construction sites become small theatrical arenas, the only places where raw
substances and processes of its transformation are visible and the only places where random
distributions are tolerated.



4 Art & Language (Terry Atkinson b. 1939)
Editorial introduction to Art-Language

The first issue of the journal Art-Language was published in Coventry in May 1969, with
Atkinson, Bainbridge, Baldwin and Hurrell listed as editors. Besides writings by the
editors there were contributions from the Americans LeWitt, Weiner and Dan Graham.
The unsigned introduction was written principally by Atkinson. It may be noted that
where Kosuth proposes a new tradition initiated by Duchamp's readymades (VIIaIO),
the position of Art & Language is that what is primarily at issue in Conceptual Art is
rather the nature of 'artwork' than the condition of the 'art-object'.

[. . .] Suppose the folio wing hypothesis is advanced: that this editorial, in itself
an attempt to evince some outlines as to what 'conceptual art' is, is held out
as a 'conceptual art' work. At first glance this seems to be a parallel case to
many past situations within the determined limits of visual art, for example the
first Cubist painting might be said to have attempted to evince some outlines
as to what visual art is, whilst, obviously, being held out as a work of visual
art. But the difference here is one of what shall be called 'the form of the work.'
Initially what conceptual art seems to be doing is questioning the condition that
seems to rigidly govern the form of visual art - that visual art remains visual.
During the past two years, a number of artists have developed projects and
theses, the earliest of which were initially housed pretty solidly within the
established constructs of visual art. Many of these projects, etc., have evolved
in such a manner that their relationship to visual art conventions has become
increasingly tenuous. The later projects particularly are represented through
objects, the visual form of which is governed by the form of the conventional
signs of written language (in this case English). The content of the artist's idea
is expressed through the semantic qualities of the written language. As such,
many people would judge that this tendency is better described by the category
name 'art theory' or 'art criticism'; there can be little doubt that works of



874 Institutions and Objections

'conceptual art' can be seen to include both the periphery of art criticism and
of art theory, and this tendency may well be amplified. With regard to this
particular point, criteria bearing upon the chronology of art theory may have
to be more severely and stringently accounted for, particularly in terms of
evolutionary analogies. For example the question is not simply: 'Are works of
art theory part of the kit of the conceptual artist, and as such can such a work,
when advanced by a conceptual artist, come up for the count as a work of
conceptual art?' But also: 'Are past works of art theory now to be counted as
works of conceptual art?' What has to be considered here is the intention of
the conceptual artist. It is very doubtful whether an art theoretician could have
advanced one of his works as a work of 'conceptual art' in (say) 1964, as the
first rudiments of at least an embryonic awareness of the notion of 'conceptual
art' were not evident until 1966. The intention of the 'conceptual artist' has
been separated off from that of the art theoretician because of their previously
different relationships and standpoints toward art, that is, the nature of their
involvement in it.

If the question is formed the other way round, that is, not as 'Does art theory
come up for the count as a possible sector of "conceptual art"?' but as, 'Does
"conceptual" art come up for the count as a possible sector of art theory?' then
a rather vaguely defined category is being advanced as a possible member of a
more established one. Perhaps some qualification can be made for such an
assertion. The development of some work by certain artists both in Britain and
the USA does not, if their intentions are to be taken into account, simply mean
a matter of a transfer of function from that of artist to that of art theoretician,
it has necessarily involved the intention of the artist to count various theoretical
constructs as artworks. This has contingently meant, either (1) If they are to
be 'left alone' as separate, then redefining carefully the definitions of both art
and art theory, in order to assign more clearly what kind of entity belongs to
which category. If this is taken up it usually means that the definition of art is
expanded, and art theoreticians then discuss the consequences and possibilities
of the new definitions, the traditional format of the art theoretician discussing
what the artist has implied, entailed, etc., by his 'creative act.' Or (2) To allow
the peripheral area between the two categories some latitude of interpretation
and consequently account the category 'art theory' a category that the category
'art' might expand to include. The category 'maker of visual art' has been
traditionally regarded as solely the domain of the visual-art object producer (i.e.,
the visual-art artist). There has been a hierarchy of languages headed by the
'direct readout from the object' language, which has served as the creative core,
and then various support languages acting as explicative and elucidatory tools
to the central creative core. The initial language has been what is called 'visual,'
the support languages have taken on what shall be called here 'conventional
written sign' language-form. What is surprising is that although the central core
has been seen to be an ever evolving language, no account up to the present
seems to have taken up the possibility of this central core evolving to include
and assimilate one or other or all of the support languages. It is through the
nature of the evolution of the works of "conceptual art" that the implicated



VIIb Attitudes to Form 875

artists have been obliged to take account of this possibility. Hence these artists
do not see the appropriateness of the label 'art theoretician' necessarily elimi-
nating the appropriateness of the label 'artist.' Inside the framework of 'con-
ceptual art' the making of art and the making of a certain kind of art theory
are often the same procedure.

Within a context such as this the initial question can be posed with a view
to a more specific inquiry. The question: 'Can this editorial, in itself an attempt
to evince some outlines as to what "conceptual art" is, come up for the count
as a work of conceptual art?' Firstly, the established notions of what the
presentation of art and the procedures of art-making entail have to be surveyed.
The question 'Can this editorial come up for the count as a work of art within
a developed framework of the visual art convention?' can only be answered
providing some thorough account is given of what is meant by 'developed' here.
At the present we do not, as a norm, expect to find works of visual art in
magazines, we expect critical, historical, etc., comment upon them, photographic
reproductions, etc. The structures of the identity of art-objects have consecu-
tively been placed under stress by each new movement in art, and the succession
of new movements has become more rapid this century. In view of this
phenomenon perhaps the above question can be altered to: 'Can this editorial
come up for the count as a member of the extended class "visual artwork"?'
Here 'extended' replaces 'developed' and can, perhaps, be made to point out
the problem as follows:

Suppose an artist exhibits an essay in an art exhibition (the way a print might
be exhibited). The pages are simply laid out flat in reading order behind glass
within a frame. The spectator is intended to read the essay 'straight,' like a
notice might be read, but because the essay is mounted in an art ambience it
is implied that the object (paper with print upon it) carries conventional visual
art content. The spectator being puzzled at not really being able to grasp any
direct visual-art-readout meaning starts to read it (as a notice might be read).
It goes as follows:

'On why this is an essay'

The appearance of this essay is unimportant in any strong sense of visual-art
appearance criteria. The prime requirement in regard to this essay's appearance
is that it is reasonably legible. Any decisions apart from this have been taken
with a view to what it should not look like as a point of emphasis over what
it should look like. These secondary decisions are aimed at eliminating as many
appearance similarities to established art-objects as possible.

Thus if the essay is to be evaluated in terms of the content expressed in the
writing (WHICH IT IS), then in an obvious established sense many people
would say that if it has a connection with art at all, that it fits better into the
category 'art criticism' or 'art theory.' Such a statement at least admits the
observation that when an artist uses '(a piece of) writing' in this context then
he is not using such an object in the way that art audiences are accustomed to
it being used. But further it admits of a rather more bigoted view, that is this



876 Institutions and Objections

essay belongs more to art criticism or art theory because it is formed of writing
and in this sense it looks more like art criticism or art theory than it looks like
art; that is, that this object (a piece of writing) does not have sufficient
appearance criteria to be identified as a member of the class 'art-object' - it
does not look like art. This observation has a strong assumption behind it that
the making of a traditional art-object (i.e., one to be judged within the visual
evaluative framework) is a necessary condition for the making of art. Suppose
there are some areas (say) pertaining to art at present which are of such a nature
that they need not, maybe cannot, any longer meet the requirements that have
previously been required as a necessary mode of an object coming up for the
count as a member of the class 'artwork.' This necessary mode is formulated
as follows (say): the recognition of art in the object is through some aspect(s)
of the visual qualities of the object as they are directly perceived.

The question of 'recognition' is a crucial one here. There has been a constantly
developing series of methods throughout the evolution of the art whereby the
artist has attempted to construct various devices to ensure that his intention to
count the object as an art-object is recognized. This has not always been 'given'
within the object itself. The more recently established ones have not necessarily,
and justifiably so, meant the obsolescence of the older methods. A brief account
of this series may help to illuminate matters further.

1 To construct an object possessing all the morphological characteristics
already established as necessary to an object in order that it can count as an
artwork. This would of course assume that such established categories (e.g.,
painting, sculpture) had already evolved through a period in which the relevant
rules and axioms had initially to be developed.

2 To add new morphological characteristics to the older established ones
within the framework of one object (e.g., as with the advent of the technique
of collage), where certain of the morphological characteristics of the object could
be recognized as the type criterion for assigning the objects of the category
'painting' and other (newer) ones grafted onto them could not be so easily placed
(e.g., in the introduction of Cubist collages and the collages made by Schwitters).

[...]

3 To place an object in a context where the attention of any spectator will
be conditioned toward the expectancy of recognizing art-objects. For example
placing what up to then had been an object of alien visual characteristics to
those expected within the framework of an art ambience, or by virtue of the
artist declaring the object to be an art-object whether or not it was within an
art ambience. Using these techniques what appeared to be entirely new mor-
phologies were held out to qualify for the status of members of the class
'art-object.' For example Duchamp's 'Ready-mades' and Rauschenberg's Portrait
of Iris Clert. There is some considerable overlap here with the type of object
mentioned in No. (2), but here the prime question seems to emphasize even
more whether or not they count as art-objects and less and less whether or not
they are good or bad (art-objects). David Bainbridge's Crane, which shifted
status according to his 'sliding scale' intentions as to where it was placed at
different times, threw up an apparently even thicker blanket of questions



VIIb Attitudes to Form 877

regarding the morphology of art-objects. In contrast to Duchamp's 'Ready-
mades,' which took on art-object status according to Duchamp's act of (say)
purchase (e.g., Bottle Rack) entailing an asymmetrical transfer or rather super-
imposition of the identity 'art-object' onto that of 'bottle rack,' Bainbridge's
Crane sometimes is a member of the class 'art-object and crane' and sometimes
simply is only a member of the class 'crane.' Its qualification as a member of
the class 'art-object' is not conceived as being reliant upon the object's mor-
phological characteristics but on Bainbridge's and Atkinson's list of intentions
acknowledging two kinds of ambience, art and not-an-art ambience. Here the
identity (art-object or crane) is symmetrical. [ . . . ]

4 The concept of using 'declaration' as a technique for making art was used
by Terry Atkinson and Michael Baldwin for purposes of the 'Air-Conditioning
Show' and 'Air Show,' which were formulated in 1967. For example the basic
tenet of the 'Air Show' was a series of assertions concerning a theoretical usage
of a column of air comprising a base of one square mile and of unspecified
distance in the vertical dimension. No particular square mile of the earth's
surface was specified. The concept did not entail any such particularized
location. [. . .]

No. (4) differs from Nos. (1), (2), and (3) in the following way. The first
three methods use a concrete existential object, the latter simply a theoretical
one. This factor of 'use' is important here. The existential object upon which
the 'content' of No. (4) is formulated (i.e., paper with print upon it) is not the
art-object, the art-object is not an object that can be directly perceived, the
'object' component is merely specified. Once having established writing as a
method of specifying points in an inquiry of this kind, there seems no reason
to assume that inquiries pertaining to the art area should necessarily have to
use theoretical objects simply because art in the past has required the presence
of a concrete object before art can be thought of as 'taking place'; having gained
the use of such a wide-ranging instrument as 'straight' writing, then objects,
concrete and theoretical, are only two types of entity that can count, a whole
range of other types of entities become candidates for art usage. Some of the
British artists involved in this area have constructed a number of hypotheses
using entities that might be regarded as alien to art. Most of these inquiries do
not exhibit the framework of the established art-to-object relationship and (if
you like) they are not categorically asserted as members of the class 'art-object,'
nor for that matter is there a categorical assertion that they are art ('work'); but
such a lack of absolute assertion does not prohibit them from being tentatively
asserted as having some important interpellations for the art area.

This concept of presenting an essay in an art gallery, the essay being concerned
with itself in relation to it being in an art gallery, helps fix its meaning. When
it is used as it is in this editorial, then the art gallery component has to be
specified. The art gallery component in the first essay is a concrete entity, the
art gallery component in the second case (here) is a theoretical component, the
concrete component is the words 'in an art gallery.' Lists (1), (2), (3), and (4)
above might be followed by (5), the essay in the gallery, and (6) the essay



878 Institutions and Objections

possessing the paragraph specifying the theoretical art gallery; it is more likely
that the nuances of (5) and (6) could be included in an expanded version of

(4).

The British 'conceptual artists' are still attempting to go into this notion of
the meta-strata of art-language. Duchamp wrote early in the century that he
'wanted to put painting back into the service of the mind.' There are two things
to be especially taken into account here, 'painting' and 'the mind.' Leaving aside
here ontological questions concerning 'the mind/ what the British artists have,
rightly or wrongly, analyzed out and constructed might be summarized in words
something like: 'There is no question of putting painting, sculpture, et al., back
in the service of the mind (because as painting and scultpure it has only served
the mind within the limits of the language of painting and sculpture and the
mind cannot do anything about the limits of painting and sculpture after a
certain physical point, simply because those are the limits of painting and
sculpture). Painting and sculpture have physical limits and the limit of what
can be said in them is finally decided by precisely those physical limits.' Painting
and sculpture, et al., have never been out of the service of the mind, but they
can only serve the mind to the limits of what they are. The British conceptual
artists found at a certain point that the nature of their involvements exceeded
the language limits of the concrete object. Soon after they found the same thing
with regard to theoretical objects. Both put precise limits on what kind of
concepts can be used. There has never been any question of these latter projects
coming up for the count as members of the class 'painting' or the class
'sculpture,' or the class 'art-object,' which envelops the classes 'painting' and
'sculpture.' There is some question of these latter projects coming up for the
count as members of the class 'artwork.'



Something might now be said noting the relationship of the psychology of
perception with regard to 'conceptual art.' It is today widely agreed that the
psychology of perception is of some importance in the study of visual art. The
practice of this study by art theoreticians, for example Ehrenzweig, Arnheim,
etc., has at least clarified some questions within the context of visual 'visual
art,' which have enabled the conceptual artists to say these (such and such)
projects have not such and such characteristics, in this way they have influenced
what the formulative hypotheses of some of conceptual art is not about. Such
concepts as whether art consecrates our ordinary modes of seeing and whether
or not we are able, in the presence of art, to suspend our ordinary habits of
seeing are strongly linked with inquiries into Gestalt hypotheses and other
theories of perception; the limits of visual art are oTten underlined in inquiries
into how we see. The British group have noted particularly and with deep
interest the various Gestalt hypotheses that Robert Morris (for example) had
developed in the notes on his sculpture-objects. These notes seem to have been
developed as a support and an elucidation for Morris' sculpture. The type of
analysis that the British group have spent some considerable time upon is that
concerning the linguistic usage both of plastic art itself and of its support



VIIb Attitudes to Form 879

languages. These theses have tended to use the language form of the support
languages, namely word-language, and not for any arbitrary reason, but for the
reason that this form seems to offer the most penetrating and flexible tool with
regard to some prime problems in art today. Merleau-Ponty is one of the more
recent contributors to a long line of philosophers who have, in various ways,
stressed the role of visual art as a corrective to the abstractness and generality
of conceptual thought - but what is visual art correcting conceptual thought
out of - into? In the final analysis such corrective tendencies may simply turn
out to be no more than a 'what we have we hold' conservatism without any
acknowledgement as to how art can develop. Richard Wollheim has written,
'. . . but it is quite another matter, and one I suggest, beyond the bounds of
sense, even to entertain the idea that a form of art could maintain itself outside
a society of language-users.' I would suggest it is not beyond the bounds of
sense to maintain that an art form can evolve by taking as a point of initial
inquiry the language-use of the art society.



5 Ian Burn (b. 1939) and Mel Ramsden (b. 1944)
'The Role of Language'

Together with Roger Cutforth, Burn and Ramsden formed the Society for Theoretical
Art and Analyses in New York in 1969. Two years later they merged their separate
collaboration with Art & Language. This text argues for the position, shared at the time
with the members of Art & Language in England, that language is the condition of
'seeing' (and not vice versa, as assumed in much modern art theory). The essay was
written in 1969. First published (as September 1968) in G. de Vries (ed.), Uber Kunst/On
Art, Cologne, 1974, pp. 90-4, from which the present text is taken.



It seems, in seeing an object, I can construe (translate) that object within many
seemingly complete 'languages' of perception. Another person seeing the same
object may construe a similar number of 'languages', none of which need
necessarily coincide with mine. If, for instance, we both adopt the same physical
object as 'subject-of-consideration', in what sense can we say we are adopting
the same object? ... If each sets out to define that object by (e.g.) 'content',
then are we in a position to say that what we call 'content' is physically existing
in the object? If not, then such 'content' is merely part of that construal, it is
subject to interpretation, and there is no position from which it can be described
in any objective way. Accepting then that no 'content' exists as a fact, what are
we implying when we say we recognize content? It seems to suggest that we
are dealing with numerous types, perhaps levels or stratifications, of language
which in turn are appropriate for numerous types, again perhaps stratifications,
of (empirical) data. If each thing we make or do is merely a statement within
a particular language, then it is not necessarily related to nor need correspond
to any other language - it can only relate if we have the disposition to impose
a relationship between those languages. It is at this point that a 'content' is
imposed in order to evince that relationship, e.g., we formulate that the 'content'



880 Institutions and Objections

of A is of the kind V, and that the 'content' of B is also of the kind 'x', thus
we can talk of a relationship between A and B. It's not possible to construe one
language into another or to correlate them in any way without intervening such
a 'content'. To say that one language is more or less complete than another is
again to infer that our familiarity with one language is more in one case than
the other. We do not directly identify or recognize, we only recognize the
language(s) which are appropriate for the material. In many instances our
familiarity with a language is so (culturally) inbred that we confuse the language
with a kind of 'reality' or brute facts. In seeing, we typically substitute
an appropriate language for the actual object in order to facilitate our 'seeing'
of it - our language screens the object, it's the grid which structures our
perceiving.

In terms of intention, if one is dealing with an object then one is more strongly
committed to one's attitude of seeing (language) in this particular case than to
any physical attributes. If one can conceptually distinguish that 'language' as a
'thing-in-itself ', one might very well claim certain rights to it, e.g. to 'put a
signature on it', rather than to any physical manifestation. The object then can
be as ordinary or common or accessible as one chooses . . . since that is not what
one is directly committed to - one is not committed to a particular object but
only to the fact of an object being there in order that one can have an attitude
about it, i.e., a particular language of seeing. One's commitment then can lie
in the direction of the language.

It becomes crucial to realize the significance of the ties between the language
we use and what (and how) we see.

It's been pointed out that there is no common noun which is associated with
the verb 'see' in the way that, for example, the noun 'sound' is associated with
the verb 'hear'. Is there then nothing which acts for vision in the way that
sound does when I hear footsteps. ... 'I hear the sound of footsteps', but 'I see
the (what?) of a man'? While it could be merely an accident of vocabulary, it
seems more likely that perception has a different relationship to language than
do any of our other senses. And it may be also that, for those things we do see
(i.e., objects), our language is rich enough that we have no need of any
'intermediary' term to describe what we see (- we can describe more readily
what we see than what we hear, touch, smell, or taste). If this is so, then there
is something in how we describe what we see which needs to be pointed to as
problematic - there is more difficulty in grasping the separation between 'the
seeing of something' and 'what it is that's seen' than there is, for instance,
between 'the sound' and 'the footsteps'. Language seems to enter into our
'seeing' more directly than with the other senses. This could be taken as
implying a stronger (more developed) interdependence between 'perception' and
'language' and so must raise many questions about the kind of relationship which
exists between how we see and how we talk of what we see.

The words which can be used to describe the kinds of 'seeing' are many -
from which it might be taken that there are many possible ways which we
undertake the act of perceiving, that is, again, independent of what is perceived.
For example, 'see', 'look at', 'examine', 'scrutinize', 'gaze', 'discern', 'scan', 'look



VIIb Attitudes to Form 881

for', 'watch', and so on. (Compare how many words we have to describe
'hearing'.)

The distinction between 'task' and 'achievement' verbs is exemplified by
'looking' and 'seeing'. From this it's concluded that 'achievement' verbs (i.e.,
'see') stand not for activities but for the outcome of activities, an outcome which
is a part of a single extended process. But this distinction can be misleading
since 'looking' can be used typically as either 'looking for' or 'looking at'. And,
while 'looking for' certainly does imply some kind of resulting outcome (a
successful or otherwise achievement), there are many typical uses of 'looking
at' which do not imply any such outcome of activities and which seemingly are
identical with (or at least similar to) 'seeing' ( - e.g., *I am looking at this page'
and 'I am seeing this page', whereas 'I am looking for this page' obviously
means something else).

Suppose the distinction is maintained for the 'looking for' kind of 'looking'
and that this process results in the outcome of 'seeing (something)' - I look for
(something) and then I see (that something). But frequently I see things without
looking for them - is this still an achievement verb then even though it is not
the outcome of a preceding activity? If something is within my field of vision,
then it hardly occasions my 'looking for' it before I see it. I may examine or
scrutinize it without necessarily having looked for it in the first place (though
I must have come to see it in some way or other). If I have two reproductions
of a landscape, then I may see a detail in one and look for it in the other; but
seeing it in the second case would seem to depend more on the conditions of
seeing in the first case than on any interim 'looking for'. The 'single continuous
activity' notion doesn't seem to account for very much in that case.

Then, if we must limit the applicability of the distinction to this degree, we
must begin to doubt how useful it can be as an over-all distinction. A problem
arises with all such distinctions when one tries to make them generally applic-
able. Distinctions are applicable (meaningful) in particular contexts and, within
that context, they may have significance (meaningfulness) because they are useful
in some sense. But usefulness in one context does not imply usefulness in any
other; extending a distinction into another context can be simply misleading
without at all being useful.

Thus whatever attitude we have to seeing may depend very much on the
kinds of distinctions we typically use in language, and in fact on the way in
general that we set out to describe our visual experiences. It may mean that,
to establish any new modes or nuances of 'seeing', the mode (or such conditions
as will allow for it) must first be established in an appropriate language.



6 Lawrence Weiner (b. 1940) Statements

A tendency to disparage or to avoid the production of finite artistic objects was one
among the various outcomes of American Minimalism. Weiner occupies a central place
within this specific tendency, if only by virtue of the consistency with which his position
has been maintained. His attitude towards the realization and distribution of his work



882 Institutions and Objections

remains exemplary of the libertarian cultural ethics of the later 1960s. The statement
of 12 October 1969 is based on a conversation with Ursula Meyer and was originally
published in Meyer (ed.), Conceptual Art, New York, 1972, pp. 217-18. The specifica-
tion The artist . . . receivership', cited at the end of the statement, was first published
in the catalogue of 'January 5-31 1969', Seth Siegeiaub, New York, and has since
tended to accompany all publication of Weiner's work. The passage If for to exist . . .
are not' was appended when the specification was reprinted in the catalogue of
'Documenta 5', Kassel, 1972.



I do not mind objects, but I do not care to make them.

The object - by virtue of being a unique commodity - becomes something
that might make it impossible for people to see the art for the forest.

People, buying my stuff, can take it wherever they go and can rebuild it if
they choose. If they keep it in their heads, that's fine too. They don't have to
buy it to have it - they can have it just by knowing it. Anyone making a
reproduction of my art is making art just as valid as art as if I had made it.

Industrial and socioeconomic machinery pollutes the environment and the day
the artist feels obligated to muck it up further art should cease being made. If
you can't make art without making a permanent imprint on the physical aspects
of the world, then maybe art is not worth making. In this sense, any permanent
damage to ecological factors in nature not necessary for the furtherance of human
existence, but only necessary for the illustration of an art concept, is a crime
against humanity. For art being made by artists for other human beings should
never be utilized against human beings, unless the artist is willing to renounce
his position as an artist and take on the position of a god. Being an artist means
doing a minimum of harm to other human beings.

Big egocentric expensive works become very imposing. You can't put twenty-
four tons of steel in the closet.

If art has a general aspect to it and if someone receives a work in 1968 and
chooses to have it built, then either tires of looking at it or needs the space for
a new television set, he can erase it. If - in 1975 - he chooses to have it built
again - he has a piece of 1975 art. As materials change, the person who may
think about the art, as well as the person who has it built, approach the material
itself in a contemporary sense and help to negate the preciousness of 1968
materials ... I personally am more interested in the idea of the material than
in the material itself.

Art that imposes conditions - human or otherwise - on the receiver for its
appreciation in my eyes constitutes aesthetic fascism.

My own art never gives directions, only states the work as an accomplished
fact.

1 The artist may construct the work

2 The work may be fabricated

3 The work need not to be built

Each being equal and consistent with the intent of the artist the decision as to
condition rests with the receiver upon the occasion of receivership



VHb Attitudes to Form 883



If for to exist within a cultural context

1 An art may be constructed by an artist

2 An art may be fabricated

3 An art need not to be built

A reasonable assumption would be

that all are equal and consistent with the condition of art

and the relevant decisions as to condition

upon receivership are not



7 Victor Burgin (b. 1941) 'Situational Aesthetics'

Burgin was exposed to the ideas of Judd and Morris while studying in America. Returning
to London in 1969 he was to be a central figure in the development of Conceptual Art
in England. The present essay proposes that the concepts of artistic object and artistic
form should be dissociated from the world of manufactured things and redefined in
terms of the structures of psychological experience. Burgin's contemporary work was
intended to give practical effect to this proposal. Like many others at the time, the
author associates an avant-garde laterally proliferating complex of activities' with a
counter-conservative critique of institutions. Originally published in Studio International,
vol. 178, no. 915, October 1969, pp. 118-21, from which the present version is taken.



Some recent art, evolving through attention both to the conditions under which
objects are perceived and to the processes by which aesthetic status is attributed
to certain of these, has tended to take its essential form in message rather than
in materials. In its logical extremity this tendency has resulted in a placing of
art entirely within the linguistic infrastructure which previously served merely
to support art. In its less hermetic manifestations art as message, as 'softwear 7 ,
consists of sets of conditions, more or less closely defined, according to which
particular concepts may be demonstrated. This is to say, aesthetic systems are
designed, capable of generating objects, rather than individual objects them-
selves. Two consequences of this work process are: the specific nature of any
object formed is largely contingent upon the details of the situation for which
it is designed; through attention to time, objects formed are intentionally located
partly in real, exterior, space and partly in psychological, interior, space.
* * *

Accepting the shifting and ephemeral nature of perceptual experience, and if
we accept that both real and conceptual objects are appreciated in an analogous
manner, then it becomes reasonable to posit aesthetic objects which are located
partly in real space and partly in psychological space. Such a placing of aesthetic
objects however involves both a revised attitude towards materials and a reversal
of function between these materials and their context.

Cage is hopeful in claiming, 4 We are getting rid of ownership, substituting
use'; attitudes towards materials in art are still informed largely by the laws of
conspicuous consumption, and aesthetic commodity hardwear continues to pile



884 Institutions and Objections



while utilitarian objects, whose beauty might once have been taken as conclusive
proof of the existence of God, spill in inconceivable profusion from the
cybernated cornucopias of industry. Each day we face the intractability of
materials which have outstayed their welcome. Many recent attitudes to materials
in art are based in an emerging awareness of the interdependence of all
substances within the ecosystem of earth. The artist is liable to see himself not
as a creator of new material forms but rather as a coordinator of existing forms,
and may therefore choose to subtract materials from the environment. As art is
being seen increasingly in terms of behaviour so materials are being seen in
terms simply of quantity rather than of quality. [. . .]

Once materials are selected according to largely fortuitous criteria, depending
on their location, their individual status is diminished. The identification of art
relies upon the recognition of cues which signal that the type of behaviour
termed aesthetic appreciation is to be adopted. These cues help form a context
which reveals the art object. The object itself, in being displayed, may be termed
overt and in the case of the visual arts it has been predominantly substantial.
Any attempt to make an 'object' of non-overt and insubstantial conceptual forms
demands that substantial materials located in exterior space-time be used in a
manner which subverts their 'objectness' in order to identify them as 'situational
cues'.

Perceptual fields are not experienced as objects in themselves. Perception is
a continuum, a precipitation of event fragments decaying in time, above all a
process. An object analogue may, however, be posited by locating points within
the perceptual continuum. Two rope triangles placed in Greenwich park earlier
this year represent an attempt to 'parenthesize' a section of perceptual experience
in time. General instructions for this work are:

1 Two units co-exist in time.

2 Spatial separation is such that units may not simultaneously be directly
perceived.

3 Units isomorphic to degree that encounter with second is likely to evoke
recollection of first.

By the above definition the units may be said to bracket the perceptual data
subjectively experienced between them. The 'object', therefore may be defined
as consisting of three elements: First unit. Recollection of intervening space-
time. Second unit. [. . .]

Visual information concerning duration is gained, as it is gained when we
observe motion, from observations of shift in perceptual field. In travelling past
an object we are presented with an apparent configurational evolution from
which we may abstract a number of discrete states. Comparison of expired
configurations with the configuration of the moment tells us we are in motion
relative to the object. An exercise of a similar nature is involved when we
observe change in a place to which we have returned after an absence, we com-
pare and contrast past and present configurations, or more accurately, we
superimpose a memorized configuration upon a configuration present to the
retina. Pragmatically, within this complex of shifting appearances, we have



VIIb Attitudes to Form 885

workable systems of establishing space-time coordinates for navigation and
prediction, but true locations exist only in the abstract as points of zero
dimensions. Locations such as those given by the National Grid are fixed by
definition, but the actual spaces to which they refer are in continual flux and
so impossible to separate from time.

Time, in the perception of exterior events, is the observation of succession
linked with muscular-navigational memories - a visceral identification with
change. Similarly kinaesthetic modes of appreciation are applied to the subjective
transformation of these events in interior time and in recollection. All behaviour
has these space-time parameters in common. To distinguish, therefore, between
'arts of space' and 'arts of time' is literally unrealistic. The misconception is
based in materialism, it springs, again, from a focus upon the object rather than
upon the behaviour of the perceiver. Theatre and cinema are not arts of 'time'
but arts of theatrical and cinematic time, governed by their own conventions and
the limitations of their hardware. The Parthenon is not 'timeless' but, simply,
set in geological time. It is a mistake to refer to 'time' as if it were singular and
absolute. A full definition of the term would require a plurality of times and
would accomodate such contrasting scales as the times of galaxies and of viruses.
The current occupation with time and ecology, the consciousness of process, is
necessarily counter-conservative. Permanence is revealed as being a relationship
and not an attribute. Vertical structuring, based in hermetic, historically given
concepts of art and its cultural role, has given way to a laterally proliferating
complex of activities which are united only in their common definition as
products of artistic behaviour. This situation in art is the corollary of a general
reduction in the credibility of institutions and many find much recent art
implicitly political. One may disagree, however, with those who would locate
motivations in as doctrinaire an attitude as 'Disgust with the decadence of
Western civilization'.

Art intended as propaganda is almost invariably both aesthetically tedious and
politically impotent. The process-oriented attitudes described here are not
intentionally iconoclastic and one should be suspicious of easy comparisons with
Dada. It does not follow, because some institutions have been ignored, that they
are under attack. It seems rather less likely that the new work will result in the
overthrow of the economy than that it will find a new relationship with it; one
based, perhaps, in the assumption that art is justified as an activity and not
merely as a means of providing supplementary evidence of pecuniary reputability.
As Brecht observed, we are used to judging a work by its suitability for the
apparatus. Perhaps it is time to judge the apparatus by its suitability for the work.



John A. Murphy (b. 1929) Sponsor's Statement for
l When Attitudes become Form'



From 22 March to 27 April 1969, the exhibition 'When Attitudes become Form; Works
- Concepts - Processes - Situations - Information' was staged at the Kunsthalle, Berne,
transferring in revised form to the Institute of Contemporary Arts, London, from 28



886 Institutions and Objections

September-27 October 1969. It provided a substantial international survey of those
avant-garde tendencies of the later 1960s which, for all their heterogeneity, were united
both by their distance from the standard Modernist paradigms of painting and sculpture,
and by their variable but oft-rehearsed proximity to the radical temper of the times. The
exhibition was sponsored by Philip Morris Europe. The present statement by the
president of the company was printed in the catalogue for the London showing.

The works assembled for this exhibit have been grouped by many observers of
the art scene under the heading 'new art'. We at Philip Morris feel it is
appropriate that we participate in bringing these works to the attention of the
public, for there is a key element in this 'new art' which has its counterpart in
the business world. That element is innovation - without which it would be
impossible for progress to be made in any segment of society.

Just as the artist endeavours to improve his interpretation and conceptions
through innovation, the commercial entity strives to improve its end product
or service through experimentation with new methods and materials. Our
constant search for a new and better way in which to perform and produce is
akin to the questionings of the artists whose works are represented here.

For a number of years, we have been involved in sponsorship of the arts in
its many diverse forms - through purchase of works, commissioning of young
artists, presentation of major exhibits, and so forth.

These activities are not adjuncts to our commercial function, but rather an
integral part. As businessmen in tune with our times, we at Philip Morris are
committed to support the experimental. We hope that those who attend this
exhibit will be as stimulated while viewing it as we have been during its
preparation.



9 Germano Celant (b. 1940) from Art Povera

Arte Povera (Poor Art) was a specifically Italian variant of the anti-formal and putatively
libertarian tendencies which mushroomed in the later 1960s. Among the artists involved
were Giovanni Anselmo, Alighiero Boetti, Jannis Kounellis, Mario Merz, Michelangelo
Pistoletto, Emilio Prini and Gilberto Zorio. Arte Povera was first identified as a distinct
movement through an exhibition in Genoa in 1967. Celant was closely associated as
propagandist and curator. The present text is taken from Celant (ed.), Arte Povera,
Milan, 1969, translated as Art Povera. Conceptual, Actual or Impossible Art?, London,
1969, pp. 225-30.

Animals, vegetables and minerals take part in the world of art. The artist feels
attracted by their physical, chemical and biological possibilities, and he begins
again to feel the need to make things of the world, not only as animated beings,
but as a producer of magic and marvelous deeds. The artist-alchemist organizes
living and vegetable matter into magic things, working to discover the root of
things, in order to re-find them and extol them. His work, however, does include
in its scope the use of the simplest material and natural elements (copper, zinc,
earth, water, rivers, land, snow, fire, grass, air, stone, electricity, uranium, sky,



VIIb Attitudes to Form 887

weight, gravity, height, growth, etc.) for a description or representation of
nature. What interests him instead is the discovery, the exposition, the insur-
rection of the magic and marvelous value of natural elements. Like an organism
of simple structure, the artist mixes himself with the environment, camouflages
himself, he enlarges his threshold of things. What the artist comes in contact
with is not re-elaborated; he does not express a judgement on it, he does not
seek a moral or social judgement, he does not manipulate it. He leaves it
uncovered and striking, he draws from the substance of the natural event - that
of the growth of a plant, the chemical reaction of a mineral, the movement of
a river, of snow, grass and land, the fall of a weight - he identifies with them
in order to live the marvelous organization of living things.

Among living things he discovers also himself, his body, his memory, his
gestures - all that which directly lives and thus begins again to carry out the
sense of life and of nature, a sense that implies, according to Dewey, numerous
subjects: the sensory, sensational, sensitive, impressionable and sensuous. [. . .]

He abolishes his role of being an artist, intellectual, painter or writer and
learns again to perceive, to feel, to breathe, to walk, to understand, to make
himself a man. Naturally, to learn to move oneself, and to re-find one's own
existence does not mean to admire or to recite, to perform new movements, but
to make up continuously mouldable material.

What follows is: impossibility to believe in discussion for imagery, in the
communication of new explanatory and didactic information, in the structure
that imposes regularity, behaviour, synthesis that leans upon a moralistic,
industrial subject; estrangement, therefore, from the existing archetype and
continuous renewal of himself; total aversion for discussion and aspiration
towards continuity, towards aphasia, towards immobility, for a progressive
identification of consciousness and praxis. The first discoveries of this dispos-
session are the finite and infinite moments of life; the work of art and work
that identifies itself with life; the dimension of life as lasting without end;
immobility as a possibility of leaving contingent circumstances in order to plunge
into time; the explosion of the individual dimension as an aesthetic and feeling
communion with nature; unconsciousness as a method of consciousness of the
world; the search of psycho-physical disturbances plurally sensitive and steadfast;
the loss of identity with himself, for an abandonment of reassuring recognition
that is continually imposed upon him by others and by the social system; the
object-subject as physical presence continuously changing, as a trial of existence
that becomes continuous, chaotic, spatial and differs temporally. 'Art comes',
states Cage, 'from a kind of experimental condition in which one experiments
with living'. To create art, then, one identifies with life and to exist takes on
the meaning of re-inventing at every moment a new fantasy, pattern of beha-
viour, aestheticism, etc. of one's own life. What is important is not to justify
it or to reflect it in the work or in the product, but to live it as work. [ . . . ]

Thus, art begins creating to place itself as a possibility in material (vegetable,
animal, mineral and mental); its own dimension that identifies itself with
knowledge and perception, becomes 'living in art', that fantastic existence
continually at variance with daily reality that opposes the building of art, that



888 Institutions and Objections

resulting from the place of art - from visual research to pop art, from minimal
to funk art. A work of art - that of pop, op, minimal and funk artists - that
is ready not for an intervention but for an interpretation of reality, a discussion
on the images that tend towards a clarification and a criticism of the methods
of communication (comic books, photographs, mass-media, technologically pro-
duced objects, micro-perceptive structures, etc.). To create art as a critic of
popular and optical images that collaborate for the clarification of the social
system, but block the crushing energy of life, nature, the world of things and
do away with the sensory significance of any kind of work; to create as an
intervention that is carried out by means of the intellectual scheme of critical-
historical literature, photographic advertising, imaginary, objective means, struc-
turally psychological, perceptive, in order to domesticate in prefixed schemes
the vitality of real daily life; to create art that moves itself within the linguistic
systems in order to remain language, an act to live by means of continual
isolation; to create art as cultural kleptomania that lives on the assumption of
the destructive charges of other languages (politics, sociology and technology);
finally to create art as a separate language that speculates on codes and on
instruments of communication in order to live in a dimension of exclusiveness
and recognition that makes it an aristocratic and class question, an action that
scratches at the whole of the superstructure without blunting the natural
structure of the world.

On the other hand, the asystematic procedure of life that becomes contem-
poraneously, time, experience, love, art, work, politics, thought, action, science,
daily living - poor in choices and assumptions - if not contingent and necessary;
a life as an expression of creative existence, working, mental politics. There it
creates work, art, thought, love, politics and complex living that lets itself be
used by the connexions of the system; here a living in work, in art, in thought,
in politics deprived of recognizable, disoriented, infinite, undiscussible con-
stancy, given the uncertainty of the evolutionary cycle of daily reality. To live
in work, in art, in politics, in science as a free design of itself, tying itself to
the rhythm of life for an exhaustion, immediate and contingent, of real life in
action, in facts and in thought.

In the first case, being, living, working makes art and politics 'rich', inter-
rupting the chain of the causal in order to maintain in life the manipulation of
the world, an attempt to conserve also 'the man well endowed when faced with
nature'; in the second case, life, work, art, politics, behaviour, thought 'poveri',
employed in the inseparableness of experience and consciousness with the
political and mental event, with contingency, with the infinite, with the ahis-
torical, with the chain of individual and social motivation, with man, with
environment, with space, with time, with the social situation . . . The declared
intention of doing away with every discussion, misunderstanding and coherence
(coherence is in fact a characteristic of concatenation of the system), the need
of feeling life continually going on, the necessity, dictated by nature itself, to
advance at jumps, without having to collect with exactness the confines that
govern modifications. Yesterday, therefore, life, art, existence, manifestation of
oneself, manipulation, political beings, involved because based on a scientific



VIIb Attitudes to Form 889

and technological imagination, on the highly specialized superstructure of com-
munication, on marked moments; a life, an art, a manifestation in itself, a
manipulation, categorical and class-conscious, that - separating itself from the
real, as speculative actions - isolates artistic, political and behavioural art with
the aim of placing it in a competitive position with life: a life, an art, a policy,
a manifestation of itself, a metamorphic manipulation, that through agglomera-
tion and collation, reduces reality to fantasy; a life, an art, a behaviour, a
manipulation, frustrated - as a receptacle of all of the real and intellectual
impotence of daily life - a life, an art, a moralistic policy, in which judgement
is contradictory, imitating and passing the real, to the real itself, with a
transgression of the intellectual aspect in that which is really needed. Today,
in life or art or politics one finds in the anarchy and in the continuousness of
nomadic behaviour, the greatest level of liberty for a vital and fantastic express-
ion; life or art or politics, as a stimulus to verify continuously its own level of
mental and physical existence, as urgency of a presence that eliminates the
manipulation of life, in order to bring about again the individuality of every
human and natural action; an innocent art, or a marvelousness of life, more
political spontaneity since it precedes knowledge, reasoning, culture, not justi-
fying itself, but lives in the continuous enchantment or horror of daily reality
- a daily reality that is more like stupefying, horrible poetic entity, like changing
physical presence, and never allusive to alienation.

Thus, art, life, politics 'poveri' are not apparent or theoretical, they do not
believe in 'putting themselves on show', they do not abandon themselves in
their definition, not believing in art, life, politics 'poveri', they do not have as
an objective the process of the representation of life; they want only to feel,
know, perform that which is real, understanding that what is important is not
life, work, action, but the condition in which life, work and action develop
themselves.

It is a moment that tends towards deculturization, regression, primitiveness
and repression, towards the pre-logical and pre-iconographic stage, towards
elementary and spontaneous politics, a tendency towards the basic element in
nature (land, sea, snow, minerals, heat, animals) and in life (body, memory,
thought), and in behaviour (family, spontaneous action, class struggle, violence,
environment).

The reality, in which one participates every day, is in its dull absurdity a
political deed. It is more real than any intellectually recognizable element. Thus,
art, politics and life 'poveri', as reality do not send back or postpone, but they
offer themselves as self representatives, presenting themselves in the state of
essence.



10 Joseph Beuys (1921-1986) 'Not Just a Few Are
Called, But Everyone'

Beuys's thought can be related to a tradition of social idealism wherein it is not the
business of the artist to function politically in any material or organizational sense to



890 Institutions and Objections

bring about change in the world, but to do so through the example of his art. He was
the most prominent European member of the Fluxus movement during the early 1960s
- one of various tendencies which sought to merge art and life in the face of more
strictly Modernist attempts to legislate their separation. He was Professor of Sculpture
at the Kunstakademie in Dusseldorf from 1961 until 1972, when he was dismissed
following his attempt to implement a principle of unrestricted admission. Through his
work and his example he shaped a distinct German contribution to the broad avant-garde
tendencies of the later 1960s and early 1970s. His ideal of democracy was based on
the presupposition that creative potential is universal. This interview with Georg Jappe
was translated by John Wheelwright; first published in Studio International, vol. 184,
no. 950, London, December 1972, pp. 226-8, from which the present text is taken.'

JB: Things start with answers to questions . . . But since there have been these
large classes I don't carry on individual conversations - in a desperate situation
like that private conversations aren't so effective - so everyone can learn
something from every correction. That way each student learns from others'
problems as well as his own.

GJ: Is that a sort of group therapy?

JB: Yes. Private problems, too - with some exceptions - are publicly discussed.
It is part of group therapy that people should put their private hang-ups into
words, and the questions that have mounted up and whatever anyone has on
their mind. Sometimes it is really like a special school for the handicapped,
developing the most primitive forms; the students bring up the most diverse
things, out of the sculpture, painting and drawing fields. I have no fixed
teaching plan. Everyone must build upon the basis of his own aim and then
express it in a question so that something is cleared up. To begin with I
refuse any pre-ordained theme; everyone must put his own theme forward.
Then the conversation about how this fits in with theoretical principles begins.
[...] I don't believe that an art school, which should stress new artistic
concepts, should lay emphasis on fixed places to work in the school. That
sort of thinking is tied up with the idea of art as a craft, with the work-bench
and the drawing-table. The need for that is only now felt by a few - and
those who want a place to work can still have it - because the majority is
striving for movement and sees the school as a meeting-point. Discussions
can arise spontaneously there, though some are also announced beforehand,
on questions the students themselves have brought up, for example the
question of space, or the difference between concrete plastic art and sculpture.

GJ: What does that distinction mean?

JB: It is often maintained that in my class everything is conceptual or political.
But I put great value on something coming out of it that is sensuously
accessible according to the broad principles of the theory of recognition. [. . .]
Thought and speech should be seen as plastic in the same way that a sculptor
sees a plastic object. My main interest here is to begin with speech and to
let the materialization follow as a composite of thought and action. The most
important thing to me is that man, by virtue of his products, has experience
of how he can contribute to the whole and not only produce articles but
become a sculptor or architect of the whole social organism. The future social



VIIb Attitudes to Form 891

order will take its shape from compatibility with the theoretical principles of
art. Just as a relief must be unravelled and must come to life - because
plasticity feels ill, as I say to my pupils in such cases - so must the
organization of society. My concept of organization is an artistic one insofar
as it must come to fruition according to the laws of organisms and in organic
form. And that is what concrete plastic art does. Sculpture is more abstract,
geometrical, a matter of assembly; concrete plastic art fulfils itself in elemental
organic ways, like animals developing, like blood working its way through the
veins or the moving water of a river. [. . .] Art can be learned, though a
certain talent is a prerequisite, but hard work is part of the process. Art
comes from intelligence, one must have something to say, but on the other
side, that of capability, one must be able to express it. And then sense of
proportion, of mass, of form, and feel for symmetry. Of course this is
subjective, but no judgements can possibly be made outside the terms of
reference of the subject. Scientific objectivity cannot stretch to objective
judgements about art. Objective judgements on art are not directly rationa-
lizable, but they are expressible; for example, it may be that in a work
overloaded with content no overall formal coherence emerges. The pouring
into form of streams of emotion that has not been thought out, the psychedelic
belches that well up without being reflected upon and without being touched
by the polarizing influence of form, these are a form of illness, a sort of
cancerous psychical tumour. Then one goes on to the therapy: don't take
what boils up inside you so seriously, grasp something real outside, so that
everything doesn't stick in a state of chaos. [. . .]

GJ: Why do you turn almost all your energy towards education and enlight-
enment?

JB: It is the consequence of widening the concept of art. The 'Political Office'
has self-determination as its focus. And art has the same focus. Every man
is a plastic artist who must determine things for himself. In an age of
individuation, away from collective groupings, self-determination is the central
concept. But one should not lose sight of actual practice, daily coming into
being under one's hands. My pedagogic and political categories result from
'Fluxus'. To impose forms on the world around us is the beginning of a
process that continues into the political field. Discussion used to centre on
the participation of the public and it became apparent that actionism as a
sort of joint play was not enough; the participant must also have something
to contribute from the resources of his own thought. A total work of art is
only possible in the context of the whole of society. Everyone will be a
necessary co-creator of a social architecture, and, so long as anyone cannot
participate, the ideal form of democracy has not been reached. Whether people
are artists, assemblers of machines or nurses, it is a matter of participating
in the whole. Art looks more towards a field where sensitivity is developed
into an organ of cognition and hence explores areas quite different from formal
logic. I have to admit that only quite a small minority is still in a position
to understand pictures. The times educate people to think in terms of abstract
concepts . . . most people think they have to comprehend art in intellectual



892 Institutions and Objections

terms - in many people the organs of sensory and emotional experience have
atrophied. Concepts must be elaborated which relate to this state of conscious-
ness, so as to express quite different associations of force. Many people spoke
of mysticism. Basically, though, I am interested in getting as far as talking
of a picture of man that cannot be constrained by the prevailing scientific
concepts. For this, man needs the Aesthetic Education. The isolated concept
of art education must be done away with, and the artistic element must be
embodied in every subject, whether it is our mother tongue, geography,
mathematics or gymnastics. I am pleading for a gradual realization that there
is no other way except that people should be artistically educated. This artistic
education alone provides a sound base for an efficient society. The achieve-
ments of our society are channeled and determined by power relationships.
But it is not just a few who are called to determine how the world will be
changed - but everyone. In a true democracy there are no other differences
than capability; democracy can only develop freely when all restrictive mech-
anisms are gone. One of the greatest of these restrictive mechanisms is the
present-day school, because it does not develop people but channels them.



VIIc

Political Aspects



1 Lucy Lippard (b. 1937) 'Interview with Ursula
Meyer' and 'Postface' to Six Years

In 1968 the critics Lucy Lippard and John Chandler published an article entitled 'The
Dematerialization of Art'. Lippard then expanded this into a book, Six Years, a listing
of the principal artists, events and works of the years 1966 to 1972: the period
conventionally associated with Conceptual Art. The book's Preface' reprinted an inter-
view conducted in December 1969 between Lippard and the German critic Ursula
Meyer. It speculated on connections between Conceptual Art, a critique of the current
international market structure of art, and the then emergent 'counter-culture'. The book
also contained a 'Postface' written for its publication, in which Lippard reflected on the
failure of some of those aspirations. The present extracts are taken from Six Years:
the dematerialization of the art object, New York and London, 1973, pp. 7-9 and
263-4.

Interview with Ursula Meyer

UM: Do you think visual art may eventually function in a different context
altogether?

LL: Yes, but there's going to have to be an immense educational process to
get people to even begin to look at things, to say nothing of look at things
the way artists look at things. [. . .]

UM: Do you believe the impact of what is happening now - with conceptual
art and what I call the other culture - that impact is going to hit the so-called
art world, the galleries, the museums? What changes do you envisage?

LL: Unfortunately I don't think there are going to be many changes taking
place immediately. I think the art world is probably going to be able to absorb
conceptual art as another 'movement' and not pay too much attention to it.
The art establishment depends so greatly on objects which can be bought and
sold that I don't expect it to do much about an art that is opposed to the
prevailing systems. Whenever I lecture and start talking about the possibility
of no art or non-art in the future, I have to admit I think I'm going to be
able to tell who the artists are anyway. Maybe another culture, a new network
will arise. It's already clear that there are very different ways of seeing things



I



894 Institutions and Objections

and thinking about things within the art world even as it stands now, not as
clear as the traditional New York 'uptown' and 'downtown' dichotomy, but
it has something to do with that.

One of the important things about the new dematerialized art is that it
provides a way of getting the power structure out of New York and spreading
it around to wherever an artist feels like being at the time. Much art now is
transported by the artist, or in the artist himself, rather than by watered-down,
belated circulating exhibitions or by existing information networks such as
mail, books, telex, video, radio, etc. The artist is traveling a lot more, not to
sightsee, but to get his work out. New York is the center because of the
stimulus here, the bar and studio dialogue. Even if we get the art works out
of New York, even if the objects do travel, they alone don't often provide
the stimulus that they do combined with the milieu. But when the artists
travel, whether they're liked or disliked, people are exposed directly to the
art and to the ideas behind it in a more realistic, informal situation. Another
idea that has come up often recently that interests me very much is that of
the artist working as an interruptive device, a jolt, in present societal systems.
Art has always been that, in a way, but John Latham and his APG group in
London, among others, are trying to deal with it more directly.

UM: There's a strange reawakening in Europe now.

LL: It may be more fertile for new ideas and new ways of disseminating art
than the United States. Certainly Canada is. Charles Harrison has pointed
out that Paris and the various European cities are in the position that New
York was in around 1939. There is a gallery and museum structure, but it
is so dull and irrelevant to new art that there's a feeling that it can be
bypassed, that new things can be done, voids filled. Whereas in New York,
the present gallery-money-power structure is so strong that it's going to be
very difficult to find a viable alternative to it. The artists who are trying to
do non-object art are introducing a drastic solution to the problem of artists
being bought and sold so easily, along with their art. Not, God knows, that
the artists making conventional objects want that any more than anyone else,
but their work unfortunately lends itself more easily to capitalist marketing
devices. The people who buy a work of art they can't hang up or have in
their garden are less interested in possession. They are patrons rather than
collectors. That's why all this seems so inapplicable to museums, because
museums are basically acquisitive.

UM: That one word 'idea' contradicts any sort of central establishment. You
might have many idea centers that are made by living artists rather than one
chauvinistic art enterprise.

LL: Yes. I was politicized by a trip to Argentina in the fall of 1968, when I
talked to artists who felt that it was immoral to make their art in the society
that existed there. It becomes clear that today everything, even art, exists in
a political situation. I don't mean that art itself has to be seen in political
terms or look political, but the way artists handle their art, where they make
it, the chances they get to make it, how they are going to let it out, and to
whom - it's all part of a life style and a political situation. It becomes a



Vile Political Aspects 895

matter of artists' power, of artists achieving enough solidarity so they aren't
at the mercy of a society that doesn't understand what they are doing. I guess
that's where the other culture, or alternative information network, comes in
- so we can have a choice of ways to live without dropping out.



Postface

Hopes that 'conceptual art' would be able to avoid the general commercialization,
the destructively 'progressive' approach of modernism were for the most part
unfounded. It seemed in 1969 . . , that no one, not even a public greedy for
novelty, would actually pay money, or much of it, for a xerox sheet referring
to an event past or never directly perceived, a group of photographs document-
ing an ephemeral situation or condition, a project for work never to be
completed, words spoken but not recorded; it seemed that these artists would
therefore be forcibly freed from the tyranny of a commodity status and
market-orientation. Three years later, the major conceptualists are selling work
for substantial sums here and in Europe; they are represented by (and still more
unexpected - showing in) the world's most prestigious galleries. Clearly, what-
ever minor revolutions in communication have been achieved by the process of
dematerializing the object (easily mailed work, catalogues and magazine pieces,
primarily art that can be shown inexpensively and unobtrusively in infinite
locations at one time), art and artist in a capitalist society remain luxuries.

On the other hand, the esthetic contributions of an 'idea art' have been
considerable. An informational, documentary idiom has provided a vehicle for
art ideas that were encumbered and obscured by formal considerations. It has
become obvious that there is a place for an art which parallels (rather than
replaces or is succeeded by) the decorative object, or, perhaps still more
important, sets up new critical criteria by which to view and vitalize itself (the
function of the Art-Language group and its growing number of adherents). Such
a strategy, if it continues to develop, can only have a salutory effect on the way
all art is examined and developed in the future.

Conceptual art has not, however, as yet broken down the real barriers between
the art context and those external disciplines - social, scientific, and academic
- from which it draws sustenance. While it has become feasible for artists to
deal with technical concepts in their own imaginations, rather than having to
struggle with constructive techniques beyond their capacities and their financial
means, interactions between mathematics and art, philosophy and art, literature
and art, politics and art, are still at a very primitive level. There are some
exceptions, among them certain works by Haacke, Buren, Piper, the Rosario
group, Huebler. But, for the most part, the artists have been confined to art
quarters, usually by choice. As yet the 'behavioral artists' have not held
particularly rewarding dialogues with their psychologist counterparts, and we
have had no feedback on the Art-Language group from the linguistic philoso-
phers they emulate. 'Art use' of elementary knowledge, already accepted
and exhausted, oversimplification, and unsophistication in regard to work



896 Institutions and Objections

accomplished in other fields are obvious barriers to such interdisciplinary
communication.

The general ignorance of the visual arts, especially their theoretical bases,
deplorable even in the so-called intellectual world; the artist's well-founded
despair of ever reaching the mythical 'masses 1 with 'advanced art', the resulting
ghetto mentality predominant in the narrow and incestuous art world itself, with
its resentful reliance on a very small group of dealers, curators, critics, editors,
and collectors who are all too frequently and often unknowingly bound by
invisible apron strings to the 'real world's' power structure - all of these factors
may make it unlikely that conceptual art will be any better equipped to affect
the world any differently than, or even as much as, its less ephemeral counter-
parts. Certainly, few of the artists are directly concerned with this aspect of
their art, nor can they be, since art that begins with other than an internal,
esthetic goal rarely produces anything more than illustration or polemic. The
fact remains that the mere survival of something still called Art in a world so
intolerant of the useless and uningratiating indicates that there is some hope
for the kind of awareness of that world which is uniquely imposed by esthetic
criteria, no matter how bizarre the 'visual' manifestations may initially appear
to those unacquainted with the art context.



2 Artforum: from 'The Artist and Politics: a
Symposium'

In America in the late 1960s the Civil Rights issue and the Anti-Vietnam War movement
forced the question of the political relations and commitments of artists on to the
agenda in a way not seen since the end of the Second World War. The issue was
exacerbated when in May 1970 four students taking part in a protest against the United
States's illegal invasion of Cambodia were shot at and killed by National Guardsmen at
Kent State University, Ohio. During the summer of 1970, Artforum, then the leading
American art magazine, circulated a question to a number of artists. Twelve replies of
varying lengths were published, in alphabetical order; which is to say not in order of
seniority or prominence in the art world. They appeared in Artforum, New York,
September 1970, pp. 35-9. The question and seven replies, some extracted, are here
reprinted from this source. (Judd's response refers to demands issued by the Art
Workers' Coalition. These are printed in their definitive form in Vllc3.)

A growing number of artists have begun to feel the need to respond to
the deepening political crisis in America. Among these artists, however,
there are serious differences concerning their relations to direct political
actions. Many feel that the political implications of their work constitute
the most profound political action they can take. Others, not denying
this, continue to feel the need for an immediate, direct political com-
mitment. Still others feel that their work is devoid of political meaning
and that their political lives are unrelated to their art. What is your
position regarding the kinds of political action that should be taken by
artists?



Vile Political Aspects 897

Given: Art as a branch of agriculture.
Hence:

1 We must farm to sustain life.

2 We must fight to protect life.

3 Farming is one aspect of the social-political-economic struggle.

4 Fighting is one aspect of the social-political-economic struggle.

5 We must be fighting farmers and farming fighters.

6 There is no merit in growing potatoes in the shape of machine guns.

7 There is no merit in making edible machine guns.

8 Life is the link between politics and art.

9 Settle for nothing less than concrete analysis of concrete situations leading
to concrete actions.

10 Silence is assent.

CARL ANDRE



I think the time for political action by artists is now and I believe action should
be taken in the art world and in the world at large. Political action need not
inhibit art-making; the two activities are dissimilar, not incompatible. In fact
all art is eventually political. [. . .]

While the political power of art is easily seen in the past, the political effects
of art today appear somewhat obscure. This is probably because any contem-
porary time presents so much material and allows so few conclusions. Aristotle,
in the Poetics, provides the most direct analysis, describing artists who imitate
the past, artists who imitate the present, and artists who imitate the future
(ranking them in an ascending order of value). Past seeking, the preterit mode,
sustains the conservative heart, which longs for that idealized childhood where
authorities were strong, rules were clear and properties were unequivocally
possessed. These desires are reinforced by reactionary art. There is no doubt
why Nixon removed all the abstract art from the White House when he moved
in. Abstract art seldom provokes a clear affection for the past.

Art which mirrors the present moves in a different way, from another cause
and toward another effect. Its mainspring is the status quo. It is unidealized,
displaying both the good and bad aspects of the now. Pop Art is the most
obvious example but Machine Art, technological light works and most painting
and sculpture in plastics are also typical. Other commemorators of the contem-
porary scene are Earth Art (reflecting the ways of our environment); the New
Realism (recording the peoples and places of today); Protest Art (reproducing
sado-masochistic brutalities); and that pair of sexual solipsisms currently known
as Concept Art and Color Painting (rejoicing in the separative forces of our old
friend, the mind-body problem). It is interesting to observe how intimately
these art movements are joined to modern media, with their heavy reliance on
promotion for distribution of products (and it is no accident to find their best
customers in the bourgeoisie), for all these art ways and works of the present
are entertainment commodities. They posit no radical changes and deal with
conundrums, not problems. Their net political effect is a tacit support of the
present system.



898 Institutions and Objections

There is a radical art in America today, an art which innovates and is aimed
at the future, but elucidation of its effects must wait until that future. [. . .]
The most far-reaching endeavour has been reordering of subject matter so that
the art object itself dominates its particular parts. Figure/grounds and hierar-
chical arrangements give way to paintings that picture their own shapes and
pigments and sculptures that render their own shapes and matter. [. . .] These
new ways have political implications that bear on the sovereignty of the subject
and the nature and ramifications of self-determination.

JO BAER

You have asked what kind of political action should be taken by artists, and I
can answer only that any particular artist should take whatever political action
he wants to. Political things should not affect the making of art because political
activity and art-making have never mixed to art's advantage, and my guess is
that most artists are better off out of politics. But it is an individual's choice.
As a subject it really does not merit the attention you are giving it.

WALTER DARBY BANNARD

I think of myself as a container, and what I do as an eruption of what I am.
Where do you get nourished? That's where you have something to do. The
body of the octopus is full. Its tentacles need only be directed to the caverns
of waiting mouths.

[ . . . ] I have stipulated that the art-changers take upon themselves the tax
burden - that dead artists support live artists through trust funds collected by
taxing the profits from the auction block. Dead artists support live ones
spiritually, so it isn't much of a peculiar demand that they support us financially.
In fact our voices would be a lot stronger if our blood were nourished by our
dead compatriots instead of the market system. We can use the system as a
pipeline, directing the fuel to where the need is signalled. Artists are sensitive
people and they are hurt by the rock throwers while standing in line waiting
for bread. Artists are the saints of the world eating the continual last supper.
The better the food, the richer the art.

It's all a matter of economics, not politics. Throughout the centuries of
art-making there have been wars, investigations, pogroms. The artist does battle
on his own field, and resents being forced into combat with strangers, by a
government that does not nourish him.

ROSEMARIE CASTORO

I've always thought that my work had political implications, had attitudes that
would permit, limit or prohibit some kinds of political behavior and some
institutions. Also, I've thought that the situation was pretty bad and that my
work was all I could do. My attitude of opposition and isolation, which has
slowly changed in regard to isolation in the last five years or so, was in reaction
to the events of the fifties: the continued state of war, the destruction of the
UN by the Americans and the Russians, the rigid useless political parties, the
general exploitation and both the Army and McCarthy.






vile Political Aspects 899

Part of the reason for my isolation was the incapacity to deal with it all, in
any way, and also work. Part was that recent art had occurred outside of most
of the society. Unlike now, very few people were opposed to anything, none
my age that I knew. The most important reason for isolation was that I couldn't
think about the country in a general way. Most of the general statements I read
seemed doctrinaire and sloppy, both typical of general statements. Most of the
advice seemed Utopian, impractical or rather fascistic itself; I couldn't think of
any great explanations and gradually came to the conclusion that there weren't
any. All the institutions and their actions seemed like the explanations, over-
blown and unsubstantial. So my work didn't have anything to do with the
society, the institutions and grand theories. It was one person's work and
interests; its main political conclusion, negative but basic, was that it, myself,
anyone shouldn't serve any of these things, that they should be considered very
sceptically and practically. A person shouldn't be used by an organization of
two on up. Most of the emotions and beliefs given to institutions should be
forgotten; the bigger the institution the less it should get; I never understood
how anyone could love the United States, or hate it for that matter; I've never
understood the feelings of nationalism. Ask what your country can do for you.

My interest in actually doing something grew partly because my work became
easier, clearer, more interesting, so that I didn't feel I would be swamped by
other interests; partly by the example of the civil rights movement, that things
could change a little; by the Vietnam war, which presented a situation of
either/or - I marched in the first Fifth Avenue parade and I hate group activities
(Ad Reinhardt was the only artist I recognized); by the realization that politics,
the organization of society, was something itself, that it had its own nature and
could only be changed in its own way. Art may change things a little but not
much; I suspect one reason for the popularity of American art is that the
museums and collectors didn't understand it enough to realize that it was against
much in the society, f . . . ]

It sounds obvious, but isn't so in terms of what happens, that everyone is a
citizen, an equal part of a social organization, a political, public entity, an
individual in a group that is only a sum of individuals. The citizen, individual,
person has his interests and rights. He or she's not or shouldn't be an economic,
military, or institutional entity. I think the main confusion of both the right
and left is the confusion of politics, public action, with economics. On both
sides the individual is turned into an economic being. It's incredibly stupid that
a person's reason for being should be the production of cars, whether here or
in Russia. The people in both places are educated to be useful persons,
producers, and not citizens. [. . .]

There is a big difference between the politics of citizens and the politics of
interest groups. Obviously interest groups are a lot less important and necessary.
Often they prevent people from acting as citizens. But if they don't they're
legitimate. I think there should be an artists' organization functioning as an
interest group. There's no reason why the organization shouldn't oppose the
war in Vietnam, for example, as long as it knows it does so as an interest group
and as long as the members act first as citizens. Certainly one thing an interest



900 Institutions and Objections

group should have is a sense of the integrity of its activity. One thing of the
several I have against the Art Workers Coalition is that they were using art for
all sorts of things. An activity shouldn't be used for a foreign purpose except
when the purpose is extremely important and when nothing else can be done.
I thought the suggestion of the Art Workers that a separate section of the
Modern be permanently given to black artists and another to artists without
galleries to be useless corruptions of the nature of the activity, one aspect of
which is that art is good, middling and bad. Neither, as they think, are all
artists equal; citizens are equal, not workers, not doctors, not anything. I'm also
unimpressed by SoHo (I hope the name disappears); it's too narrow an interest
group. Unlike the Art Workers, an artists' organization should decide what it
wants and go after it practically and politically. If museum boards should be
one third money and otherwise, one third staff and one third artists, as I think
they should be, state that and talk to the museums. Allow some for differences
in the museums, and those who refuse without reasons can be struck. Why is
the Modern so interesting? Why be so eager to demonstrate, to use a tactic that
was originally used for a much more serious purpose? [. . .]

DON JUDD

The artist does not have to will a response to the 'deepening political crisis in
America.' Sooner or later the artist is implicated or devoured by politics without
even trying. My 'position' is one of sinking into an awareness of global squalor
and futility. The rat of politics always gnaws at the cheese of art. The trap is
set. If there's an original curse, then politics has something to do with it. Direct
political action becomes a matter of trying to pick poison out of boiling stew.
The pain of this experience accelerates a need for more and more actions.
'Actions speak louder than words.' Such loud actions pour in on one like
quicksand - one doesn't have to start one's own action. Actions swirl around
one so fast they appear inactive. From a deeper level of 'the deepening political
crisis,' the best and the worst actions run together and surround one in the
inertia of a whirlpool. The bottom is never reached, but one keeps dropping
into a kind of political centrifugal force that throws the blood of atrocities onto
those working for peace. The horror becomes so intense, so imprisoning that
one is overwhelmed by a sense of disgust. [ . . . ]

ROBERT SMITHSON

May the immediate political response be that as a human being all I can
comment upon is what action an Artist could take and to even imply what action
Artists should take would constitute a fascism as abhorrent if not more repugnant
as that which has brought the sorry situation to bear originally.

The major problem still remains the same: the old esthetic workhorse of
content and intent. Art as it becomes useful, even to the extent of entering the
culture, becomes for me no longer Art but History. History being perhaps the
most viable tool of Politics. All Art as it becomes known becomes Political
regardless of the intent of the Artist.

All Art then is capable of becoming political by its own or by the volition of
the culture, changing via this process from Art to History.



H



I



vile Political Aspects 901

So-called Art whose original intent and most often content is political or social
does not concern me as an Artist. They are for me only varied forms of
sociological propaganda; albeit sometimes extremely creative advertising.

I accept fully the responsibility for the position of my Art in Culture Politics
- but hold firmly that my actions as a man constitute only that. The political
and sociological actions of one man with no vocational trimmings as props.

Artists are but one vocational unit in a sociological system and if I believed
that their political and social opinions or needs were either above or below any
other vocational unit, I should cease my activities.

Be there hopefully a day when men no longer need any other title than man
to function politically. Then perhaps there shall be no political function for
them.

LAWRENCE WEINER



3 Art Workers' Coalition: Statement of Demands

The Art Workers' Coalition was born of a specifically art-world controversy. On 3 January
1969 the kinetic artist Takis unilaterally withdrew a work from an exhibition at the
Museum of Modern Art, New York. This action instigated a protest concerning the rights
of artists to maintain control over their work, which rapidly mushroomed in the form of
demonstrations by artists. In February '13 Demands' were issued to the Museum.
Though remaining rooted in questions of artists' rights and museum reform, the AWC
quickly broadened its remit to take in questions of the representation of women and
black artists, and to protest against the continuation of the war in Vietnam. Robert
Morris, Carl Andre and Lucy Lippard were among the leading art-world figures involved.
The original list of 'Demands' was revised throughout 1969 and was published in
definitive form in March 1970. It was reprinted in Lucy Lippard, 'The Art Workers'
Coalition: not a history', in Studio International, London, November 1970, pp. 171-2,
from which the present text is taken.

A. WITH REGARD TO ART MUSEUMS IN GENERAL THE ART WORKERS' COALI-
TION MAKES THE FOLLOWING DEMANDS:

1 The Board of Trustees of all museums should be made up of one-third
museum staff, one-third patrons and one-third artists, if it is to continue to
act as the policy-making body of the museum. All means should be explored
in the interest of a more open-minded and democratic museum. Art works
are a cultural heritage that belong to the people. No minority has the right
to control them; therefore, a board of trustees chosen on a financial basis
must be eliminated.

2 Admission to all museums should be free at all times and they should be
open evenings to accommodate working people.

3 All museums should decentralize to the extent that their activities and
services enter Black, Puerto Rican and all other communities. They should
support events with which these communities can identify and control. They
should convert existing structures all over the city into relatively cheap,



902 Institutions and Objections

flexible branch-museums or cultural centres that could not carry the stigma
of catering only to the wealthier sections of society.

4 A section of all museums under the direction of Black and Puerto Rican
artists should be devoted to showing the accomplishments of Black and
Puerto Rican artists, particularly in those cities where these (or other)
minorities are well represented.

5 Museums should encourage female artists to overcome centuries of damage
done to the image of the female as an artist by establishing equal repre-
sentation of the sexes in exhibitions, museum purchases and on selection
committees.

6 At least one museum in each city should maintain an up-to-date registry of
all artists in their area, that is available to the public.

7 Museum staffs should take positions publicly and use their political influence
in matters concerning the welfare of artists, such as rent control for artists'
housing, legislation for artists' rights and whatever else may apply specifically
to artists in their area. In particular, museums, as central institutions, should
be aroused by the crisis threatening man's survival and should make their
own demands to the government that ecological problems be put on a par
with war and space efforts.

8 Exhibition programs should give special attention to works by artists not
represented by a commercial gallery. Museums should also sponsor the
production and exhibition of such works outside their own premises.

9 Artists should retain a disposition over the destiny of their work, whether
or not it is owned by them, to ensure that it cannot be altered, destroyed,
or exhibited without their consent.

B. UNTIL SUCH TIME AS A MINIMUM INCOME IS GUARANTEED FOR ALL
PEOPLE, THE ECONOMIC POSITION OF ARTISTS SHOULD BE IMPROVED IN THE
FOLLOWING WAYS:

1 Rental fees should be paid to artists or their heirs for all work exhibited
where admissions are charged, whether or not the work is owned by the
artist.

2 A percentage of the profit realized on the re-sale of an artist's work should
revert to the artist or his heirs.

3 A trust fund should be set up from a tax levied on the sales of the work of
dead artists. This fund would provide stipends, health insurance, help for
artists' dependants and other social benefits.



4 Joseph Beuys (1921-1986) 'I Am Searching for
Field Character'

Beuys invokes a concept of 'direct democracy' in an essentially hierarchy-less social
organism. To this end his concept of a 'Fifth International', assuming the priority of
Consciousness over Being (or at least, of 'energy' over 'matter'), is advanced as a
riposte to the philosophical materialism of the Communist (Third), and Trotskyist (Fourth)



Vile Political Aspects 903

Internationals. Dated 1973, Beuys's statement was published in English translation by
Caroline Tisdall in the exhibition catalogue Art into Society, Society into Art, London
(Institute of Contemporary Arts), 1974, p. 48, from which the present text is' taken.



Only on condition of a radical widening of definition will it be possible for art
and activities related to art to provide evidence that art is now the only
evolutionary-revolutionary power. Only art is capable of dismantling the re-
pressive effects of a senile social system that continues to totter along the
deathline: to dismantle in order to build A SOCIAL ORGANISM AS A WORK
OF ART.

This most modern art discipline - Social Sculpture/Social Architecture - will
only reach fruition when every living person becomes a creator, a sculptor, or
architect of the social organism. Only then would the insistence on participation
of the action art of FLUXUS and Happening be fulfilled; only then would
democracy be fully realized. Only a conception of art revolutionized to this
degree can turn into a politically productive force, coursing through each person,
and shaping history.

But all this, and much that is as yet unexplored, has first to form part of our
consciousness: insight is needed into objective connections. We must probe
(theory of knowledge) the moment of origin of free individual productive
potency (creativity). We then reach the threshold where the human being
experiences himself primarily as a spiritual being, where his supreme achieve-
ments (work of art), his active thinking, his active feeling, his active will, and
their higher forms, can be apprehended as sculptural generative means, corres-
ponding to the exploded concepts of sculpture divided into its elements -
indefinite - movement - definite (see theory of sculpture), and are then
recognized as flowing in the direction that is shaping the content of the world
right through into the future.

This is the concept of art that carries within itself not only the revolutionizing
of the historic bourgeois concept of knowledge (materialism, positivism), but
also of religious activity.

EVERY HUMAN BEING IS AN ARTIST who - from his state of freedom

- the position of freedom that he experiences at first-hand - learns to determine
the other positions in the TOTAL ART WORK OF THE FUTURE SOCIAL
ORDER. Self-determination and participation in the cultural sphere (freedom);
in the structuring of laws (democracy); and in the sphere of economics (social-
ism). Self-administration and decentralization (three-fold structure) occurs:
FREE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALISM.

THE FIFTH INTERNATIONAL is born.

Communication occurs in reciprocity: it must never be a one-way flow from
the teacher to the taught. The teacher takes equally from the taught. So oscillates

- at all times and everywhere, in any conceivable internal and external circum-
stance, between all degrees of ability, in the work place, institutions, the street,
work circles, research groups, schools - the master/pupil, transmitter/receiver,
relationship. The ways of achieving this are manifold, corresponding to the



904 Institutions and Objections

varying gifts of individuals and groups. THE ORGANIZATION FOR DIRECT
DEMOCRACY THROUGH REFERENDUM is one such group. It seeks to
launch many similar work groups or information centres, and strives towards
world-wide cooperation.



5 Hans Haacke (b. 1936) Statement

Haacke's early work involved the production of self-contained systems, such as the
process of condensation within a glass box, as part of the international series of breaks
from conventional Modernism which occurred in the mid-1960s. As the 1960s pro-
gressed, however, his art became politicized and his attention turned from natural to
social systems. Increasingly he has devoted his work to the exposure of those systems
wherein conservative political and economic interests may be seen to use cultural
sponsorship as a legitimating screen for their other activities. The art of the museum
has been a recurring focus for him. Originally published in Art into Society, Society into
Art (op. cit.), p. 63, from which the present text is taken.

Products which are considered 'works of art' have been singled out as culturally
significant objects by those who at any given time and social stratum wield the
power to confer the predicate 'work of art' unto them; they cannot elevate
themselves from the host of man-made objects simply on the basis of some
inherent qualities.

Today museums and comparable art institutions, like e.g. the ICA in London,
belong to that group of agents in a society who have a sizable, although not an
exclusive, share, in this cultural power on the level of so-called 'high-art'.

Irrespective of the 'avant-garde' or 'conservative', 'rightist' or 'leftist' stance
a museum might take, it is, among other things, a carrier of socio-political
connotations. By the very structure of its existence, it is a political institution.
This is as true for museums in Moscow or Peking as for a museum in Cologne
or the Guggenheim Museum. The question of private or public funding of the
institution does not affect this axiom. The policies of publicly financed institu-
tions are obviously subject to the approval of the supervising governmental
agency. In turn, privately funded institutions naturally reflect the predilections
and interests of their supporters. Any public museum receiving private donations
may find itself in a conflict of interests. On the other hand the indirect subsidy
of many private institutions through exemption from taxes and partial funding
of their programs could equally create problems. Often, however, there exists
in fact if not by design a tolerance or even a congruence of the respective
ideological persuasions.

In principle the decisions of museum officials, ideologically highly determined
or receptive to deviations from the norm, follow the boundaries set by their
employers. These boundaries need not be expressly stated in order to be
operative. Frequently museum officials have internalized the thinking of their
superiors to a degree that it becomes natural for them to make the 'right'
decisions and a congenial atmosphere reigns between employee and employer.
Nevertheless it would be simplistic to assume that in each case museum officials



Vile Political Aspects 905

are faithfully translating the interests of their superiors into museum policy,
particularly since new cultural manifestations are not always recognizable as to their
suitability or opposition to the parties concerned. The potential for confusion
is increased by the fact that the convictions of an 'artist' are not necessarily
reflected in the objective position his/her work takes on the socio-political scale
and that this position could change over the years to the point of reversal.

Still, in order to gain some insight into the forces that elevate certain products
to the level of 'works of art' it is helpful - among other investigations - to look
into the economic and political underpinnings of the institutions, individuals
and groups who share in the control of cultural power.

Strategies might be developed for performing this task in ways that its
manifestations are liable to be considered 'works of art' in their own right. Not
surprisingly some museums do not think they have sufficient independence to
exhibit such a portrait of their own structure and try to dissuade or even censor
works of this nature, as has been demonstrated. Fortunately art institutions and
other cultural power agents do not form a monolithic block, so that the public's
access to such works might be limited but not totally prevented.

Bertolt Brecht's 1934 appraisal of the 'Five Difficulties in Writing the Truth'
is still valid today. They are the need for 'the courage to write the truth,
although it is being suppressed; the intelligence to recognize it, although it is
being covered up; the judgement to choose those in whose hands it becomes
effective; the cunning to spread it among them.'

There are no 'artists', however, who are immune to being affected and
influenced by the socio-political value-system of the society in which they live
and of which all cultural agencies are a part, no matter if they are ignorant of
these contraints or not ('artist' like 'work of art' are put in quotation marks
because they are predicates with evaluative connotations deriving their currency
from the relative ideological frame of a given cultural power group). So-called
'avant-garde art' is at best working close to the limitations set by its cultu-
ral/political environment, but it always operates within that allowance.

'Artists' as much as their supporters and their enemies, no matter of what
ideological coloration, are unwitting partners in the art-syndrome and relate to
each other dialectically. They participate jointly in the maintenance and/or
development of the ideological make-up of their society. They work within that
frame, set the frame and are being framed.

6 Mel Ramsden (b. 1944) from 'On Practice'

Ramsden and Ian Burn merged their collaborative practice with Art & Language in 1970.
By 1975 some thirty people were associated with the name, equally divided between
England and New York. Three issues of The Fox were published by an Art & Language
Foundation in New York, with an editorial board which included Ramsden and Joseph
Kosuth. The declared aim of the journal was to establish a basis for community practice
through critical address to the contingent conditions of the New York art world. The
Fox was instrumental in the Artists' Meeting for Cultural Change, which formed as a
kind of revival of the Art Workers' Coalition. The title of Ramsden's essay makes ironic



906 Institutions and Objections

reference to a pamphlet by Mao Tse-tung, recalling the latter's dictum, If you want
knowledge, you must take part in the practice of changing reality'. First published in
The Fox, New York, April, 1975, pp. 66-83, from which the present opening and
concluding extracts are taken.

[. . .] Consider the following: that the administrators, dealers, critics, pundits,
etc. who once seemed the neutral servants of art are now, especially in New
York, becoming its masters. Has adventuristic New York art of the Seventies
(perhaps uncontrollably) become a function of the market-system? Isn't the way
this market vectors human relations now a massive controlling factor in the way
we now vector human relations? A simplified and possibly even misleading
account of how the above has come about might sound something like this:
there is prevalent in the New York art world a ludicrous model of the individual
in society (I say the New York art world but it does hold, I am sure, for other
places too, no matter how far-flung. This is because most art 'centers' and
art-schools (etc.) fall for modernist hegemony - this can be known as 'The New
York connection'). This model may be generally and partially characterized as
the idealist separation of private from political-social life. Such a separation has
led to the celebration of indulgent individual 'freedom.' This appears to me to
have had two alarming results: adventuristic art of the Seventies has become an
insular and boring spectacle of fads, intoxications, diversions, infatuations and
even the odd pseudo-revolution, all under the platitudinous guise of massive
evidence of 'creativity' and 'artistic freedom.' (This 'freedom' some will always
persist in citing as evidence that in this society the artist suffers no overt
governmental controls and hence may still be 'a rebel'; a freedom which, on the
other hand, others cite as fundamental to 'bourgeois ideology' and its 'illusion
of freedom'.) Tied intimately to all this, as an essential part of the same 'form
of life,' is the astonishing increase in art-world assessors: entrepreneurs, critics,
curators, gallery staff, etc. In other words, bureaucrats. These bureaucrats
administer the above 'manifestations of freedom' by alienating them, treating
them as a kind of gloss for the mode of existence of middle-life market-relations.
This is a mode of existence in which we become prices on the media-market,
in which we become commodities, a mode of existence in which what counts
is the demand for what the market defines as your talents, in which all relation-
ships have their monetary value, and it is their monetary value that matters. It
is a mode of existence in which we become slaves to the 'blind urge' to
production-consumption and are thus assessed and administered by the bureau-
crats only because the latter are closer to the sources of control (are higher in
the market hierarchy). The above may be a bit vulgar but under these conditions
I still think our activities become (except insofar as they perpetuate-stabilize the
market) largely arbitrary. The reason is that the bureaucrats are able to subsume
anything, even the rare cranky-iconoclastic work. The products may change,
modifications occur all the time (an endless spectacle), but the form of life
remains the same: the ruling market provides the standard of intelligibility. One
question to raise about this standard of intelligibility is whether the market-
relations are really separate from what we do? That is to say, just how far has



vile Political Aspects 907

market-standing been internalized? [. . .]
* # *

Doing without the object . . . seemed at first and most obviously to grow from
questions raised by the Minimalism of Judd, et al. of the mid-sixties. The need
for us all to go-on after their utilization of objects in (, . . as the cant goes) an
extremely robust 'literal' way, produced an art-form which didn't, in the
conventional sense, appear to need objects at all - again in the conventional
sense. Now suppose I pursue this line of argument: it could be said that trying
to refine and extend the Modern Art tradition after Minimalism produced, in
the form of Conceptual Art, a contradiction. This seems okay. It seems to lead
on to noting that in the Marxist sense, a contradiction is a process wherein the
normal operation of a 'social or cultural system' produces a condition which
tends to undermine normal operation itself. Hence change comes to take place
because the system creates, through its own internal contradictions, the condi-
tions for its own breakdown. Such a characterization of revolutionary change
is, interestingly enough, also fairly consistent with T.S. Kuhn's 'paradigm
shifts': a system breaks down when 'anomalies' in one paradigm model force
new paradigms to come into existence. Thus in both dialectical social analysis
(Marxism) and an extremely fashionable segment of contemporary Philosophy
of Science, 'revolution' is considered sufficiently characterized as a dialectical
movement out from a set of entrenched norms. So, it seemed . . . whereas the
AWC had been disarmed by an essentially inadequate reform program, Concep-
tual Art might indeed be such a 'revolution.' It wasn't, and there were reasons.
First of all it wasn't even a contradiction because it was basically limited to
insular-tautological spectacle. It wasn't enough; it was a diversification, not a
contradiction because this is the way the institutions make things work today.
That is, today institutions have become autonomous. They constitute a bureau-
cratic tyranny which brooks no opposition. They are in other words logically
separate from (our) practice. This implies that the just-doing-my-job artist's role
also severs the ties with social practice insofar as it is bureaucratic. To put all
this another way: it may be that the range of maneuvers now available to us
under Modern Art are simply out of phase with the institutional conditions
inherent under late-capitalism. Hence, if our labor and means of production
seem to be our own free possessions to do with as we please, 'freely' so to
speak, it's only because we naively operate according to an outmoded model of
competitive capitalism. And this is just out of phase today, given the kunst star
media-life which easily and greedily coerces (our) practice. The inability to really
bring about change, Conceptual Art notwithstanding, is because our mode of
operation is 'professionalized', specialized, autonomous, and essentially quaintly
harmless (but essential) to the mode of operation of the market-structures. The
basis of control of such a market is its role structuring and the artist as
a-willing-or-not-conscious-or-not efficient economic unit. Of course we've all
moralistically refused to see these problems as anything other than incidental,
or, at best, somebody else's business. The situation becomes, to me, even more
vain as we ourselves finally become our own entrepreneurs-pundits, the middle-
life of the market our sole realitv. To increase the frenzied manipulation of



908 Institutions and Objections

spectacle is absolutely fundamental to New York Adventurism. The Cultural
imperialism unwittingly exported everywhere by this adventurism is heinous and
alienating - finally even to those who produce the exports. The bureaucracy
will subsume even the most persistent iconoclasm unless we begin to act on the
realization that its real source of control lies in our very concept of our own
'private' individual selves. The far-out and the outlandish is deeply rooted in
the US as evidence of freedom and of the truly moral - it is the lack of
examination of such a concept that makes most present day radical-art radical-
daft instead of radical-fundamental.



7 Ian Burn (b. 1939) 'The Art Market: Affluence
and Degradation'

Burn was involved in the early development of Conceptual Art and co-founded the
Society for Theoretical Art and Analyses with Roger Cutforth and Mel Ramsden in New
York in 1969. He worked in New York with Ramsden and subsequently as a member
of Art & Language before returning to his native Australia in 1976. His essay contributed
to that critical engagement with the conditions of the New York art world which
developed within the American wing of Art & Language. It was not published in either
of the group's own journals, however, but in the mainstream publication Artforum, in
April 1975, pp. 34-7, from which the present text is taken. The essay was reprinted
in the Artforum Anthology, New York, 1984.

Impending economic crisis has forced many deeply lurking problems into the
open. Art sales are declining and there is an air of pessimism. The sense of
opulence of the 1960s has gone to dust. As artists, we have tended to understand
the art market only in its reward capacity, preferring to ignore the 'dismal
science' of economics. But no longer, it seems. While it may once have seemed
an exaggeration of economic determinism to regard works of art as 'merely'
commodities in an economic exchange, it is now pretty plain that our entire
lives have become so extensively constituted in these terms that we cannot any
longer pretend otherwise. Not only do works of art end up as commodities, but
there is also an overwhelming sense in which works of art start off as commodities.

Faced with this impasse, we need alternate historical perspectives in order to
throw light on some of the most basic of social relations, to perceive the lacuna
between what we think we do and what we actually do in the world. The
historical relations of up-to-date modern art are the market relations of a
capitalist society. That much I believe is obvious to everyone. What we have
seen more recently is the power of market values to distort all other values, so
even the concept of what is and is not acceptable as 'work' is defined first and
fundamentally by the market and only secondly by 'creative urges' (etc.). This
has been the price of internalising an intensely capitalistic mode of production.

Given this, shouldn't we be scrutinizing certain historically unique aspects of
our market relations? How have these wrought fundamental changes in the 'art'
produced? I know many of us are grateful beneficiaries of this market. None-



vilc Political Aspects 909

theless, we have all ended up victims of its capriciousness, the 'principles' of
modern art having trapped us in a panoptical prison of our own making. Simply,
this is the realization that if the arts were really democratized, we as producers
of an elite art would no longer have any means of functioning - wanting to abolish
elitism in modern art is tantamount to wanting to abolish modern art itself.
# * #

Putting this into a familiar New York perspective: we have all been enticed
by the prospect of endless market expansion which it seems, oddly enough, we
have internalized in the idea of an endlessly innovative avant-gardist growth.
This supports the power of the market by providing subtly pervasive means of
cultural and intellectual control, through implicit direction and the supplying
of a categorical check on the 'evolution' of art. In addition, the unprecedented
concentration of capital invested by the market in this avant-gardist elite has
successfully had the effect of reducing 'unnecessary' competition, if not elimi-
nating it altogether. Today it is surely beyond any doubt that this popular idea
of a 'permanent revolution' in art is actively designed never to fulfil any personal
and social relationship. From this point of view, it is a set of empty gestures
which threaten none of the market requirements and end up being a sheer
celebration of the new individuality, arrogantly and, finally, stupidly set against
the idea of sociality. [. . .]

In case it appears I am overstating the role of United States capitalism in all
this, let me emphasize the obvious, that the history of modern art from its
beginnings was nurtured within a number of industrialized societies, not just
America. Looking closer at that history, with its unrelenting emphasis on an
'art-for-art's-sake' ideology, we become conscious of the ever-increasing role
played by a neutered formalism - at the expense of our possibility of content.
The stress on exclusively formal innovation had the aftermath of content in its
last gasp being reduced to such vacua as 'colour', 'edge', 'process', 'ideas',
'image', etc. plus a lot of fatuous jargon about qualities symbolized through
these (cf. especially Greenberg's account of modernism, but also most issues of
Artforum and other magazines). This is formalism taken to its ultimate empty
conclusions: it is what we have lauded as pure art . . . the impossibility of
content, of saying anything whatsoever. The tradition of formalism has left me
largely incapable of expressing through 'my art' those very things about which
I have the greatest misgivings - and so incapable of changing anything through
'my art'. These ideological fetters have conclusively eradicated every possibility
of a social practice in relation to art, even the thought of it - the expression
of modern art has become the rejection of society and of our social beings. Now,
obviously the United States isn't to blame for all of this, but it certainly deserves
a lot of the credit for bringing it to a remarkable and unprecedented pitch. No
longer just producing an art for a privileged middle-class, it has burgeoned into a
spectacularly elitist art, remote even from its own producers' actual lives and problems.

What can you expect to challenge in the real world with 'colour', 'edge',
'process', systems, modules, etc. as your arguments? Can you be any more than
a manipulated puppet if these are your 'professional' arguments? Moreover,
when you add to this picture thousands upon thousands of artists in all corners



910 Institutions and Objections

of the modern art empire tackling American formalism in the belief that it is
the one 'true art' - that's when it is possible to see how preposterous and finally
downright degrading it has become!

Needless to say, it is easy for me to identify with some points of the classic
nineteenth-century theses about alienation. There it was argued that alienation
is the process whereby human values are projected outside of us and achieve
an existence independent of us, and over us, and this is an essential condition
for the functioning of capitalism. We are all familiar with the romanticized
notions about the work of art 'embodying the soul of the artist'. Well, perhaps
historically this has taken on mythic proportions, but there is a very real sense
in which everything produced ought to bear some personal relation to who
makes it. However, once my work of art enters the art market, it takes on a
power independent of me and this strikes me as a form of estrangement from
what I have produced, an alienation from my own experiences; and the more I
produce the more I deprive myself of my 'means of life'. Yet I find I can only
maintain myself by continuing in the same fashion. So, while I may retain
economic ownership over my labour and means of production (thus giving me
a sense of 'freedom'), I am still psychologically and socially alienated from what
I produce. Once entering the market, it becomes an object foreign to me - but
without the market I don't recognize it, because it is defined via the market
which I have internalized. Don't we all experience this to greater or lesser
degrees? As a result, myself-as-an-artist has become a stranger to me, a figure
over whom I have little power or control. This is today's blunt reality of
alienation. No longer merely having lost the product of our labour, our ability
to create is profoundly impaired . . . and this is also expressed in my relation to
you, and burgeons in the relation you can have to what I produce.

Often-heard remarks implying that it is not enough to be 'just an artist' are
merely public admissions that, as a role in society, 'artist' is a sterile one. More
pointedly, this sheds light on the prevailing concept of 'artist': it has become
an integral part of the meaning of the concept 'artist' that it is politically
conservative (or, at its more adventuristic, reactionary), and that remains its sole
possible political role - hence its continuing great value as propaganda for an
imperious culture. This is clearly reflected in the desperation of more and more
artists to escape their political impotence, in their attempts to reconcile the
paradoxicality of their lives wrought by being hopefully 'radical' in politics but
necessarily 'conservative' in art. 1

The inside story of this is that there is no 'radical theory' in the arts today,
and there can be none while the present state of affairs prevails. That also
explains something about the extreme poverty of 'critical theory', since a critical
theory which sets itself the task of revealing the various forms of conflict and
exploitation needs to be informed by some (prospect of) radical theory, some-
thing which denies the current ideology and economic class values embodied in
modern art. Current and recent art criticism has become at best a means of
policing and regulating, at worst a sheer celebration of the impotence of the
status quo.

In this light, most of the chatter about 'plurality' in the contemporary scene



Vile Political Aspects 911

comes over as so much liberal claptrap. What use is a sort of 'freedom' which
can have no other effect than reinforcing the status quo? [ . . . ]
* * *

Whatever we are able to accomplish now, my point is that transforming our
reality is no longer a question of just making more art - it is a matter of realizing
the enormous social vectoring of the problem and opportunistically taking
advantage of what social tools we have. Of one thing I am certain: anything we
might call radical theory in the arts will have to be solidly constructed in all
its social dimensions. But even then it may not be a question of how much we
might accomplish, since it might take something as catastrophic as a collapse
in the economic structure of this society to have any substantial effect on the
careening superstructure of modern American art.

This point can also be made concerning the contradictions apparent in looking at art produced
by feminist artists, black artists and various underprivileged groups: while their social thinking
is radical, fertile and engaging, what we see of the art produced is too often as embarrassingly
dull, uniform and bureaucratic as evervone else's.



8 Victor Burgin (b. 1941) from 'Socialist Formalism'

In the early 1970s Burgin's work became increasingly politicized, and he turned par-
ticularly to the critical use of advertising techniques: offsetting photographs and texts
to point up the persistence of social and sexual contradictions behind the facade of
the conventional advertisement. For Burgin, painting and other forms of fine art prac-
tised under the rubric of the 'autonomy of art' became complicit in the exploitative
social structure which his, principally photographic, art was now concerned to unmask.
In his attempt to gain critical purchase on the 'expressive' protocols of Modernism in
art, he invoked the practical tradition of Russian Constructivism, and the theoretical
legacy of linguistic semiology. The present essay was first published in Studio interna-
tional, vol. 191, no. 980, London, March/April 1976, from which the present extracts
are taken.



While contemporary Western art practice is currently polarized between Mod-
ernism and 'conceptualism' both are being viewed in terms of a Modernist
politique - in terms of a Modernist aesthetics and a Modernist version of history.
The inability of most critics to deal with conceptualism on anything but an ad
hoc basis stems from this fundamental category error, as does the failure of most
conceptualists to found their practice in anything other than laissez-faire sub-
jectivism. The consolidation of conceptualist practices along the socialist lines
which have been implicit from their inception demands a reading of formalist
aesthetics, of history, and of current priorities, different from that now pre-
dominating in the Western art community.

Conceptualism administered a rebuff to the Modernist demand for aesthetic
confections and for formal novelty for its own sake. It disregarded the arbitrary
and fetishistic restrictions which 'Art' placed on technology - the anachronistic
daubing of woven fabrics with coloured mud, the chipping apart of rocks and
the sticking together of pipes - all in the name of timeless aesthetic values.



912 Institutions and Objections

However, once beyond the official enclosures of 'legitimate' art practice many
found that they had exchanged their prison for a desert. They learned that there
is nothing to be made of a conceptual/^, defined in opposition to Modernism,
other than an 'official opposition'; and that there is nothing to be made of
Modernist art history other than a history of Modernism.

My remarks here, very far from being comprehensive, are intended to point
off the highroad of Western bourgeois aesthetics to areas where conceptualism
may be better grounded for the completion of its metamorphosis from an
essentially Modernist avant-garde to a socialist art practice. They will concern
Russian art in the decade following the October revolution, normally presented
as a story of the arbitrary suppression of modern art by philistine communism;
and (representing a general concern with 'mass media') advertising, normally
not presented at all in an art context.

The Western assessment of the 'importance' of Malevich amongst modern
Russian artists is readily understood: his work, his concern for 'the spiritual in
art', is easily accommodated within the western tradition of Romantic formalism.
This movement of accommodation disengages all Russian art of the revolutionary
period from its real historical context in order to insert it in the familiar,
spuriously historical, sequence 'from Cubism to Modernism' which in fact is an
anti-history, an ideology. It also ignores the difference between Western and
Russian formalism.

Modernism is typically defined in opposition to Realism. In classic Realism
there is assumed an unmediated presentation of the referent through the sign
(unmediated that is save for 'noise' in the physical channel of communication
- problems of mediation in Realism tending to become confused with questions
of technique exercised in the interests of conformity to some prevailing model
of reality). Realism is primarily 'about' content and major debates within Realism
concern subject-matter alone (witness the recurring 'crisis of content' in nine-
teenth-century painting).

With the hindsight granted us by Saussure we can today see that classic
Realism rests upon a mistaken concept of signification: the sign is assumed to
be 'transparent', allowing unproblematical access to the referent. Cubism we can
see as constituting a radical critique of this concept, a practice compatible with
a recognition of the disjunction of signifier and signified within the sign.
Post-cubist Modernism, however, did not develop as a scientific aesthetics based
upon a critique of the sign, but rather as a normative aesthetics based upon a
notion of territoriality.

The brand of formalism propounded by Greenberg and Fried is in direct line
of descent from the attempt by Bell and Fry to 'free' art from concerns not
'peculiarly its own'. In the earlier of these two periods of formalist criticism,
particularly with Bell, recourse is made to a Kantian ontology (a noumenal world
'behind' mere appearances) in order to justify abstraction. American Modernism
ostensibly sees the art object as justified solely as an end in itself, but it remains
determined by the earlier English version in that in the same movement in
which it sheds idealism it loses the last vestige of any concern with content.



vile Political Aspects 913

(The ghost of idealism haunts Modernism to this day - it was minimal sculpture
which came closest to a materialist abstractionism.)

In Russia the move towards the immanent modes of analysis of formalism
was first accomplished by the Symbolist philologists Potebnya and Veselovsky.
Their emphasis on the distinction between poetic and prosaic language isolated
language itself as the primary object of literary studies. 1 The Formalist critics
of OPOYAZ (Society for the Study of Poetic Language) and the Moscow
Linguistic Circle retained this distinction, Jakobson, in a well-known dictum,
declaring the proper object of literary studies to be not literature by 'literariness'
(liter aturnost).

The Russian Formalists, however, rejected the Symbolist notion of a 'higher
reality'. They also rejected the Symbolist notion of form in which form, the
perceivable, was conceived in opposition to content, the intelligible. They
extended the notion of form to cover all aspects of a work. Todorov writes:
' ... the Symbolists tended to divide the literary product into form (i.e. sound),
which was vital and content (i.e. ideas), which was external to art. The Formalist
approach was completely opposed to this aesthetic appreciation of 'pure form'.
They no longer saw form as opposed to some other internal element of a work
of art (normally its content) and began to conceive it as the totality of the work's
various components. Thus every element inside a work of art is, according to
the exact measure of its appropriateness to it, a formal part of the whole . . .
This makes it essential to realise that the 'form' of a work is not its only formal
element: its content may equally be formal.' 2 Russian Formalism was therefore
substantially advanced beyond its Western contemporary, the formalism of Fry
and Bell, in which considerations of content were arbitrarily banished in a
quasi-legal ruling.



The period from 1917 to 1932 does not present the simple story of suppression
preferred in the West. Decisions on aesthetic questions were entirely avoided
by the party until 1925. The notion that a fully formed state aesthetic policy
was desirable did not emerge until the thirties. By 1920, however, 'laboratory
art' Constructivism had already been condemned by the constructivist artists
themselves as an anachronistic perpetuation of bourgeois vested interests. These
productivists went on to develop, in industry and in mass media, practices
compatible with their revolutionary socialist politics. In some respects they were
'overtaken on the left' by Proletkult, but both factions eventually foundered
against the growing influence of conservatism after NEP - that moment depicted
in some accounts as an improvement in post-revolutionary cultural conditions,
but which the artists and critics of Lef recognized as a betrayal of the revolution.

We may integrate the concerns of Russian Formalism and Factography within
a modern Western art problematic: the first requirement of a socialist art practice
is that it should engage those codes and contents which are in the public domain.
These present themselves, and thus ideology, as natural and whole; a socialist
art practice aims to deconstruct these codes, to unpick the apparently seamless
ideological surface they present.



914 Institutions and Objections

The propaganda message is ineffective to the extent that it endorses the very
codes which frame the ideology it would oppose; it is these which appropriate
it as 'mere propaganda 1 . Anthony Wilden puts it: ' . . . the response to the
indifference of the system cannot simply be a strident dogmatism ... the first
line of defence against the violence of the rhetoric of the establishment is to
learn something about rhetoric. And that means to learn something about
communication. But a line of defence is not enough: the victims must take the
offensive. What is required - at this admittedly minimal level - is a guerrilla
rhetoric. And for a guerrilla rhetoric, you must know what your enemy knows,
why and how he knows it, and how to contest him on any ground.' 3

Wilden is speaking here of the rhetoric of the academic establishment in
which: The necessary isolation of a system from its context in order that it
may be studied ... is generally used, implicitly ... to justify the isolation of the
researcher from his context: from his past, from his social and academic position,
from his future expectations, from his economic status in a hierarchical system
of privilege, from his conscious or unconscious positive or negative commitment
to a set of ideological and political views - all of which one may expect to
discover in various transformations in his work.' 4 Wild en's remarks, however,
may be extended to all the forms of discourse which collectively constitute the
symbolic representation of our official culture; notably, those which are en-
countered in the mass media.

Fortini quotes a certain communist spokesman: 'Continue as writers. We do
not want to make a corporal of a man whose voice can move an army'; and
then comments that '. . . the writer whose "voice can move an army" is in fact
the bureaucrat of letters, the specialist in propaganda, integrated in mystifica-
tion. ,s It is such specialists as these who today compose commercial publicity.

Without doubt advertising constitutes one of the most massive ideological
interventions in our cultural life. Why then does it receive such a dispropor-
tionately small amount of 'serious' attention, compared say with cinema? One
answer to this question is cultural: British intellectuals tend to have an 'English
Lit' background and the analysis of (what they take to be) animated books suits
them very well. Another reason is phenomenological: whereas the cinema readily
constitutes itself as an object, advertising is received as an environment and as
such tends to pass unremarked (like ideology itself). Nevertheless it is advertising
which is closest to that mass-consumed art form, the product of an anonymous
collective, which cinema becomes in the imagination of 'left' film commentators
when they take time off from writing about films by famous men. It is as much
an autonomous category of communication as is the cinema, and should be
studied as such.
* * *

In a 1934 essay the Prague linguist and aesthetician Jan Mukarovsky referred,
in passing, to the triad of theories which even today still frame the thinking of
our Western art community. He warned: 'Without semiological orientation the
art theorist will always be open to the temptation to treat the work of art as a
purely formal construction or else as an immediate reflex of the mental or
physiological moods of the author or of the distinct reality expressed by the



Vile Political Aspects 915

work, viz, the ideological, economic, social and cultural situation of the con-
temporary milieu.' 6

These are the points between which well-worn paths are still being trodden
today - Formalism, expression theory, Realism. 'Only the semiological view-
point 1 , Mukarovsky continues, 'allows theorists to grasp the autonomous exist-
ence and fundamental dynamics of the artistic structure and to grasp the
development of art as an immanent movement which also has a constant
dialectical relation to the development of the other domains of culture'.

Russian art of the twenties represents an exemplary attempt to deal with that
interdependence of form and ideology for which Aleksei Gan, in Constructivism
(1922), coined the term 'tectonic': 'Painting, sculpture, theatre, these are the
material forms of the bourgeois capitalist aesthetic culture which satisfies
the "spiritual" demands of the consumer of a disorganised social order . . . The
tectonic as a discipline should lead the Constructivist in practice to a synthesis
of a new content and the new form. He must be a marxist-educated man who
has once and for all outlived art and really advanced on industrial material. The
tectonic is his guiding star, the brain of experimental and practical activity . . .
the tectonic unites the ideological and the formal.' 7 [see IIID7]

The Left front's advance on industrial materials led them into direct engage-
ment with mass communication codes and practices. Today such 'mass media'
constitute en bloc a popular Art. We took the example of advertising: advertising
is an 'art' form in that it constitutes an autonomous genre of aesthetically
dimensioned message structures (which although they may be analysed in terms
of other structures are not reducible to them) - devices whose (contingent)
function is to renew our perception of, and enthusiasm for, consumer values.
Advertising is 'popular' in the sense that its codes are commonly understood:
assuming literacy, advertisements yield more or less non-aberrant de-codings
within most social sub-groups.

Although we cannot currently affect the publicity messages emitted, we may
subvert the messages received. A task for socialist art is to unmask the
mystifications of bourgeois culture by laying bare its codes, by exposing the
devices through which it constructs its self-image. Another job for socialist art
is to expose the contradictions in our class society, to show up what double-think
there is in our second-nature. Qualifications for the first job include a knowledge
of semiotics; qualifications for the second job include a knowledge of politics
and economics. As we only know society through its representations, then both
jobs will have to be done by the same man. (The inmates of art educational
institutions generally receive only courses in connoisseurship; on their release,
their progress towards self-reeducation is a difficult one.)

To date there is little evidence that the self-professing left of our art
community has grasped Gan's 'tectonic 1 principle in its application within our
own media-dominated culture. Seemingly oblivious to the formal aspects of
ideology, they address each other in a shop-worn rhetoric long ago appropriated
by bourgeois ideology as 'leftist dogma 1 . Thus they obligingly fill the benches
which bourgeois culture allocates to the 'official opposition', endorsing the
existing structure of social relations.



916 Institutions and Objections

John Berger has observed: 'Publicity turns consumption into a substitute for
democracy. The choice of what one eats (or wears or drives) takes the place of
significant political choice.' 8 Vanguardism in art has become just another way
of offering the consumer a choice. Body art or art-language, the ingredients
disappear behind the packaging and a mindless loyalty to the label is rapidly
established and just as rapidly lost. There is therefore nothing more contradic-
tory at this present historical juncture than a left avant-garde, and nothing more
depressing than attempts to invent one.



References to literature are unavoidable when discussing the visual arts in Russia at the beginning
of the present century. In addition to the early lead taken by Formalist literary criticism the
political framework of art tended to be discussed primarily in terms of literature; party decisions
on the arts were made first in respect of literature with other arts following suit. To make such
literary references, however, is not to misrepresent the theoretical context of the visual arts, as
contacts between the various arts were extensive both before the October revolution and into the
late twenties.

Tzvetan Todorov, 'Some approaches to Russian Formalism 1 , 20th Century Studies, December 1972,
p. 10.

Anthony Wilden, System and Structure, Tavistock, 1972, p. xxvi.
Ibid., p. xxii.

Franco Fortini, 'The Writers' Mandate and the End of Anti-Fascism 1 , Screen, vol. 15, no. 1,
1974, pp. 42-3.

Jan Mukarovsky, 'L'Art com me fait semiologique 1 , Actes du hut tie me congres Internationale de
phthsophte d Prague 2-7 septembre 1934, Prague, 1936, (unpublished translation, BFI, London).
Aleksei Gan, Constructivism, 1922 (signed 1920) in Camilla Gray, The Great Experiment: Russian
Art 1863-1922, Thames & Hudson, 1962, p. 285.
John Berger, Ways of Seeing, BBC and Penguin, 1972, p. 149.



9 Art & Language: Editorial to Art-Language

If the Conceptual Art movement remained unpopular with the art market throughout the
1970s, by the middle of the decade certain forms of Conceptual Art had achieved
respectability in those intellectual circles where the methods of semiology had become
virtually de rigueur. As some Conceptual artists, Burgin among them, turned to semio-
logical methods in their critique of fine art, Art & Language was to turn to painting,
with its traditional depth and opacity, as a form of resistance to the academic appro-
priation of pictures-and-texts. The polemic of this editorial is directed against the
privileging of cultural and artistic avant-gardism through forms of academic specialism.
Originally printed on the cover and first inside page of Art-Language, vol. 3, no. 3,
Banbury, June 1976. (The ellipses in the present text are original and do not denote
editorial excisions.)



. . . THE TIMELESS LUMPENNESS OF A RADICAL CULTURAL LIFE;

the gangrenous excrescence, stylishly exposed in the quiet salons. The market
for the dry delicacies of pretentious gentility, the over-fed opinion, the corpulent
. . . choice, the leisured appropriation, 'society' and society in harmony are an
objective condition of the class struggle. The privileged low-life of high culture
is the massification of the people, is the enemy of inquiry, is an insult to, and



Vile Political Aspects 917

sometimes an egregious product of, the achievement and goals of working-class
movements, a denial of the real objectives of the working-class movement. It is
not, however, the life of the unwitting fool. It has its own agencies.

The conditions of the production of high culture are not somehow apart from
these machinations in brutality . . . and the artists are not exempt from the
charge of connivance at the proliferation of force, violence: the barbarism of
imperialism. Their 'status' as an economic hors concours serves the aim of the
ruling classes in their continuing domination. It avails no one of a glimpse of
'freedom'. It is a status which allows a parvenu sincerity, the treachery of the
successful product, to be deified in a fideism of 'culture', a fideism in the
interests of the ruling class.

Don't think that artists are somehow the victims of an underdetermined
predestination: their attempts to fix forever their relations with 'the rest of the
world', irrespective of social change, are the last defensive gasps of an entirely
static instrument of capitalism: empty-headed, it parasitizes the ectoderm of
social change in the effort to be the better fed by its masters.

And radical artists produce articles and exhibitions about photos, capitalism,
corruption, war, pestilence, trench-foot and issues, possessed by that venal shade
of empiricism which guards their proprietorial interests. Most people laugh
easily at old fools' hack aestheticism; the by now undifferentiated mass of
pretence and piety. It is similarly easy to avoid debate with the serious, anorexic
autohagiographers who've shoved (?) and wheedled their way into the (what?)
praxis of a ludicrous and equivalent 'specialism'. The air (and the aether) is
toxic with the confident exhalations of their apprehension. Club-foot-Ph.D.-
standards-as-style is nothing new in the global sales-pitch. American football
helmets and meaningless photos are serious objects of contemplation (and . . . )
if you happen to be obsessed by your career as the nexus of historiography.
Heaven knows, anything must go; and it even goes against the sanction imposed
by the appropriate Lebensphilosophie: the manieres of 'semiotique' and the
manieres of 'social purpose' even sell that short. The artist, the bourgeois
ideologist without 'virtue', is just like anyone else without 'virtue': his 'terror'
is gratuitous and ultimately suicidal.



VIlD

Critical Revisions



1 Jacques Derrida (b. 1930) The Exorbitant:

Question of Method' and 'The Engraving and the
Ambiguities of Formalism', from Of Grammatology

No claim in the contemporary critical literature has been more hotly contested, nor
arguably more misunderstood, than Derrida's 'il n'y a pas de hors-texte' (approximately:
'there is nothing outside of the text'; or 'there is no outside-the-text'). By those wishing
to distance themselves from the interventionist requirements of the Marxist tradition,
the statement has been taken as licence to deny the very existence of a 'real' world
outside of language. For historical materialists, on the other hand, it has come to
represent the acme of a resurgent idealism, linked to the conservative political turn in
the Western democracies since the mid-1970s. It is, however, equally plausible to read
Derrida's text as a claim which would sit relatively conventionally within most modern
philosophies: that there is no Archimedean point outside of language from which the
truth claims of language itself can be surveyed. It is in a sense the extremity of the
relativist inference Derrida draws from this which has ensured the resonance of his
claim. In the second extract he considers the implication of this argument for the
concept of art, finding against formalism. Despite the claim that 'il n'y pas de hors
texte', in art it is 'the represented and not the representer, the expressed and not the
expression' which matters; at the same time as this 'represented' can never achieve
an unmediated presence. Both extracts proceed from reflections on the philosophy of
Jean-Jacques Rousseau (the internal quotation is from his Essay on the Origin of
Languages). Originally published as De la Grammatologie, Paris, 1967, Derrida's book
was translated into English by Gayatri Chakravorti Spivak as Of Grammatology, Balti-
more, 1976, pp. 158-160, 207-10 and 215, from which the present extracts are
taken.

[The] question is . . . not only of Rousseau's writing but also of our reading.
We should begin by taking rigorous account of this being held within [prise] or
this surprise: the writer writes in a language and in a logic whose proper system,
laws, and life his discourse by definition cannot dominate absolutely. He uses
them only by letting himself, after a fashion and up to a point, be governed by
the system. And the reading must always aim at a certain relationship, unper-
ceived by the writer, between what he commands and what he does not command



VIId Critical Revisions 919

of the patterns of the language that he uses. This relationship is not a certain
quantitative distribution of shadow and light, of weakness or of force, but a
signifying structure that critical reading should produce.

What does produce mean here? In my attempt to explain that, I would initiate
a justification of my principles of reading. A justification, as we shall see, entirely
negative, outlining by exclusion a space of reading that I shall not fill here: a
task of reading.

To produce this signifying structure obviously cannot consist of reproducing,
by the effaced and respectful doubling of commentary, the conscious, voluntary,
intentional relationship that the writer institutes in his exchanges with the
history to which he belongs thanks to the element of language. This moment
of doubling commentary should no doubt have its place in a critical reading.
To recognize and respect all its classical exigencies is not easy and requires all
the instruments of traditional criticism. Without this recognition and this
respect, critical production would risk developing in any direction at all and
authorize itself to say almost anything. But this indispensable guardrail has
always only protected, it has never opened, a reading.

Yet if reading must not be content with doubling the text, it cannot legitim-
ately transgress the text toward something other than it, toward a referent (a
reality that is metaphysical, historical, psychobiographical, etc.) or toward a
signified outside the text whose content could take place, could have taken place
outside of language, that is to say, in the sense that we give here to that word,
outside of writing in general. That is why the methodological considerations
that we risk applying here to an example are closely dependent on general
propositions that we have elaborated above; as regards the absence of the referent
or the transcendental signified. There is nothing outside of the text [there is no
outside- text; il n'y a pas de hors-texte]. And that is neither because Jean-Jacques'
life, or the existence of Mamma or Therese themselves, is not of prime interest
to us, nor because we have access to their so-called 'real' existence only in the
text and we have neither any means of altering this, nor any right to neglect
this limitation. All reasons of this type would already be sufficient, to be sure,
but there are more radical reasons. What we have tried to show by following
the guiding line of the 'dangerous supplement,' is that in what one calls the
real life of these existences 4 of flesh and bone,' beyond and behind what one
believes can be circumscribed as Rousseau's text, there has never been anything
but writing; there have never been anything but supplements, substitutive
significations which could only come forth in a chain of differential references,
the 'real' supervening, and being added only while taking on meaning from a
trace and from an invocation of the supplement, etc. And thus to infinity, for
we have read, in the text, that the absolute present, Nature, that which words
like 'real mother' name, have always already escaped, have never existed; that
what opens meaning and language is writing as the disappearance of natural
presence.

Although it is not commentary, our reading must be intrinsic and remain
within the text. That is why, in spite of certain appearances, the locating of the
word supplement is here not at all psychoanalytical, if by that we understand an



920 Institutions and Objections

interpretation that takes us outside of the writing toward a psychobiographical
signified, or even toward a general psychological structure that could rightly be
separated from the signifier. This method has occasionally been opposed to the
traditional doubling commentary; it could be shown that it actually comes to
terms with it quite easily. The security with which the commentary considers the
self-identity of the text, the confidence with which it carves out its contour, goes
hand in hand with the tranquil assurance that leaps over the text toward its presumed
content, in the direction of the pure signified. [ . . . ]

If it seems to us in principle impossible to separate, through interpretation
or commentary, the signified from the signifier, and thus to destroy writing by
the writing that is yet reading, we nevertheless believe that this impossibility is
historically articulated. It does not limit attempts at deciphering in the same
way, to the same degree, and according to the same rules. Here we must take
into account the history of the text in general. When we speak of the writer
and of the encompassing power of the language to which he is subject, we are
not only thinking of the writer in literature. The philosopher, the chronicler,
the theoretician in general, and at the limit everyone writing, is thus taken by
surprise. But, in each case, the person writing is inscribed in a determined
textual system. Even if there is never a pure signified, there are different
relationships as to that which, from the signifier, is presented as the irreducible
stratum of the signified. For example, the philosophical text, although it is in
fact always written, includes, precisely as its philosophical specificity, the project
of effacing itself in the face of the signified content which it transports and in
general teaches. Reading should be aware of this project, even if, in the last
analysis, it intends to expose the project's failure. The entire history of texts,
and within it the history of literary forms in the West, should be studied from
this point of view. With the exception of a thrust or a point of resistance which
has only been very lately recognized as such, literary writing has, almost always
and almost everywhere, according to some fashions and across very diverse ages,
lent itself to this transcendent reading, in that search for the signified which we
here put in question, not to annull it but to understand it within a system to
which such a reading is blind. [. . .]

If art operates through the sign and is effective through imitation, it can only
take place within the system of a culture, and the theory of art is a theory of
mores. A 'moral' impression, contrary to a '"sensible" impression,' is recognized
through the fact that it places its force in a sign. Aesthetics passes through a
semiology and even through an ethnology. The effects of aesthetic signs are
only determined within a cultural system. 'Unless the influence of sensations
upon us is due mainly to moral causes, why are we so sensitive to impressions
that mean nothing to the uncivilized? Why is our most touching music only a
pointless noise to the ear of a West Indian? Are his nerves of a different nature
from ours?' [Rousseau, Essay on The Origin of Languages, Chapter XV].

Medicine itself must take account of the semiological culture within which it
must heal. As with the therapeutic art, the therapeutic effects of art are not
natural in as much as they work through signs; and if the cure is a language,



VIId Critical Revisions 921

the remedies must make themselves understood to the sick through the code of
his culture:



The healing of tarantula bites is cited as proof of the physical power of sounds.
But in fact this evidence proves quite the opposite. What is needed for curing
those bitten by this insect are neither isolated sounds, nor even the same tunes.
Rather, each needs tunes with familiar melodies and understandable lyrics. Italian
tunes are needed for Italians; for Turks, Turkish tunes. Each is affected only by
accents familiar to him. His nerves yield only to what his spirit pre-disposes [for]
them. One must speak to him in a language he understands, if he is to be moved
by what he is told. The cantatas of Bernier are said to have cured the fever of a
French musician. Thev would have given one to a musician of any other nation.
[Essay, Chapter XV]

Rousseau does not go so far as to consider that the symptoms themselves
belong to a culture and that the bite of a tarantula might have different effects
in different places. But the principle of such a conclusion is clearly indicated
in his explication. There is a single exception, which is more than simply
strange, within this ethno-semiotics: cooking, or rather taste. Rousseau condemns
gluttony without mercy. One might wonder why: T know r of only one affective
sense in which there is no moral element: that is taste. And, accordingly,
gluttony is the main vice only of those who have no sense of taste' (ibid.). 'Who
have no sense of taste' means here, of course, 'who do nothing but taste,' who
have nothing but uneducated and uncultivated sensations.

As the value of virtuality or potentiality further introduces here an element
of transition and confusion, of graduality and of shifts within the rigor of
distinctions and within the functioning of concepts - limits of animality,
childhood, savagery, etc. - one must admit that 'moral impressions' through
signs and a system of differences can always be already discerned, although
confusedly, in the animal. 'Something of this moral effect is perceivable even
in animals.' We realized the need for this hesitation in connection with pity,
and at the same time with imitation [. . .]

From this irreducibility of the semiotic order, Rousseau also draws conclusions
against the sensationalism and materialism of his own century: 'Colors and
sounds can do much, as representations and signs, very little simply as objects
of sense' [Essay]. The argument for art as signifying text is at the service of
metaphysics and of spiritualist ethics: 'I believe that had these ideas been better
developed, we should have been spared many stupid arguments about ancient
music. But in this century when all the operations of the soul have to be
materialized, and even human feeling deprived of all morality, I am deluded if
the new philosophy does not become as destructive of good taste as of virtue'
[Essay].

We must be attentive to the ultimate finality of the esteem which the sign
enjoys. According to a general rule which is important for us, attention to the
signifier has the paradoxical effect of reducing it. Unlike the concept of
the supplement which, of course, signifies nothing, simply replaces a lack, the
signifier, as it is indicated in the grammatical form of this word and the logical



922 Institutions and Objections

form of the concept, signifies a signified. One cannot separate its effectiveness
from the signified to which it is tied. It is not the body of the sign that acts,
for that is all sensation, but rather the signified that it expresses, imitates, or
transports. It would be wrong to conclude that, in Rousseau's critique of
sensationalism, it is the sign itself that exhausts the operation of art. We are
moved, 'excited,' by the represented and not by the representer, by the expressed
and not by the expression, by the inside which is exposed and not by the outside
of the exposition. Even in painting, representation comes alive and touches us
only if it imitates an object, and, better, if it expresses a passion: 'It is the
drawing, the imitation, which gives life and spirit to these colors. The passions
they express are what stir ours. . . . The strokes of a touching picture affect us
even in a print' [Essay].

The engraving: art being born of imitation, only belongs to the work proper
as far as it can be retained in an engraving, in the reproductive impression of
its outline. If the beautiful loses nothing by being reproduced, if one recognizes
it in its sign, in the sign of the sign which a copy must be, then in the 'first
time' of its production there was already a reproductive essence. The engraving,
which copies the models of art, is nonetheless the model for art. If the origin
of art is the possibility of the engraving, the death of art and art as death are
prescribed from the very birth of the work. The principle of life, once again,
is confounded with the principle of death. Once again, Rousseau desires to
separate them but once again, he accedes within his description and within his
text to that which limits or contradicts his desire.

On the one hand, in fact, Rousseau does not doubt that imitation and formal
outline are the property of art and he inherits, as a matter of course, the
traditional concept of mimesis; a concept that was first that of the philosophers
whom Rousseau, one must remember, accused of having killed song. This
accusation could not be radical, since it moved within the conceptuality inherited
from this philosophy and of the metaphysical conception of art. The outline
that lends itself to the print or engraving, the line which is imitated, belongs to
all the arts, to the arts of space as much as to the arts of duration, to music
no less than to painting. In both it outlines the space of imitation and the
imitation of space.

Music is no more the art of combining sounds to please the ear than painting is
the art of combining colors to please the eye. If there were no more to it than
that, they would both be natural sciences rather than fine arts. Imitation alone
raises them to this level. But what makes painting an imitative art? Drawing. What
makes music another? Melody. [Essay, Chapter XIII]

The outline (design or melodic line) is not only what permits imitation and
the recognition of the represented in the representer. It is the element of formal
difference which permits the contents (colored or sonorous substance) to appear.
By the same token, it cannot give rise to [literally provide space for] art (techne)
as mimesis without constituting it forthwith as a technique of imitation. If art lives
from an originary reproduction, the outline that permits this reproduction, opens
in the same stroke the space of calculation, of grammaticality, of the rational




VIId Critical Revisions 923

science of intervals, and of those 'rules of imitation' that are fatal to energy.
Let us recall: 'And, to the degree that the rules of imitation proliferated,
imitative language was enfeebled' [Essay]. Imitation is therefore at the same time
the life and the death of art. Art and death, art and its death are comprised in
the space of the alteration of the originary iteration {iterum, anew, does it not
come from Sanskrit itara, other?); of repetition, reproduction, representation;
or also in space as the possibility of iteration and the exit from life placed
outside of itself.

For the outline is spacing itself, and marking figures, it shapes the surfaces
of painting as much as the time of music:

The role of melody in music is precisely that of drawing in a painting. This is
what constitutes the strokes and figures, of which the harmony and the sounds
are merely the colors. But, it is said, melody is merely a succession of sounds.
No doubt. And drawing is only an arrangement of colors. An orator uses ink to
write out his compositions: does that mean ink is a very eloquent liquid? [Essay,
Chapter XIII]

Thus disengaging a concept of formal difference, criticizing with vigor an
aesthetic that one might call substantialist rather than materialist, more attentive
to sensory content than to formal composition, Rousseau yet places a great deal
of the burden of art - here music - upon the outline. That is to say to what
can give rise to cold calculation and the rules of imitation. According to a logic
with which we are now familiar, Rousseau confronts that danger by opposing
good form to bad form, the form of life to the form of death, melodic to harmonic
form, form with imitative content to form without content, form full of sense
to empty abstraction. Rousseau reacts against formalism. In his eyes formalism is
also a materialism and a sensationalism.
* * *

What does Rousseau say without saying, see without seeing? That substitution
has always already begun; that imitation, principle of art, has always already
interrupted natural plenitude; that, having to be a discourse, it has always already
broached presence in differance; that in Nature it is always that which supplies
Nature's lack, a voice that is substituted for the voice of Nature.



2 Michel Foucault (1926-1984) 'What Is an Author?'

Existentialism, indeed artistic Modernism in general, privileged the author. The sense
of the self-contained human individual, reaching its high point in the artist, has deep
roots in the desires and self-images of Western societies. The t|/vin quests for authen-
ticity and originality which are inscribed right across the body of modern art find their
fulfilment in tragic authors, or more particularly in their biographies: van Gogh and
Jackson Pollock being perhaps the stereotypical examples. This form of privilege came
under challenge from the wave of Structuralist influence which passed across French
thought in the 1960s, spreading outwards as part of an intellectual project which, in
its origins at least, was manifestly radical with respect to bourgeois convention.
Thinkers as diverse as Lacan, Althusser, Barthes and Foucault all questioned the status



924 Institutions and Objections

of the homogeneous individual, seen now as an ideological construct. Foremost among
the casualties of this attack was the concept of the author. The critique of the author
has sometimes been ridiculed as a denial of the existence of biological individuals. Its
force is rather to locate the individual within a system of conventions, rules, norms,
grammars and so forth which, in effect, articulate him - or 'speak' him. The 'death of
the author' points to a revision of critical priorities. Originally given as a talk at the
Societe Francaise de Philosophie, and first published in the Bulletin de la Societe
Frangaise de Philosophie, no. 63, Paris, 1969. Revised version translated by Josue V.
Harari in Harari (ed), Textual Strategies: Perspectives in Post-Structuralist Criticism,
Ithaca, 1979, pp. 141-60, from which the present extracts are taken.

The coming into being of the notion of 'author' constitutes the privileged
moment of individualization in the history of ideas, knowledge, literature,
philosophy, and the sciences. Even today, when we reconstruct the history of
a concept, literary genre, or school of philosophy, such categories seem relatively
weak, secondary, and superimposed scansions in comparison with the solid and
fundamental unit of the author and the work.
* * *

... an author's name is not simply an element in a discourse (capable of being
either subject or object, of being replaced by a pronoun, and the like); it
performs a certain role with regard to narrative discourse, assuring a classifica-
tory function. Such a name permits one to group together a certain number of
texts, define them, differentiate them from and contrast them to others. In
addition, it establishes a relationship among the texts. Hermes Trismegistus did
not exist, nor did Hippocrates - in the sense that Balzac existed - but the fact
that several texts have been placed under the same name indicates that there
has been established among them a relationship of homogeneity, filiation,
authentification of some texts by the use of others, reciprocal explication, or
concomitant utilization. The author's name serves to characterize a certain mode
of being of discourse: the fact that the discourse has an author's name, that one
can say 'this was written by so-and-so' or 'so-and-so is its author,' shows that
this discourse is not ordinary everyday speech that merely comes and goes, not
something that is immediately consumable. On the contrary, it is a speech that
must be received in a certain mode and that, in a given culture, must receive
a certain status.

It would seem that the author's name, unlike other proper names, does not
pass from the interior of a discourse to the real and exterior individual who
produced it; instead, the name seems always to be present, marking off the
edges of the text, revealing, or at least characterizing, its mode of being. The
author's name manifests the appearance of a certain discursive set and indicates
the status of this discourse within a society and a culture. It has no legal status,
nor is it located in the fiction of the work; rather, it is located in the break
that founds a certain discursive construct and its very particular mode of being.
As a result, we could say that in a civilization like our own there are a certain
number of discourses that are endowed with the 'author-function,' while others
are deprived of it. A private letter may well have a signer - it does not have



VIId Critical Revisions 925

an author; a contract may well have a guarantor - it does not have an author.
An anonymous text posted on a wall probably has a writer - but not an author.
The author-function is therefore characteristic of the mode of existence, circu-
lation, and functioning of certain discourses within a society.

Let us analyze this 'author-function' as we have just described it. In our culture,
how does one characterize a discourse containing the author-function? In what
way is this discourse different from other discourses? [ . . . ]

First of all, discourses are objects of appropriation. The form of ownership
from which they spring is of a rather particular type, one that has been codified
for many years. We should note that, historically, this type of ownership has
always been subsequent to what one might call penal appropriation. Texts,
books, and discourses really began to have authors (other than mythical,
'sacralized' and 'sacralizing' figures) to the extent that authors became subject
to punishment, that is, to the extent that discourses could be transgressive. In
our culture (and doubtless in many others), discourse was not originally a
product, a thing, a kind of goods; it was essentially an act - an act placed in
the bipolar field of the sacred and the profane, the licit and the illicit, the
religious and the blasphemous. Historically, it was a gesture fraught with risks
before becoming goods caught up in a circuit of ownership. [. . .]

The author-function does not affect all discourses in a universal and constant
way, however. This is its second characteristic. In our civilization, it has not
always been the same types of texts which have required attribution to an author.
There was a time when the texts that we today call 'literary' (narratives, stories,
epics, tragedies, comedies) were accepted, put into circulation, and valorized
without any question about the identity of their author; their anonymity caused
no difficulties since their ancientness, whether real or imagined, was regarded
as a sufficient guarantee of their status. On the other hand, those texts that we
now would call scientific - those dealing with cosmology and the heavens,
medicine and illnesses, natural sciences and geography - were accepted in the
Middle Ages, and accepted as 'true,' only when marked with the name of their
author. 'Hippocrates said,' 'Pliny recounts,' were not really formulas of an
argument based on authority; they were the markers inserted in discourses that
were supposed to be received as statements of demonstrated truth.

A reversal occured in the seventeenth or eighteenth century. Scientific dis-
courses began to be received for themselves, in the anonymity of an established
or always redemonstrable truth; their membership in a systematic ensemble, and
not the reference to the individual who produced them, stood as their guarantee.
The author-function faded away, and the inventor's name served only to christen
a theorem, proposition, particular effect, property, body, group of elements, or
pathological syndrome. By the same token, literary discourses came to be
accepted only when endowed with the author-function. We now ask of each
poetic or fictional text: from where does it come, who wrote it, when, under
what circumstances, or beginning with what design? The meaning ascribed to
it and the status or value accorded it depend upon the manner in which we
answer these questions. And if a text should be discovered in a state of



926 Institutions and Objections

anonymity - whether as a consequence of an accident or the author's explicit
wish - the game becomes one of rediscovering the author. [ . . . ] In order to
'rediscover' an author in a work, modern criticism uses methods similar to those
that Christian exegesis employed when trying to prove the value of a text by
its author's saintliness. In De vim illustribus, Saint Jerome explains that ho-
monym} is not sufficient to identify legitimately authors of more than one work:
different individuals could have had the same name, or one man could have,
illegitimately, borrowed another's patronymic. The name as an individual trade-
mark is not enough when one works within a textual tradition.

How then can one attribute several discourses to one and the same author?
How can one use the author-function to determine if one is dealing with one
or several individuals? Saint Jerome proposes four criteria: (1) if among several
books attributed to an author one is inferior to the others, it must be withdrawn
from the list of the author's works (the author is therefore defined as a constant
level of value); (2) the same should be done if certain texts contradict the
doctrine expounded in the author's other works (the author is thus defined as
a field of conceptual or theoretical coherence); (3) one must also exclude works
that are written in a different style, containing words and expressions not
ordinarily found in the writer's production (the author is here conceived as a
stylistic unity); (4) finally, passages quoting statements that were made, or
mentioning events that occurred after the author's death must be regarded as
interpolated texts (the author is here seen as a historical figure at the crossroads
of a certain number of events).

Modern literary criticism, even when - as is now customary - it is not
concerned with questions of authentication, still defines the author the same
way: the author provides the basis for explaining not only the presence of certain
events in a work, but also their transformations, distortions, and diverse
modifications (through his biography, the determination of his individual per-
spective, the analysis of his social position, and the revelation of his basic
design). The author is also the principle of a certain unity of writing - all
differences having to be resolved, at least in part, by the principles of evolution,
maturation, or influence. The author also serves to neutralize the contradictions
that may emerge in a series of texts: there must be - at a certain level of his
thought or desire, of his consciousness or unconscious - a point where contra-
dictions are resolved, where incompatible elements are at last tied together or
organized around a fundamental or originating contradiction. Finally, the author
is a particular source of expression that, in more or less completed forms, is
manifested equally well, and with similar validity, in works, sketches, letters,
fragments, and so on. Clearly, Saint Jerome's four criteria of authenticity
(criteria which seem totally insufficient for today's exegetes) do define the four
modalities according to which modern criticism brings the author-function into
play.
* * *

[...] Perhaps it is time to study discourses not only in terms of their
expressive value or formal transformations, but according to their modes of
existence. The modes of circulation, valorization, attribution, and appropriation



I



VIId Critical Revisions 927

of discourses vary with each culture and are modified within each. The manner
in which they are articulated according to social relationships can be more readily
understood, I believe, in the activity of the author-function and in its modifi-
cations, than in the themes or concepts that discourses set in motion.

It would seem that one could also, beginning with analyses of this type,
re-examine the privileges of the subject. I realize that in undertaking the internal
and architectonic analysis of a work (be it a literary text, philosophical system,
or scientific work), in setting aside biographical and psychological references,
one has already called back into question the absolute character and founding
role of the subject. Still, perhaps one must return to this question, not in order
to re-establish the theme of an originating subject, but to grasp the subject's
points of insertion, modes of functioning, and system of dependencies. Doing
so means overturning the traditional problem, no longer raising the questions
'How can a free subject penetrate the substance of things and give it meaning?
How can it activate the rules of a language from within and thus give rise to
the designs which are properly its own?' Instead, these questions will be raised:
'How, under what conditions and in what forms can something like a subject
appear in the order of discourse? What place can it occupy in each type of
discourse, what functions can it assume, and by obeying what rules?' In short,
it is a matter of depriving the subject (or its substitute) of its role as originator,
and of analyzing the subject as a variable and complex function of discourse.

Second, there are reasons dealing with the 'ideological' status of the author.
The question then becomes: How can one reduce the great peril, the great
danger with which fiction threatens our world? The answer is: One can reduce
it with the author. The author allows a limitation of the cancerous and dangerous
proliferation of significations within a world where one is thrifty not only with
one's resources and riches, but also with one's discourses and their significations.
The author is the principle of thrift in the proliferation of meaning. As a result,
we must entirely reverse the traditional idea of the author. We are accustomed
... to saying that the author is the genial creator of a work in which he
deposits, with infinite wealth and generosity, an inexhaustible world of signific-
ations. We are used to thinking that the author is so different from all other
men, and so transcendent with regard to all languages that, as soon as he speaks,
meaning begins to proliferate, to proliferate indefinitely.

The truth is quite the contrary: the author is not an indefinite source of
significations which fill a work; the author does not precede the works, he is a
certain functional principle by which, in our culture, one limits, excludes, and
chooses; in short, by which one impedes the free circulation, the free manipu-
lation, the free composition, decomposition, and recomposition of fiction. In
fact, if we are accustomed to presenting the author as a genius, as a perpetual
surging of invention, it is because, in reality, we make him function in exactly
the opposite fashion. One can say that the author is an ideological product,
since we represent him as the opposite of his historically real function. (When
a historically given function is represented in a figure that inverts it, one has
an ideological production.) The author is therefore the ideological figure by
which one marks the manner in which we fear the proliferation of meaning.



928 Institutions and Objections

In saying this, I seem to call for a form of culture in which fiction would
not be limited by the figure of the author. It would be pure romanticism,
however, to imagine a culture in which the fictive would operate in an absolutely
free state, in which fiction would be put at the disposal of everyone and would
develop without passing through something like a necessary or constraining
figure. Although, since the eighteenth century, the author has played the role
of the regulator of the fictive, a role quite characteristic of our era of industrial
and bourgeois society, of individualism and private property, still, given the
historical modifications that are taking place, it does not seem necessary that
the author-function remain constant in form, complexity, and even in existence.
I think that, as our society changes, at the very moment when it is in the process
of changing, the author-function will disappear, and in such a manner that
fiction and its polysemic texts will once again function according to another
mode, but still with a system of constraint - one which will no longer be the
author, but which will have to be determined or, perhaps, experienced.

All discourses, whatever their status, form, value, and whatever the treatment
to which they will be subjected, would then develop in the anonymity of a
murmur. We would no longer hear the questions that have been rehashed for
so long: 'Who really spoke? Is it really he and not someone else? With what
authenticity or originality? And what part of his deepest self did he express in
his discourse?' Instead, there would be other questions, like these: 'What are
the modes of existence of this discourse? Where has it been used, how can it
circulate, and who can appropriate it for himself? What are the places in it
where there is room for possible subjects? Who can assume these various
subject-functions?' And behind all these questions, we would hear hardly
anything but the stirring of an indifference: 'What difference does it make who
is speaking?'

3 Louis Althusser (1918-1990) from 'Ideology and
Ideological State Apparatuses'

Althusser's philosophical work began as an intervention in the crisis of Marxism gener-
ated by the legacy of Stalin: an ambitious attempt to re-read Marx himself, and thereby
set Marxist theory on a new intellectual footing. Initially this involved a break with the
concept of 'humanism', which Althusser regarded as merely ideological, in favour of a
conception, influenced by Structuralism, of individual subjectivity as a product of the
action of general social forces. In this phase of his thought, 'ideology' was counterposed
to a rigorous view of Marxism as science. In the later 1960s however, increasingly
under the influence of Maoism, and of the Events of 1968, Althusser's thought turned
through 180 degrees. Marxism's virtue no longer lay in its status as a (scientific) theory
of social formations, but in its partisanship as theoretical practice in the class struggle.
The sphere of Ideology became a crucial site of this struggle: the intellectual and moral
means whereby class societies reproduced themselves and where revolutionaries chal-
lenged them. Originally published as Ideologies et Appareils Ideologiques d'Etat (Notes
pour une Recherche)', in La Pensee, 151, Paris, June 1970, pp. 3-38. Translated into
English as Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses' in Lenin and Philosophy and
Other Essays, London, 1971, pp. 123-73, from which the present extracts are taken.






VIId Critical Revisions 929



Infrastructure and Superstructure



On a number of occasions I have insisted on the revolutionary character of the
Marxist conception of the 'social whole' insofar as it is distinct from the Hegelian
'totality'. I said (and this thesis only repeats famous propositions of historical
materialism) that Marx conceived the structure of every society as constituted
by 'levels' or 'instances' articulated by a specific determination: the infrastructure,
or economic base (the 'unity' of the productive forces and the relations of
production) and the superstructure, which itself contains two 'levels' or 'instan-
ces': the politico-legal (law and the State) and ideology (the different ideologies,
religious, ethical, legal, political, etc.). [. . .]

It is easy to see that this representation of the structure of every society as
an edifice containing a base (infrastructure) on which are erected the two 'floors'
of the superstructure, is a metaphor, to be quite precise, a spatial metaphor:
the metaphor of a topography {topique). Like every metaphor, this metaphor
suggests something, makes something visible. What? Precisely this: that the
upper floors could not 'stay up' (in the air) alone, if they did not rest precisely
on their base.

Thus the object of the metaphor of the edifice is to represent above all the
'determination in the last instance' by the economic base. The effect of this
spatial metaphor is to endow the base with an index of effectivity known by
the famous terms: the determination in the last instance of what happens in the
upper 'floors' (of the superstructure) by what happens in the economic base.
* * *

[. . .] The great theoretical advantage of the Marxist topography, i.e. of the
spatial metaphor of the edifice (base and superstructure) is simultaneously that
it reveals that questions of determination (or of index of effectivity) are crucial;
that it reveals that it is the base which in the last instance determines the whole
edifice; and that, as a consequence, it obliges us to pose the theoretical problem
of the types of 'derivatory' effectivity peculiar to the superstructure, i.e. it
obliges us to think what the Marxist tradition calls conjointly the relative
autonomy of the superstructure and the reciprocal action of the superstructure
on the base.

The greatest disadvantage of this representation of the structure of every
society by the spatial metaphor of an edifice, is obviously the fact that it is
metaphorical: i.e. it remains descriptive.

It now seems to me that it is possible and desirable to represent things
differently. NB, I do not mean by this that I want to reject' the classical
metaphor, for that metaphor itself requires that we go beyond it. And I am not
going beyond it in order to reject it as outworn. I simply want to attempt to
think what it gives us in the form of a description.

I believe that it is possible and necessary to think what characterizes the
essential of the existence and nature of the superstructure on the basis of
reproduction. Once one takes the point of view of reproduction, many of the
questions whose existence was indicated by the spatial metaphor of the edifice,



930 Institutions and Objections

but to which it could not give a conceptual answer, are immediately illuminated.

[-]

The State

The Essentials of the Marxist Theory of the State

 * *

... the Marxist classics have always claimed that (1) the State is the repressive
State apparatus, (2) State power and State apparatus must be distinguished,
(3) the objective of the class struggle concerns State power, and in consequence
the use of the State apparatus by the classes (or alliance of classes or of fractions
of classes) holding State power as a function of their class objectives, and (4) the
proletariat must seize State power in order to destroy the existing bourgeois
State apparatus and, in a first phase, replace it with a quite different, proletarian,
State apparatus, then in later phases set in motion a radical process, that of the
destruction of the State (the end of State power, the end of every State
apparatus). [. . .]

The State Ideological Apparatuses

 * *

In order to advance the theory of the State it is indispensable to take into
account not only the distinction between State power and State apparatus, but
also another reality which is clearly on the side of the (repressive) State
apparatus, but must not be confused with it. I shall call this reality by its
concept: the ideological State apparatuses.

What are the ideological State apparatuses (ISAs)?

They must not be confused with the (repressive) State apparatus. Remember
that in Marxist theory, the State Apparatus (SA) contains: the Government, the
Administration, the Army, the Police, the Courts, the Prisons, etc., which
constitute what I shall in future call the Repressive State Apparatus. Repressive
suggests that the State Apparatus in question 'functions by violence' - at least
ultimately (since repression, e.g. administrative repression, may take non-physi-
cal forms).

I shall call Ideological State Apparatuses a certain number of realities which
present themselves to the immediate observer in the form of distinct and
specialized institutions. I propose an empirical list of these which will obviously
have to be examined in detail, tested, corrected and reorganized. With all the
reservations implied by this requirement, we can for the moment regard the
following institutions as Ideological State Apparatuses (the order in which I
have listed them has no particular significance):

 the religious ISA (the system of the different Churches),

 the educational ISA (the system of the different public and private 'Schools'),

 the family ISA,

 the legal ISA,

 the political ISA (the political system, including the different Parties),



viid CriticarRevisions 931

 the trade-union ISA,

 the communications ISA (press, radio and television, etc.),

 the cultural ISA (Literature, the Arts, sports, etc.).

I have said that the ISAs must not be confused with the (Repressive) State
Apparatus. What constitutes the difference?

As a first moment, it is clear that while there is one (Repressive) State
Apparatus, there is a plurality of Ideological State Apparatuses. Even presup-
posing that it exists, the unity that constitutes this plurality of ISAs as a body
is not immediately visible.

As a second moment, it is clear that whereas the - unified - (Repressive)
State Apparatus belongs entirely to the public domain, much the larger part of
the Ideological State Apparatuses (in their apparent dispersion) are part, on the
contrary, of the private domain. Churches, Parties, Trade Unions, families, some
schools, most newspapers, cultural ventures, etc., etc., are private.

We can ignore the first observation for the moment. But someone is bound
to question the second, asking me by what right I regard as Ideological State
Apparatuses, institutions which for the most part do not possess public status,
but are quite simply private institutions. As a conscious Marxist, Gramsci already
forestalled this objection in one sentence. The distinction between the public
and the private is a distinction internal to bourgeois law, and valid in the
(subordinate) domains in which bourgeois law exercises its 'authority'. The
domain of the State escapes it because the latter is 'above the law': the State,
which is the State of the ruling class, is neither public nor private; on the
contrary, it is the precondition for any distinction between public and private.
The same thing can be said from the starting-point of our State Ideological
Apparatuses. It is unimportant whether the institutions in which they are
realized are 'public' or 'private'. What matters is how they function. Private
institutions can perfectly well 'function' as Ideological State Apparatuses. A
reasonably thorough analysis of any one of the ISAs proves it.

But now for what is essential. What distinguishes the ISAs from the (Re-
pressive) State Apparatus is the following basic difference: the Repressive State
Apparatus functions 'by violence', whereas the Ideological State Apparatuses
function 'by ideology".

 * *

[. . .] If the ISAs 'function' massively and predominantly by ideology, what
unifies their diversity is precisely this functioning, insofar as the, ideology by
which they function is always in fact unified, despite its diversity and its
contradictions, beneath the ruling ideology, which is the ideology of 'the ruling
class'. Given the fact that the 'ruling class' in principle holds State power
(openly or more often by means of alliances between classes or class fractions),
and therefore has at its disposal the (Repressive) State Apparatus, we can accept
the fact that this same ruling class is active in the Ideological State Apparatuses
insofar as it is ultimately the ruling ideology which is realized in the Ideological
State Apparatuses, precisely in its contradictions. Of course, it is a quite
different thing to act by laws and decrees in the (Repressive) State Apparatus



932 Institutions and Objections

and to 'act' through the intermediary of the ruling ideology in the Ideological
State Apparatuses. We must go into the details of this difference - but it cannot
mask the reality of a profound identity. To my knowledge, no class can hold
State power over a long period without at the same time exercising its hegemony
over and in the State Ideological Apparatuses. [. . .]

This last comment puts us in a position to understand that the Ideological
State Apparatuses may be not only the stake, but also the site of class struggle,
and often of bitter forms of class struggle. [ . . . ]



On the Reproduction of the Relations of Production

Ideology is a 'Representation' of the Imaginary Relationship of
Individuals to their Real Conditions of Existence

In order to approach my central thesis on the structure and functioning of
ideology, I shall first present two theses, one negative, the other positive. The
first concerns the object which is 'represented' in the imaginary form of
ideology, the second concerns the materiality of ideology.

THESIS I: Ideology represents the imaginary relationship of individuals to
their real conditions of existence.

We commonly call religious ideology, ethical ideology, legal ideology, political
ideology, etc., so many 'world outlooks'. Of course, assuming that we do not
live one of these ideologies as the truth (e.g. 'believe' in God, Duty, Justice,
etc.), we admit that the ideology we are discussing from a critical point of view,
examining it as the ethnologist examines the myths of a 'primitive society', that
these 'world outlooks' are largely imaginary, i.e. do not 'correspond to reality'.

However, while admitting that they do not correspond to reality, i.e. that
they constitute an illusion, we admit that they do make allusion to reality, and
that they need only be 'interpreted' to discover the reality of the world behind
their imaginary representation of that world (ideology = illusion/ allusion).
* * #

All [such] interpretations thus take literally the thesis which they presuppose,
and on which they depend, i.e. that what is reflected in the imaginary repre-
sentation of the world found in an ideology is the conditions of existence of
men, i.e. their real world.

Now I can return to a thesis which I have already advanced: it is not their
real conditions of existence, their real world, that 'men' 'represent to themselves'
in ideology, but above all it is their relation to those conditions of existence
which is represented to them there. It is this relation which is at the centre of
every ideological, i.e. imaginary, representation of the real world. It is this
relation that contains the 'cause' which has to explain the imaginary distortion
of the ideological representation of the real world. Or rather, to leave aside the
language of causality it is necessary to advance the thesis that it is the imaginary
nature of this relation which underlies all the imaginary distortion that we can
observe (if we do not live in its truth) in all ideology.



SI






VHd Critical Revisions 933

To speak in a Marxist language, if it is true that the representation of the
real conditions of existence of the individuals occupying the posts of agents of
production, exploitation, repression, ideologization and scientific practice, does
in the last analysis arise from the relations of production, and from relations
deriving from the relations of production, we can say the following: all ideology
represents in its necessarily imaginary distortion not the existing relations of
production (and the other relations that derive from them), but above all the
(imaginary) relationship of individuals to the relations of production and the
relations that derive from them. What is represented in ideology is therefore
not the system of the real relations which govern the existence of individuals,
but the imaginary relation of those individuals to the real relations in which
they live.

If this is the case, the question of the 'cause' of the imaginary distortion of
the real relations in ideology disappears and must be replaced by a different
question: why is the representation given to individuals of their (individual)
relation to the social relations which govern their conditions of existence and
their collective and individual life necessarily an imaginary relation? And what
is the nature of this imaginariness? [ . . . ]

THESIS II: Ideology has a material existence.

I have already touched on this thesis by saying that the 'ideas' or 'repre-
sentations', etc., which seem to make up ideology do not have an ideal (ideale
or ideelle) or spiritual existence, but a material existence. [. . .]

This hypothetical thesis of the not spiritual but material existence of 'ideas'
or other 'representations' is indeed necessary if we are to advance in our analysis
of the nature of ideology. Or rather, it is merely useful to us in order the better
to reveal what every at all serious analysis of any ideology will immediately and
empirically show to every observer, however critical.

While discussing the ideological State apparatuses and their practices, I said
that each of them was the realization of an ideology (the unity of these different
regional ideologies - religious, ethical, legal, political, aesthetic, etc. - being
assured by their subjection to the ruling ideology). I now return to this thesis:
an ideology always exists in an apparatus, and its practice, or practices. This
existence is material.

Of course, the material existence of the ideology in an apparatus and its
practices does not have the same modality as the material existence of a
paving-stone or a rifle. But, at the risk of being taken for a Neo-Aris^otelian
(NB Marx had a very high regard for Aristotle), I shall say that 'matter is
discussed in many senses', or rather that it exists in different modalities, all
rooted in the last instance in 'physical' matter.

Having said this, let me move straight on and see what happens to the
'individuals' who live in ideology, i.e. in a determinate (religious, ethical, etc.)
representation of the world whose imaginary distortion depends on their im-
aginary relation to their conditions of existence, in other words, in the last
instance, to the relations of production and to class relations (ideology = an
imaginary relation to real relations). I shall say that this imaginary relation is
itself endowed with a material existence.



934 Institutions and Objections

Now I observe the following.

An individual believes in God, or Duty, or Justice, etc. [. . .]

The individual in question behaves in such and such a way, adopts such and
such a practical attitude, and, what is more, participates in certain regular
practices which are those of the ideological apparatus on which 'depend' the
ideas which he has in all consciousness freely chosen as a subject. [. . .]

. . . every 'subject' endowed with a 'consciousness' and believing in the 'ideas'
that his 'consciousness' inspires in him and freely accepts, must 'act according
to his ideas', must therefore inscribe his own ideas as a free subject in the
actions of his material practice. If he does not do so, 'that is wicked'.

Indeed, if he does not do what he ought to do as a function of what he
believes, it is because he does something else, which, still as a function of the
same idealist scheme, implies that he has other ideas in his head as well as those
he proclaims, and that he acts according to these other ideas, as a man who is
either 'inconsistent' ('no one is willingly evil') or cynical, or perverse.

In every case, the ideology of ideology thus recognizes, despite its imaginary
distortion, that the 'ideas' of a human subject exist in his actions, or ought to
exist in his actions, and if that is not the case, it lends him other ideas
corresponding to the actions (however perverse) that he does perform. This
ideology talks of actions: I shall talk of actions inserted into practices. And I
shall point out that these practices are governed by the rituals in which these
practices are inscribed, within the material existence of an ideological apparatus,
be it only a small part of that apparatus: a small mass in a small church, a
funeral, a minor match at a sports' club, a school day, a political party meeting,
etc. [...]

I shall therefore say that, where only a single subject (such and such an
individual) is concerned, the existence of the ideas of his belief is material in
that his ideas are his material actions inserted into material practices governed by
material rituals which are themselves defined by the material ideological apparatus
from which derive the ideas of that subject. Naturally, the four inscriptions of the
adjective 'material' in my proposition must be affected by different modalities:
the materialities of a displacement for going to mass, of kneeling down, of the
gesture of the sign of the cross, or of the mea culpa, of a sentence, of a prayer,
of an act of contrition, of a penitence, of a gaze, of a hand-shake, of an external
verbal discourse or an 'internal' verbal discourse (consciousness), are not one
and the same materiality. I shall leave on one side the problem of a theory of
the differences between the modalities of materiality.

It remains that in this inverted presentation of things, we are not dealing with
an 'inversion' at all, since it is clear that certain notions have purely and simply
disappeared from our presentation, whereas others on the contrary survive, and
new terms appear.

Disappeared: the term ideas.

Survive: the terms subject, consciousness, belief actions.

Appear: the terms practices, rituals, ideological apparatus. [ . . . ]

Ideas have disappeared as such (insofar as they are endowed with an ideal or
spiritual existence), to the precise extent that it has emerged that their existence



VIId Critical Revisions 935

{ is inscribed in the actions of practices governed by rituals defined in the last
instance by an ideological apparatus. It therefore appears that the subject acts
insofar as he is acted by the following system (set out in the order of its real

I determination): ideology existing in a material ideological apparatus, prescribing
material practices governed by a material ritual, which practices exist in the

| material actions of a subject acting in all consciousness according to his belief.

f But this very presentation reveals that we have retained the following notions:

subject, consciousness, belief, actions. From this series I shall immediately
extract the decisive central term on which everything else depends: the notion
of the subject.

And I shall immediately set down two conjoint theses:

% 1 there is no practice except by and in an ideology;

I 2 there is no ideology except by the subject and for subjects.

I* I can now come to my central thesis.

 Ideology Interpellates Individuals as Subjects

I This thesis is simply a matter of making my last proposition explicit: there is
I no ideology except by the subject and for subjects. Meaning, there is no ideology
I except for concrete subjects, and this destination for ideology is only made
f possible by the subject: meaning, by the category of the subject and its functioning.
I By this I mean that, even if it only appears under this name (the subject)

I with the rise of bourgeois ideology, above all with the rise of legal ideology,
| the category of the subject (which may function under other names: e.g., as the
f soul in Plato, as God, etc.) is the constitutive category of all ideology, whatever
I its determination (regional or class) and whatever its historical date - since
I ideology has no history.

I I say: the category of the subject is constitutive of all ideology, but at the

 same time and immediately I add that the category of the subject is only constitutive
% of all ideology insofar as all ideology has the function (which defines it) of
1 'constituting' concrete individuals as subjects. In the interaction of this double
I constitution exists the functioning of all ideology, ideology being nothing but
;| its functioning in the material forms of existence of that functioning.
| In order to grasp what follows, it is essential to realize that both he who is

f writing these lines and the reader who reads them are themselves subjects, and
I therefore ideological subjects (a tautological proposition), i.e. that the author
| and the reader of these lines both live 'spontaneously' or 'naturally' in ideology
| in the sense in which I have said that 'man is an ideological animal by nature'.
That the author, insofar as he writes the lines of a discourse which claims to
be scientific, is completely absent as a 'subject' from 'his' scientific discourse
(for all scientific discourse is by definition a subject-less discourse, there is no
'Subject of science' except in an ideology of science) is a different question
which I shall leave on one side for the moment.

As St Paul admirably put it, it is in the 'Logos', meaning in ideology, that
we 'live, move and have our being'. It follows that, for you and for me, the
category of the subject is a primary 'obviousness' (obviousnesses are always



936 Institutions and Objections

primary): it is clear that you and I are subjects (free, ethical, etc. . . . ). Like all
obviousnesses, including those that make a word 'name a thing' or 'have a
meaning' (therefore including the obviousness of the 'transparency' of language),
the 'obviousness' that you and I are subjects - and that that does not cause any
problems - is an ideological effect, the elementary ideological effect. It is indeed
a peculiarity of ideology that it imposes (without appearing to do so, since these
are 'obviousnesses') obviousnesses as obviousnesses, which we cannot fail to
recognize and before which we have the inevitable and natural reaction of crying
out (aloud or in the 'still, small voice of conscience'): 'That's obvious! That's
right! That's true!' [. . .]



4 Thomas Kuhn (b. 1922) from 'Postscript - 1969'
to The Structure of Scientific Revolutions

Conventional theory tended to assume that knowledge grew, cumulatively. It was Kuhn's
achievement to point out that rather than proceeding in an ascending curve, knowledge
could be plural: what counted as knowledge at any one time tended to be related more
powerfully than had hitherto been realized to the interests of the community which the
knowledge served. Kuhn's central concept was the 'paradigm'. Paradigmatic works
functioned by overthrowing or challenging the norms of a given practice when those
norms had begun to seem constricting, incoherent, or otherwise no longer immune to
challenge. The implications of the new paradigm would then be worked out over many
years in a period of 'normal' endeavour. As such, all paradigms marginalize or disqualify
practices which no longer conform to their criteria. Thus physics or astronomy dis-
qualifies astrology; chemistry disqualifies alchemy. By the same token paradigmatic
Modernist art theory disqualified the coherent spatial illusion which had been a pre-
requisite of academic competence. Kuhn's relevance lay not least in the widespread
perception that that paradigm itself no longer compelled assent by the late 1960s. He
also offered some reasoned grounds for confidence in trying things out and trying things
on. Kuhn's work was originally published as The Structure of Scientific Revolutions,
Chicago, 1962. The second edition of 1970 contained the 'Postscript' from which the
present extracts are taken.



Exemplars, Incommensurability, and Revolutions

[. . .] To understand why science develops as it does, one need not unravel the
details of biography and personality that lead each individual to a particular
choice, though that topic has vast fascination. What one must understand,
however, is the manner in which a particular set of shared values interacts with
the particular experiences shared by a community of specialists to ensure that
most members of the group will ultimately find one set of arguments rather
than another decisive.

That process is persuasion, but it presents a deeper problem. Two men who
perceive the same situation differently but nevertheless employ the same voca-
bulary in its discussion must be using words differently. They speak, that is,
from . . . incommensurable viewpoints. How can they even hope to talk together



VIId Critical Revisions 937

much less to be persuasive. Even a preliminary answer to that question demands
further specification of the nature of the difficulty. I suppose that, at least in
part, it takes the following form.

The practice of normal science depends on the ability, acquired from exem-
plars, to group objects and situations into similarity sets which are primitive in
the sense that the grouping is done without an answer to the question, 'Similar
with respect to what?' One central aspect of any revolution is, then, that some
of the similarity relations change. Objects that were grouped in the same set
before are grouped in different ones afterward and vice versa. Think of the sun,
moon, Mars, and earth before and after Copernicus; of free fall, pendular, and
planetary motion before and after Galileo; or of salts, alloys, and a sulphur-iron
filing mix before and after Dalton. Since most objects within even the altered
sets continue to be grouped together, the names of the sets are usually preserved.
Nevertheless, the transfer of a subset is ordinarily part of a critical change in
the network of interrelations among them. Transferring the metals from the set
of compounds to the set of elements played an essential role in the emergence
of a new theory of combustion, of acidity, and of physical and chemical
combination. In short order those changes had spread through all of chemistry.
Not surprisingly, therefore, when such redistributions occur, two men whose
discourse had previously proceeded with apparently full understanding may
suddenly find themselves responding to the same stimulus with incompatible
descriptions and generalizations. Those difficulties will not be felt in all areas
of even their scientific discourse, but they will arise and will then cluster most
densely about the phenomena upon which the choice of theory most centrally
depends.

Such problems, though they first become evident in communication, are not
merely linguistic, and they cannot be resolved simply by stipulating the defini-
tions of troublesome terms. Because the words about which difficulties cluster
have been learned in part from direct application to exemplars, the participants
in a communication breakdown cannot say, 'I use the word "element" (or
"mixture", or "planet", or "unconstrained motion") in ways determined by the
following criteria.' They cannot, that is, resort to a neutral language which both
use in the same way and which is adequate to the statement of both their
theories or even of both those theories' empirical consequences. Part of the
difference is prior to the application of the languages in which it is nevertheless
reflected.

The men who experience such communication breakdowns must, however,
have some recourse. The stimuli that impinge upon them are the same. So is
their general neural apparatus, however differently programmed. Furthermore,
except in a small, if all-important, area of experience even their neural pro-
gramming must be very nearly the same, for they share a history, except the
immediate past. As a result, both their everyday and most of their scientific
world and language are shared. Given that much in common, they should be
able to find out a great deal about how they differ. The techniques required
are not, however, either straightforward, or comfortable, or parts of the scien-
tist's normal arsenal. Scientists rarely recognize them for quite what they are,



938 Institutions and Objections

and they seldom use them for longer than is required to induce conversion or
convince themselves that it will not be obtained.

Briefly put, what the participants in a communication breakdown can do is
recognize each other as members of different language communities and then
become translators. Taking the differences between their own intra- and inter-
group discourse as itself a subject for study, they can first attempt to discover
the terms and locutions that, used unproblematically within each community,
are neverthless foci of trouble for inter-group discussions . . . Having isolated
such areas of difficulty in scientific communication, they can next resort to their
shared everyday vocabularies in an effort further to elucidate their troubles.
Each may, that is, try to discover what the other would see and say when
presented with a stimulus to which his own verbal response would be different.
If they can sufficiently refrain from explaining anomalous behavior as the
consequence of mere error or madness, they may in time become very good
predictors of each other's behavior. Each will have learned to translate the
other's theory and its consequences into his own language and simultaneously
to describe in his language the world to which that theory applies. That is what
the historian of science regularly does (or should) when dealing with out-of-date
scientific theories.

Since translation, if pursued, allows the participants in a communication
breakdown to experience vicariously something of the merits and defects of each
other's points of view, it is a potent tool both for persuasion and for conversion.
But even persuasion need not succeed, and, if it does, it need not be accompa-
nied or followed by conversion. The two experiences are not the same, an
important distinction that I have only recently fully recognized.

To persuade someone is, I take it, to convince him that one's own view is
superior and ought therefore supplant his own. That much is occasionally
achieved without recourse to anything like translation. In its absence many of
the explanations and problem-statements endorsed by the members of one
scientific group will be opaque to the other. But each language community can
usually produce from the start a few concrete research results that, though
describable in sentences understood in the same way by both groups, cannot
yet be accounted for by the other community in its own terms. If the new
viewpoint endures for a time and continues to be fruitful, the research results
verbalizable in this way are likely to grow in number. For some men such results
alone will be decisive. They can say: I don't know how the proponents of the
new view succeed, but I must learn; whatever they are doing, it is clearly right.
That reaction comes particularly easily to men just entering the profession, for
they have not yet acquired the special vocabularies and commitments of either
group.

Arguments statable in the vocabulary that both groups use in the same way
are not, however, usually decisive, at least not until a very late stage in the
evolution of the opposing views. Among those already admitted to the profes-
sion, few will be persuaded without some recourse to the more extended
comparisons permitted by translation. Though the price is often sentences of
great length and complexity . . . many additional research results can be trans-



VIId Critical Revisions 939

fated from one community's language into the other's. As translation proceeds,
furthermore, some members of each community may also begin vicariously to
understand how a statement previously opaque could seem an explanation to
members of the opposing group. The availability of techniques like these does
not, of course, guarantee persuasion. For most people translation is a threatening
process, and it is entirely foreign to normal science. Counter-arguments are, in
any case, always available, and no rules prescribe how the balance must be
struck. Nevertheless, as argument piles on argument and as challenge after
challenge is successfully met, only blind stubbornness can at the end account
for continued resistance.

That being the case, a second aspect of translation, long familiar to both
historians and linguists, becomes crucially important. To translate a theory or
worldview into one's own language is not to make it one's own. For that one
must go native, discover that one is thinking and working in, not simply
translating out of, a language that was previously foreign. That transition is not,
however, one that an individual may make or refrain from making by deliberation
and choice, however good his reasons for wishing to do so. Instead, at some
point in the process of learning to translate, he finds that the transition has
occurred, that he has slipped into the new language without a decision having
been made. Or else, like many of those who first encountered, say, relativity or
quantum mechanics in their middle years, he finds himself fully persuaded of
the new view but nevertheless unable to internalize it and be at home in the
world it helps to shape. Intellectually such a man has made his choice, but the
conversion required if it is to be effective eludes him. He may use the new
theory nonetheless, but he will do so as a foreigner in a foreign environment,
an alternative available to him only because there are natives already there. His
work is parasitic on theirs, for he lacks the constellation of mental sets which
future members of the community will acquire through education.

The conversion experience that I have likened to a gestalt switch remains,
therefore, at the heart of the revolutionary process. Good reasons for choice
provide motives for conversion and a climate in which it is more likely to occur.
Translation may, in addition, provide points of entry for the neutral repro-
gramming that, however inscrutable at this time, must underlie conversion.
But neither good reasons nor translation constitute conversion, and it is that
process we must explicate in order to understand an essential sort of scientific
change.

The Nature of Science

[ . . . ] A number of those who have taken pleasure from [this book] have done
so less because it illuminates science than because they read its main theses as
applicable to many other fields as well. I see what they mean and would not
like to discourage their attempts to extend the position, but their reaction has
nevertheless puzzled me. To the extent that the book portrays scientific develop-
ment as a succession of tradition-bound periods punctuated by non-cumulative
breaks, its theses are undoubtedly of wide applicability. But they should be, for



940 Institutions and Objections

they are borrowed from other fields. Historians of literature, of music, of the
arts, of political development, and of many other human activities have long
described their subjects in the same way. Periodization in terms of revolutionary
breaks in style, taste, and institutional structure have been among their standard
tools. If I have been original with respect to concepts like these, it has mainly
been by applying them to the sciences, fields which had been widely thought
to develop in a different way. Conceivably the notion of a paradigm as a concrete
achievement, an exemplar, is a second contribution. I suspect, for example, that
some of the notorious difficulties surrounding the notion of style in the arts
may vanish if paintings can be seen to be modeled on one another rather than
produced in conformity to some abstracted canons of style.

This book, however, was intended also to make another sort of point, one that
has been less clearly visible to many of its readers. Though scientific development
may resemble that in other fields more closely than has often been supposed, it
is also strikingly different. To say, for example, that the sciences, at least after
a certain point in their development, progress in a way that other fields do not,
cannot have been all wrong, whatever progress itself may be. One of the objects
of the book was to examine such differences and begin accounting for them.

Consider, for example, the reiterated emphasis ... on the absence or, as I
should now say, on the relative scarcity of competing schools in the developed
sciences. Or remember my remarks about the extent to which the members of
a given scientific community provide the only audience and the only judges of
that community's work. Or think again about the special nature of scientific
education, about puzzle-solving as a goal, and about the value system which the
scientific group deploys in periods of crisis and decision. The book isolates other
features of the same sort, none necessarily unique to science but in conjunction
setting the activity apart.

About all these features of science there is a great deal more to be learned.
Having opened this postscript by emphasizing the need to study the community
structure of science, I shall close by underscoring the need for similar and,
above all, for comparative study of the corresponding communities in other
fields. How does one elect and how is one elected to membership in a particular
community, scientific or not? What is the process and what are the stages of
socialization to the group? What does the group collectively see as its goals;
what deviations, individual or collective, will it tolerate; and how does it control
the impermissible aberration? A fuller understanding of science will depend on
answers to other sorts of questions as well, but there is no area in which more
work is so badly needed. Scientific knowledge, like language, is intrinsically the
common property of a group or else nothing at all. To understand it we shall
need to know the special characteristics of the groups that create and use it.



5 Roland Barthes (1915-1980) 'From Work to Text'

Barthes's thesis relates to the de-centring of the subject noted in respect of the theories
of Lacan, Althusser and Foucault. Here, instead of the work - say, a work of art - being



VIId Critical Revisions 941

a primary, essentially self-contained thing, whose priority over all acts of seeing it,
reading it, discussing it, etc., is given, the whole set of these transactions is reconcep-
tualized. Thus the process of establishing a meaning becomes radically contingent, the
product of a variety of shifting interchanges rather than the divination of the semantic
heart of the work. The work, so to speak, loses its pre-eminence and steps down into
a field of interactions, all conceived as of more-or-less equal moment. These interac-
tions Barthes designates as 'play'. The result is a resolutely anti-hierarchical conception
of the production of meaning, rather than a grasping of the author's Truth: the false
truth, as it were, of authority. Originally published as 'De I'oeuvre au texte' in Revue
d'esthetique, no. 3, Paris, 1971; English translation by Stephen Heath in Roland
Barthes, image, Music, Text, London, 1977, pp. 155-64, from which the present text
is taken.

It is a fact that over the last few years a certain change has taken place (or is
taking place) in our conception of language and, consequently, of the literary
work which owes at least its phenomenal existence to this same language. The
change is clearly connected with the current development of (amongst other
disciplines) linguistics, anthropology, Marxism and psychoanalysis (the term
'connection' is used here in a deliberately neutral way: one does not decide a
determination, be it multiple and dialectical). What is new and which affects
the idea of the work comes not necessarily from the internal recasting of each
of these disciplines, but rather from their encounter in relation to an object
which traditionally is the province of none of them. It is indeed as though the
interdisciplinarity which is today held up as a prime value in research cannot be
accomplished by the simple confrontation of specialist branches of knowledge.
Interdisciplinarity is not the calm of an easy security; it begins effectively (as
opposed to the mere expression of a pious wish) when the solidarity of the old
disciplines breaks down - perhaps even violently, via the jolts of fashion - in
the interests of a new object and a new language neither of which has a place
in the field of the sciences that were to be brought peacefully together, this
unease in classification being precisely the point from which it is possible to
diagnose a certain mutation. The mutation in which the idea of the work seems
to be gripped must not, however, be over-estimated: it is more in the nature
of an epistemological slide than of a real break. The break, as is frequently
stressed, is seen to have taken place in the last century with the appearance of
Marxism and Freudianism; since then there has been no further break, so that
in a way it can be said that for the last hundred years we have been living in
repetition. What History, our History, allows us today is merely to slide, to
vary, to exceed, to repudiate. Just as Einsteinian science demands that the
relativity of the frames of reference be included in the object studied, so the
combined action of Marxism, Freudianism and structuralism demands, in lit-
erature, the relativization of the relations of writer, reader and observer (critic).
Over against the traditional notion of the work, for long - and still - conceived
of in a, so to speak, Newtonian way, there is now the requirement of a new
object, obtained by the sliding or overturning of former categories. That object
is the Text. I know the word is fashionable (I am myself often led to use it)
and therefore regarded by some with suspicion, but that is exactly why I should



942 Institutions and Objections

like to remind myself of the principal propositions at the intersection of which
I see the Text as standing. The word 'proposition' is to be understood more
in a grammatical than in a logical sense: the following are not argumentations
but enunciations, 'touches', approaches that consent to remain metaphorical.
Here then are these propositions; they concern method, genres, signs, plurality,
filiation, reading and pleasure.

1. The Text is not to be thought of as an object that can be computed. It
would be futile to try to separate out materially works from texts. In particular,
the tendency must be avoided to say that the work is classic, the text avant-
garde; it is not a question of drawing up a crude honours list in the name of
modernity and declaring certain literary productions 'in' and others 'out' by
virtue of their chronological situation: there may be 'text' in a very ancient
work, while many products of contemporary literature are in no way texts. The
difference is this: the work is a fragment of substance, occupying a part of the
space of books (in a library for example), the Text is a methodological field.
The opposition may recall (without at all reproducing term for term) Lacan's
distinction between 'reality' and 'the real': the one is displayed, the other
demonstrated; likewise, the work can be seen (in bookshops, in catalogues, in
exam syllabuses), the text is a process of demonstration, speaks according to
certain rules (or against certain rules); the work can be held in the hand, the
text is held in language, only exists in the movement of a discourse (or rather,
it is Text for the very reason that it knows itself as text); the Text is not the
decomposition of the work, it is the work that is the imaginary tail of the Text;
or again, the Text is experienced only in an activity of production. It follows
that the Text cannot stop (for example on a library shelf); its constitutive
movement is that of cutting across (in particular, it can cut across the work,
several works).

2. In the same way, the Text does not stop at (good) Literature; it cannot
be contained in a hierarchy, even in a simple division of genres. What constitutes
the Text is, on the contrary (or precisely), its subversive force in respect of the
old classifications. How do you classify a writer like Georges Bataille? Novelist,
poet, essayist, economist, philosopher, mystic? The answer is so difficult that
the literary manuals generally prefer to forget about Bataille who, in fact, wrote
texts, perhaps continuously one single text. If the Text poses problems of
classification (which is furthermore one of its 'social' functions), this is because
it always involves a certain experience of limits (to take up an expression from
Philippe Sollers). Thibaudet used already to talk - but in a very restricted sense
- of limit-works (such as Chateaubriand's Vie de Ranee, which does indeed come
through to us today as a 'text'); the Text is that which goes to the limit of the
rules of enunciation (rationality, readability, etc.). Nor is this a rhetorical idea,
resorted to for some 'heroic' effect: the Text tries to place itself very exactly
behind the limit of the doxa (is not general opinion - constitutive of our
democratic societies and powerfully aided by mass communications - defined
by its limits, the energy with which it excludes, its censorship}). Taking the word
literally, it may be said that the Text is always paradoxical.



VIId Critical Revisions 943

3. The Text can be approached, experienced, in reaction to the sign. The
work closes on a signified. There are two modes of signification which can be
attributed to this signified: either it is claimed to be evident and the work is
then the object of a literal science, of philology, or else it is considered to be
secret, ultimate, something to be sought out, and the work then falls under the
scope of a hermeneutics, of an interpretation (Marxist, psychoanalytic, thematic,
etc.); in short, the work itself functions as a general sign and it is normal that
it should represent an institutional category of the civilization of the Sign. The
Text, on the contrary, practises the infinite deferment of the signified, is
dilatory; its field is that of the signifier and the signifier must not be conceived
of as 'the first stage of meaning', its material vestibule, but, in complete
opposition to this, as its deferred action. Similarly, the infinity of the signifier
refers not to some idea of the ineffable (the unnameable signified) but to that
of a playing; the generation of the perpetual signifier (after the fashion of a
perpetual calender) in the field of the text (better, of which the text is the field)
is realized not according to an organic progress of maturation or a hermeneutic
course of deepening investigation, but, rather, according to a serial movement
of disconnections, overlappings, variations. The logic regulating the Text is not
comprehensive (define 'what the work means') but metonymic; the activity of
associations, contiguities, carryings-over coincides with a liberation of symbolic
energy (lacking it, man would die); the work - in the best of cases - is moderately
symbolic (its symbolic runs out, comes to a halt); the Text is radically symbolic:
a work conceived, perceived and received in its integrally symbolic nature is a text.
Thus is the Text restored to language; like language, it is structured but
off-centred, without closure (note, in reply to the contemptuous suspicion of
the 'fashionable' sometimes directed at structuralism, that the epistemological
privilege currently accorded to language stems precisely from the discovery there
of a paradoxical idea of structure: a system with neither close nor centre).

4. The Text is plural. Which is not simply to say that it has several
meanings, but that it accomplishes the very plural of meaning: an irreducible
(and not merely an acceptable) plural. The Text is not a co-existence of
meanings but a passage, an overcrossing; thus it answers not to an interpretation,
even a liberal one, but to an explosion, a dissemination. The plural of the Text
depends, that is, not on the ambiguity of its contents but on what might be
called the stenographic plurality of its weave of signifiers (etymologically, the
text is a tissue, a woven fabric). The reader of the Text may be compared to
someone at a loose end (someone slackened off from any imaginary); this
passably empty subject strolls - it is what happened to the author of these lines,
then it was that he had a vivid idea of the Text - on the side of a valley, a
oued flowing down below (oued is there to bear witness to a certain feeling of
unfamiliarity); what he perceives is multiple, irreducible, coming from a discon-
nected, heterogeneous variety of substances and perspectives: lights, colours,
vegetation, heat, air, slender explosions of noises, scant cries of birds, children's
voices from over on the other side, passages, gestures, clothes of inhabitants
near or far away. All these incidents are half-identifiable: they come from codes
which are known but their combination is unique, founds the stroll in a



944 Institutions and Objections

difference repeatable only as difference. So the Text: it can be it only in its
difference (which does not mean its individuality), its reading is semelfactive
(this rendering illusory any inductive-deductive science of texts - no 'grammar'
of the text) and nevertheless woven entirely with citations, references, echoes,
cultural languages (what language is not?), antecedent or contemporary, which
cut across it through and through in a vast stereophony. The intertextual in
which every text is held, it itself being the text-between of another text, is not
to be confused with some origin of the text: to try to find the 'sources', the
influences' of a work, is to fall in with the myth of filiation; the citations which
go to make up a text are anonymous, untraceable, and yet already read: they
are quotations without inverted commas. The work has nothing disturbing for
any monistic philosophy (we know that there are opposing examples of these);
for such a philosophy, plural is the Evil. Against the work, therefore, the text
could well take as its motto the words of the man possessed by demons (Mark
5: 9): 'My name is Legion: for we are many.' The plural of demoniacal texture
which opposes text to work can bring with it fundamental changes in reading,
and precisely in areas where monologism appears to be the Law: certain of the
'texts' of Holy Scripture traditionally recuperated by theological monism (his-
torical or anagogical) will perhaps offer themselves to a diffraction of meanings
(finally, that is to say, to a materialist reading), while the Marxist interpretation
of works, so far resolutely monistic, will be able to materialize itself more by
pluralizing itself (if, however, the Marxist 'institutions' allow it).

5. The work is caught up in a process of filiation. Are postulated: a
determination of the work by the world (by race, then by History), a consecution
of works amongst themselves, and a conformity of the work to the author. The
author is reputed the father and the owner of his work: literary science therefore
teaches respect for the manuscript and the author's declared intentions, while
society asserts the legality of the relation of author to work (the "droit d'auteur"
or 'copyright', in fact of recent date since it was only really legalized at the
time of the French Revolution). As for the Text, it reads without the inscription
of the Father. Here again, the metaphor of the Text separates from that of the
work: the latter refers to the image of an organism which grows by vital
expansion, by 'development' (a word which is significantly ambiguous, at once
biological and rhetorical); the metaphor of the Text is that of the network', if
the Text extends itself, it is as a result of a combinatory systematic (an image,
moreover, close to current biological conceptions of the living being). Hence no
vital 'respect' is due to the Text: it can be broken (which is just what the Middle
Ages did with two nevertheless authoritative texts - Holy Scripture and Aris-
totle); it can be read without the guarantee of its father, the restitution of the
inter-text paradoxically abolishing any legacy. It is not that the Author may not
'come back' in the Text, in his text, but he then does so as a 'guest'. If he is
a novelist, he is inscribed in the novel like one of his characters, figured in the
carpet; no longer privileged, paternal, aletheological, his inscription is ludic. He
becomes, as it were, a paper-author: his life is no longer the origin of his fictions
but a fiction contributing to his work; there is a reversion of the work on to
the life (and no longer the contrary); it is the work of Proust, of Genet which



'\



VIId Critical Revisions 945

allows their lives to be read as a text. The word 'bio-graphy' re-acquires a
strong, etymological sense, at the same time as the sincerity of the enunciation
- veritable 'cross' borne by literary morality - becomes a false problem: the I
which writes the text, it too, is never more than a paper-I.

6. The work is normally the object of a consumption; no demagogy is
intended here in referring to the so-called consumer culture but it has to be
recognized that today it is the 'quality' of the work (which supposes finally an
appreciation of 'taste') and not the operation of reading itself which can
differentiate between books: structurally, there is no difference between 'cul-
tured' reading and casual reading in trains. The Text (if only by its frequent
'unreadability') decants the work (the work permitting) from its consumption
and gathers it up as play, activity, production, practice. This means that the
Text requires that one try to abolish (or at the very least to diminish) the
distance between writing and reading, in no way by intensifying the projection
of the reader into the work but by joining them in a single signifying practice.
The distance separating reading from writing is historical. In the times of the
greatest social division (before the setting up of democratic cultures), reading
and writing were equally privileges of class. Rhetoric, the great literary code of
those times, taught one to write (even if what was then normally produced were
speeches, not texts). Significantly, the coming of democracy reversed the word
of command: what the (secondary) School prides itself on is teaching to read
(well) and no longer to write (consciousness of the deficiency is becoming
fashionable again today: the teacher is called upon to teach pupils to 'express
themselves', which is a little like replacing a form of repression by a miscon-
ception). In fact, reading, in the sense of consuming, is far from playing with
the text. 'Playing' must be understood here in all its polysemy: the text itself
plays (like a door, like a machine with 'play') and the reader plays twice over,
playing the Text as one plays a game, looking for a practice which re-produces
it, but, in order that that practice not be reduced to a passive, inner mimesis
(the Text is precisely that which resists such a reduction), also playing the Text
in the musical sense of the term. The history of music (as a practice, not as an
'art') does indeed parallel that of the Text fairly closely: there was a period
when practising amateurs were numerous (at least within the confines of a certain
class) and 'playing' and 'listening' formed a scarcely differentiated activity; then
two roles appeared in succession, first that of the performer, the interpreter to
whom the bourgeois public (though still itself able to play a little - the whole
history of the piano) delegated its playing, then that of the (passive) amateur,
who listens to music without being able to play (the gramophone record takes
the place of the piano). We know that today post-serial music has radically
altered the role of the 'interpreter', who is called on to be in some sort the co-
author of the score, completing it rather than giving it 'expression'. The Text
is very much a score of this new kind: it asks of the reader a practical
collaboration. Which is an important change, for who executes the work?
(Mallarme posed the question, wanting the audience to produce the book.)
Nowadays only the critic executes the work (accepting the play on words). The
reduction of reading to a consumption is clearly responsible for the 'boredom'



946 Institutions and Objections

experienced by many in the face of the modern ('unreadable') text, the avant-
garde film or painting: to be bored means that one cannot produce the text,
open it out, set it going.

7. This leads us to pose (to propose) a final approach to the Text, that of
pleasure. I do not know whether there has ever been a hedonistic aesthetics
(eudaemonist philosophies are themselves rare). Certainly there exists a pleasure
of the work (of certain works); I can delight in reading and re-reading Proust,
Flaubert, Balzac, even - why not? - Alexandre Dumas. But this pleasure, no
matter how keen and even when free from all prejudice, remains in part (unless
by some exceptional critical effort) a pleasure of consumption; for if I can read
these authors, I also know r that I cannot re-write them (that it is impossible
today to write iike that') and this knowledge, depressing enough, suffices to
cut me off from the production of these works, in the very moment their
remoteness establishes my modernity (is not to be modern to know clearly what
cannot be started over again?). As for the Text, it is bound to jouissance, that
is to a pleasure without separation. Order of the signifier, the Text participates
in its own way in a social Utopia; before History (supposing the latter does not
opt for barbarism), the Text achieves, if not the transparence of social relations,
that at least of language relations: the Text is that space where no language has
a hold over any other, where languages circulate (keeping the circular sense of
the term).

These few propositions, inevitably, do not constitute the articulations of a
Theory of the Text and this is not simply the result of the failings of the person
here presenting them (who in many respects has anyway done no more than
pick up what is being developed round about him). It stems from the fact that
a Theory of the Text cannot be satisfied by a metalinguistic exposition: the
destruction of meta-language, or at least (since it may be necessary provisionally
to resort to meta-language) its calling into doubt, is part of the theory itself:
the discourse on the Text should itself be nothing other than text, research,
textual activity, since the Text is that social space which leaves no language
safe, outside, nor any subject of the enunciation in position as judge, master,
analyst, confessor, decoder. The theory of the Text can coincide only with a
practice of writing.



6 Robert Smithson (1938-1973) 'Cultural Confinement'

By 1972 Smithson was established as the leading figure working in the area of Land
Art, one of the principal strategies of which was to move the work out of the confines
of the gallery towards a more directly critical relation to the modern world. The aim
was to revise the parameters of art and in so doing to question the commodity status
increasingly accorded to Modernist art within that world. Smithson's statement was first
published in German in the catalogue to the international exhibition 'Documenta 5',
Kassel, 1972, section 17, p. 74. It was subsequently published in English in Artforum,
New York, October 1972; reprinted in Nancy Holt (ed.), The Writings of Robert Smith-
son, New York, 1979, pp. 132-3, from which the present text is taken.






VIId Critical Revisions 947

Cultural confinement takes place when a curator imposes his own limits on an
art exhibition, rather than asking an artist to set his limits. Artists are expected
to fit into fraudulent categories. Some artists imagine they've got a hold on this
apparatus, which in fact has got a hold of them. As a result, they end up
supporting a cultural prison that is out of their control. Artists themselves are
not confined, but their output is. Museums, like asylums and jails, have wards
and cells - in other words, neutral rooms called 'galleries.' A work of art when
placed in a gallery loses its charge, and becomes a portable object or surface
disengaged from the outside world. A vacant white room with lights is still a
submission to the neutral. Works of art seen in such spaces seem to be going
through a kind of esthetic convalescence. They are looked upon as so many
inanimate invalids, waiting for critics to pronounce them curable or incurable.
The function of the warden-curator is to separate art from the rest of society.
Next comes integration. Once the work of art is totally neutralized, ineffective,
abstracted, safe, and politically lobotomized it is ready to be consumed by
society. All is reduced to visual fodder and transportable merchandise. Innova-
tions are allowed only if they support this kind of confinement.

Occult notions of 'concept' are in retreat from the physical world. Heaps of
private information reduce art to hermeticism and fatuous metaphysics. Lan-
guage should find itself in the physical world, and not end up locked in an idea
in somebody's head. Language should be an ever developing procedure and not
an isolated occurrence. Art shows that have beginnings and ends are confined
by unnecessary modes of representation both 'abstract' and 'realistic' A face or
a grid on a canvas is still a representation. Reducing representation to writing
does not bring one closer to the physical world. Writing should generate ideas
into matter, and not the other way around. Art's development should be
dialectical and not metaphysical.

I am speaking of a dialectics that seeks a world outside of cultural confinement.
Also, I am not interested in art works that suggest 'process' within the
metaphysical limits of the neutral room. There is no freedom in that kind of
behavioral game playing. The artist acting like a B. F. Skinner rat doing his
'tough 1 little tricks is something to be avoided. Confined process is no process
at all. It would be better to disclose the confinement rather than make illusions
of freedom.

I am for an art that takes into account the direct effect of the elements as
they exist from day to day apart from representation. The parks that surround
some museums isolate art into objects of formal delectation. Objects in a park
suggest static repose rather than any ongoing dialectic. Parks are finished
landscapes for finished art. A park carries the values of the final, the absolute,
and the sacred. Dialectics have nothing to do with such things. I am talking
about a dialectic of nature that interacts with the physical contradictions inherent
in natural forces as they are - nature as both sunny and stormy. Parks are
idealizations of nature, but nature in fact is not a condition of the ideal. Nature
does not proceed in a straight line, it is rather a sprawling development. Nature
is never finished. When a finished work of twentieth-century sculpture is placed
in an eighteenth-century garden, it is absorbed by the ideal representation of



948 Institutions and Objections

the past, thus reinforcing political and social values that are no longer with us.
Many parks and gardens are re-creations of the lost paradise or Eden, and not
the dialectical sites of the present. Parks and gardens are pictorial in their origin
- landscapes created with natural materials rather than paint. The scenic ideals
that surround even our national parks are carriers of a nostalgia for heavenly
bliss and eternal calmness.

Apart from the ideal gardens of the past, and their modern counterparts -
national and large urban parks, there are the more infernal regions - slag heaps,
strip mines, and polluted rivers. Because of the great tendency toward idealism,
both pure and abstract, society is confused as to what to do with such places.
Nobody wants to go on a vacation to a garbage dump. Our land ethic, especially
in that never-never land called the 'art world' has become clouded with
abstractions and concepts.

Could it be that certain art exhibitions have become metaphysical junkyards?
Categorical miasmas? Intellectual rubbish? Specific intervals of visual desolation?
The warden-curators still depend on the wreckage of metaphysical principles
and structures because they don't know any better. The wasted remains of
ontology, cosmology, and epistemology still offer a ground for art. Although
metaphysics is outmoded and blighted, it is presented as tough principles and
solid reasons for installations of art. The museums and parks are graveyards
above the ground - congealed memories of the past that act as a pretext for
reality. This causes acute anxiety among artists, in so far as they challenge,
compete, and fight for the spoiled ideals of lost situations.



7 Leo Steinberg (b. 1920) from Other Criteria

Steinberg's book of essays Other Criteria was received as a powerful counter to what
was seen in the early 1970s as an increasingly barren and entrenched formalist
orthodoxy. In particular the long essay of the same title surveyed modern art from the
late nineteenth century to the then present, contesting Greenberg's account over a
broad front, and relating Modernist work to a changing continuum of self-reference and
representation of the world going back to the Renaissance. Thus the mention of the
Old Masters' 'three ways of conceiving the picture plane', refers to an argument earlier
in the essay that the matter of 'art drawing attention to art' has not been peculiar to
modern art. Steinberg argues that the art of the Old Masters, though illusionistic, also
involved self-referential devices intended to draw the spectator's attention to the art.
This was achieved by a range of devices: '. . . by radical color economies, or by eerie
proportional attenuation; by multiplication of detail ... by quotations and references to
other art . . . They did it by abrupt internal changes of scale, or by shifting reality levels'.
Finally 'the "recall to art" may be engineered by the subject matter itself ' through
devices such as internal spectators, the juxtaposition of windows with framed paintings,
or mirrors filled with reflections. For Steinberg such pictures 'soliloquize about the
capacities of the surface and the nature of illusion itself '. in the final section of the
essay, reprinted here, Steinberg postulated a significant development to this tradition
occurring after the end of the Second World War and particularly evident in the work
of Rauschenberg. He dubbed this phase, presciently, as 'post-Modernist' painting. The



viid Critical Revisions 949

essay had its origins in a lecture given at the Musem of Modern Art, New York, in March
1968. A substantial version was first published as 'Reflections on the State of Criticism',
in Artforum, New York, in March 1972. It appeared in its definitive form in Other Criteria,
London and New York, 1972, pp. 61-98, from which this excerpt is taken.



The Flatbed Picture Plane

I borrow the term from the flatbed printing press - 'a horizontal bed on which
a horizontal printing surface rests' (Webster). And I propose to use the word
to describe the characteristic picture plane of the 1960s - a pictorial surface
whose angulation with respect to the human posture is the precondition of its
changed content.

It was suggested earlier that the Old Masters had three ways of conceiving
the picture plane. But one axiom was shared by all three interpretations, and
it remained operative in the succeeding centuries, even through Cubism and
Abstract Expressionism: the conception of the picture as representing a world,
some sort of worldspace which reads on the picture plane in correspondence
with the erect human posture. The top of the picture corresponds to where we
hold our heads aloft; while its lower edge gravitates to where we place our feet.
Even in Picasso's Cubist collages, where the Renaissance worldspace concept
almost breaks down, there is still a harking back to implied acts of vision, to
something that was once actually seen.

A picture that harks back to the natural world evokes sense data which are
experienced in the normal erect posture. Therefore the Renaissance picture plane
affirms verticality as its essential condition. And the concept of the picture plane
as an upright surface survives the most drastic changes of style. Pictures by
Rothko, Still, Newman, de Kooning, and Kline are still addressed to us head
to foot - as are those of Matisse and Miro. They are revelations to which we
relate visually as from the top of a columnar body; and this applies no less to
Pollock's drip paintings and the poured Veils and Unfurls of Morris Louis.
Pollock indeed poured and dripped his pigment upon canvases laid on the
ground, but this was an expedient. After the first color skeins had gone down,
he would tack the canvas on to a wall - to get acquainted with it, he used to
say; to see where it wanted to go. He lived with the painting in its uprighted
state, as with a world confronting his human posture. It is in this sense, I think,
that the Abstract Expressionists were still nature painters. Pollock's drip paint-
ings cannot escape being read as thickets; Louis' Veils acknowledge the same
gravitational force to which our being in nature is subject.

But something happened in painting around 1950 - most conspicuously (at
least within my experience) in the work of Robert Rauschenberg and Dubuffet.
We can still hang their pictures - just as we tack up maps and architectural
plans, or nail a horseshoe to the wall for good luck. Yet these pictures no longer
simulate vertical fields, but opaque flatbed horizontals. They no more depend
on a head-to-toe correspondence with human posture than a newspaper does.
The flatbed picture plane makes its symbolic allusion to hard surfaces such as



950 Institutions and Objections

tabletops, studio floors, charts, bulletin boards - any receptor surface on which
objects are scattered, on which data is entered, on which information may be
received, printed, impressed - whether coherently or in confusion. The pictures
of the last fifteen to twenty years insist on a radically new orientation, in which
the painted surface is no longer the analogue of a visual experience of nature
but of operational processes.

To repeat: it is not the actual physical placement of the image that counts.
There is no law against hanging a rug on a wall, or reproducing a narrative
picture as a mosaic floor. What I have in mind is the psychic address of the
image, its special mode of imaginative confrontation, and I tend to regard the
tilt of the picture plane from vertical to horizontal as expressive of the most
radical shift in the subject matter of art, the shift from nature to culture.

A shift of such magnitude does noc come overnight, nor as the feat of one
artist alone. Portents and antecedents become increasingly recognizable in
retrospect - Monet's Nympheas or Mondrian's transmutation of sea and sky into
signs plus and minus. And the picture planes of a Synthetic Cubist still life or
a Schwitters collage suggest like-minded reorientations. But these last were small
objects; the 'thingness' of them was appropriate to their size. Whereas the event
of the 1950s was the expansion of the work-surface picture plane to the
man-sized environmental scale of Abstract Expressionism. Perhaps Duchamp
was the most vital source. His Large Glass begun in 1915, or his Tu nC of 1918,
is no longer the analogue of a world perceived from an upright position, but a
matrix of information conveniently placed in a vertical situation. And one detects
a sense of the significance of a ninety-degree shift in relation to a man's posture
even in some of those Duchamp 'works' that once seemed no more than
provocative gestures: the Coatrack nailed to the floor and the famous Urinal
tilted up like a monument. 1

But on the New York art scene the great shift came in Rauschenberg's work
of the early 1950s. Even as Abstract Expressionism was celebrating its triumphs,
he proposed the flatbed or work-surface picture plane as the foundation of an
artistic language that would deal with a different order of experience. The
earliest work which Rauschenberg admits into his canon - White Painting with
Numbers - was painted in 1949 in a life class at the Art Students' League, the
young painter turning his back on the model. Rauschenberg's picture, with its
cryptic meander of lines and numbers, is a work surface that cannot be construed
into anything else. Up and down are as subtly confounded as positive-negative
space or figure-ground differential. You cannot read it as masonry, nor as a
system of chains or quoins, and the written ciphers read every way. Scratched
into wet paint, the picture ends up as a verification of its own opaque surface.

In the year following, Rauschenberg began to experiment with objects placed
on blueprint paper and exposed to sunlight. Already then he was involved with
the physical material of plans; and in the early 1950s used newsprint to prime
his canvas - to activate the ground, as he put it - so that his first brush-stroke
upon it took place in a gray map of words.

In retrospect the most clownish of Rauschenberg's youthful pranks take on a
kind of stylistic consistency. Back in the fifties, he was invited to participate in



VIId Critical Revisions 951

an exhibition on the nostalgic subject of 'nature in art' - the organizers hoping
perhaps to promote an alternative to the new abstract painting. Rauschenberg's
entry was a square patch of growing grass held down with chicken wire, placed
in a box suitable for framing and hung on the wall. The artist visited the show
periodically to water his piece - a transposition from nature to culture through
a shift of ninety degrees. When he erased a de Kooning drawing, exhibiting it
as 'Drawing by Willem de Kooning erased by Robert Rauschenberg,' he was
making more than a multifaceted psychological gesture; he was changing - for
the viewer no less than for himself - the angle of imaginative confrontation;
tilting de Kooning's evocation of a worldspace into a thing produced by pressing
down on a desk.

The paintings he made towards the end of that decade included intrusive
non-art attachments: a pillow suspended horizontally from the lower frame
{Canyon, 1959); a grounded ladder inserted between the painted panels which
made up the picture {Winter Pool, 1959-60); a chair standing against a wall but
ingrown with the painting behind {Pilgrim, 1960). Though they hung on the
wall, the pictures kept referring back to the horizontals on which we walk and
sit, work and sleep.

When in the early 1960s he worked with photographic transfers, the images
- each in itself illusionistic - kept interfering with one another; intimations of
spatial meaning forever canceling out to subside in a kind of optical noise. The
waste and detritus of communication - like radio transmission with interference;
noise and meaning on the same wavelength, visually on the same flatbed plane.

This picture plane, as in the enormous canvas called Overdraw (1963), could
look like some garbled conflation of controls system and cityscape, suggesting
the ceaseless inflow of urban message, stimulus, and impediment. To hold all
this together, Rauschenberg's picture plane had to become a surface to which
anything reachable-thinkable would adhere. It had to be whatever a billboard
or dashboard is, and everything a projection screen is, with further affinities
for anything that is flat and worked over - palimpsest, canceled plate, printer's
proof, trial blank, chart, map, aerial view. Any flat documentary surface that
tabulates information is a relevant analogue of his picture plane - radically
different from the transparent projection plane with its optical correspondence
to man's visual field. And it seemed at times that Rauschenberg's work surface
stood for the mind itself - dump, reservoir, switching center, abundant with
concrete references freely associated as in an internal monologue - the outward
symbol of the mind as a running transformer of the external world, constantly
ingesting incoming unprocessed data to be mapped in an overcharged field.

To cope with his symbolic program, the available types of pictorial surface
seemed inadequate; they were too exclusive and too homogeneous. Rauschenberg
found that his imagery needed bedrock as hard and tolerant as a workbench. If
some collage element, such as a pasted-down photograph, threatened to evoke
a topical illusion of depth, the surface was casually stained or smeared with
paint to recall its irreducible flatness. The 'integrity of the picture plane' - once
the accomplishment of good design - was to become that which is given. The
picture's 'flatness' was to be no more of a problem than the flatness of a



952 Institutions and Objections

disordered desk or an unswept floor. Against Rauschenberg's picture plane you
can pin or project any image because it will not work as the glimpse of a world,
but as a scrap of printed material. And you can attach any object, so long as
it beds itself down on the work surface. The old clock in Rauschenberg's 1961
Third Time Painting lies with the number 12 on the left, because the clock face
properly uprighted would have illusionized the whole system into a real vertical
plane - like the wall of a room, part of the given world. Or, in the same picture
the flattened shirt with its sleeves outstretched - not like wash on a line, but
- with paint stains and drips holding it down - like laundry laid out for pressing.
The consistent horizontality is called upon to maintain a symbolic continuum
of litter, workbench, and data-ingesting mind.

Perhaps Rauschenberg's profoundest symbolic gesture came in 1955 when he
seized his own bed, smeared paint on its pillow and quilt coverlet, and uprighted
it against the wall. There, in the vertical posture of 'art,' it continues to work
in the imagination as the eternal companion of our other resource, our horizon-
tality, the flat bedding in which we do our begetting, conceiving, and dreaming.
The horizontality of the bed relates to 'making' as the vertical of the Renaissance
picture plane related to seeing.

I once heard Jasper Johns say that Rauschenberg was the man who in this
century had invented the most since Picasso. What he invented above all was,
I think, a pictorial surface that let the world in again. Not the world of the
Renaissance man who looked for his weather clues out of the window; but the
world of men who turn knobs to hear a taped message, 'precipitation probability
ten percent tonight,' electronically transmitted from some windowless booth.
Rauschenberg's picture plane is for the consciousness immersed in the brain of
the city.

The flatbed picture plane lends itself to any content that does not evoke a
prior optical event. As a criterion of classification it cuts across the terms
'abstract' and 'representational,' Pop and Modernist. Color field painters such
as Noland, Frank Stella, and Ellsworth Kelly, whenever their works suggest a
reproducible image, seem to work with the flatbed picture plane, i.e. one which
is man-made and stops short at the pigmented surface; whereas Pollock's and
Louis's pictures remain visionary, and Frankenthaler's abstractions, for all their
immediate modernism, are - as Lawrence Alloway recently put it - 'a celebration
of human pleasure in what is not man-made.' 2

Insofar as the flatbed picture plane accommodates recognizable objects, it
presents them as man-made things of universally familiar character. The em-
blematic images of the early Johns belong in this class; so, I think, does most
of Pop Art. When Roy Lichtenstein in the early sixties painted an Air Force
officer kissing his girl goodbye, the actual subject matter was the mass-produced
comic-book image; ben-day dots and stereotyped drawing ensured that the image
was understood as a representation of printed matter. The pathetic humanity
that populate Dubuffet's pictures are rude man-made graffiti, and their reality
derives both from the material density of the surface and from the emotional
pressure that guided the hand. Claes Oldenburg's drawing, to quote his own
words, 'takes on an 'ugliness' which is a mimicry of the scrawls and patterns



viid Critical Revisions 953

of street graffiti. It celebrates irrationality, disconnection, violence, and stunted
expression - the damaged life forces of the city street,' 3

And about Andy Warhol, David Antin once wrote a paragraph which I wish
I had written:

In the Warhol canvases, the image can be said to barely exist. On the one hand
this is part of his overriding interest in the 'deteriorated image,' the consequence
of a series of regressions from some initial image of the real world. Here there is
actually a series of images of images, beginning from the translation of the light
reflectivity of a human face into the precipitation of silver from a photo-sensitive
emulsion, this negative image developed, re-photographed into a positive image
with reversal of light and shadow, and consequent blurring, further translated by
telegraphy, engraved on a plate and printed through a crude screen with low-grade
ink on newsprint, and this final blurring and silkscreening in an imposed lilac
color on canvas. What is left? The sense that there is something out there one
recognizes and yet can't see. Before the Warhol canvases we are trapped in a
ghastly embarrassment. This sense of the arbitrary coloring, the nearly obliterated
image and the persistently intrusive feeling. Somewhere in the image there is a
proposition. It is unclear. 4

The picture conceived as the image of an image. It's a conception which
guarantees that the presentation will not be directly that of a worldspace, and
that it will nevertheless admit any experience as the matter of representation.
And it readmits the artist in the fullness of his human interests, as well as the
artist-technician.

The all-purpose picture plane underlying this post-Modernist painting has
made the course of art once again non-linear and unpredictable. What I have
called the flatbed is more than a surface distinction if it is understood as a
change within painting that changed the relationship between artist and image,
image and viewer. Yet this internal change is no more than a symptom of
changes which go far beyond questions of picture planes, or of painting as such.
It is part of a shakeup which contaminates all purified categories. The deepening
inroads of art into non-art continue to alienate the connoisseur as art defects
and departs into strange territories leaving the old stand-by criteria to rule an
eroding plain.



Cf. also Duchamp's suggestion to 'use a Rembrandt as an ironing-board' (Salt Seller: The Writings

of Marcel Duchamp, ed. Michel Sanouillet and Elmer Peterson, New York, 1973, p. 32). NB: not

a dart board or bulletin board, but a horizontal work surface.

'Frankenthaler as Pastoral/ Art News, November 1971, p. 68.

Quoted in Eila Kokkinen, review of Claes Oldenburg: Drawings and Prints, in Arts, November

1969, p. 12.

'Warhol: The Silver Tenement,' Art News, Summer 1966, p. 58.



8 Rosalind Krauss (b. 1941) 'A View of Modernism'

The author was a contemporary of Michael Fried on the faculty at Harvard University.
Together they did much to introduce the Modernist criticism of Clement Greenberg to



954 institutions and Objections

a more established academic environment, as well as substantially developing and
sophisticating the premises of that criticism themselves. By the early 1970s, however,
Fried had essentially abandoned contemporary criticism for art history, and Krauss was
increasingly disturbed by the apparent inability of Greenbergian Modernism to address
what was palpably the most trenchant and interesting art of the day. Accordingly she
began to adumbrate the idea of a 'larger' Modernist self-critical sensibility which the
entrenched Greenbergian paradigm had, through its very rigidity, begun to violate. A
transitional work, the essay none the less marks an important moment in the slackening
of Greenberg's Modernism in respect of one of its most sophisticated exponents.
Published in Artforum, New York, September 1972, pp. 48-51, from which the present
text is taken.

One day while the show, 'Three American Painters' was hanging at the Fogg
Museum at Harvard, Michael Fried and I were standing in one of the galleries.
To our right was a copper painting by Frank Stella, its surface burnished by
the light which flooded the room. A Harvard student who had entered the
gallery approached us. With his left arm raised and his finger pointing to the
Stella, he confronted Michael Fried. 'What's so good about that?' he demanded.
Fried looked back at him. 'Look,' he said slowly, 'there are days when Stella
goes to the Metropolitan Museum. And he sits for hours looking at the
Velazquez, utterly knocked out by them and then he goes back to his studio.
What he would like more than anything else is to paint like Velazquez. But
what he knows is that that is an option that is not open to him. So he paints
stripes.' Fried's voice had risen. 'He wants to be Velazquez so he paints stripes.''

I don't know what the boy thought, but it was clear enough to me. That
statement, which linked Velazquez' needs to Stella's in the immense broad jump
of a single sentence, was a giant ellipsis whose leap cleared three centuries of
art. But in my mind's eye it was more like one of those strobe photographs in
which each increment of the jumper's act registers on the single image. I could
see what the student could not, and what Fried's statement did not fill in for
him. Under the glittering panes of that skylight, I could visualize the logic of
an argument that connected hundreds of separate pictorial acts into the fluid
clarity of a single motion, an argument that was as present to me as the paintings
hanging in the gallery - their clean, spare surfaces tied back into the faint grime
of walls dedicated to the history of art. If Fried had not chosen to give the
whole of that argument to the student, he had tried to make the student think
about one piece of the obvious: that Stella's need to say something through his
art was the same as a seventeenth-century Spaniard's; only the point in time
was different. In 1965, the fact that Stella's stripes were involved with what he
wanted to say - a product, that is, of content - was clear enough to me.
* * *

The content question has been always just under the surface of the writing
of most 'modernist' critics. So when Michael Fried wrote the extended essay
for his exhibition, 'Three American Painters' [see VIb8], he of course called
attention to his experience 'that both Noland and Olitski are primarily painters
of feeling and that what I take to be their preeminence among their contempo-
raries chiefly resides not in the formal intelligence of their work, which is of



II



VIId Critical Revisions 955

the very highest order, but in the depth and sweep of feeling which this
intelligence makes possible.' In characterizing the 'passion, eloquence and fragile
power' of Noland's painting, or in speaking of Noland as 'a tense, critical, almost
hurting presence in his work,' Fried pointed to both color and design (or
structure) as the sources of these. But he confined his analysis to the structure
and not the color, because the first being the result of rational decisions could
be usefully described, while the second being arbitrary could not. And the
partialness of this analysis was not seen as a kind of cheating or shying away
from the responsibility to confront the total work, because it was precisely in
that very mixture of rationality and arbitrariness that the work's meaning was
seen to reside. Fried saw Noland's painting as a response to a general 'crisis of
meaning' generated by a particular history - one that made imperative the
invention of a self-evident, reflexive structure and drove lyricism onto an
increasingly narrow highland of color.

That whole story ... is offered in evidence of the fact that most people who
attack the 'modernist' critical position, do so by omitting or distorting various
parts of that position. Of course, they could reply that they cannot be expected
to take into account what is left out of most 'modernist' writing; that if questions
of content and feeling really are central to 'modernist' critics, they themselves
are keeping it a secret since such questions are never really up front in what
they write. But upfrontness is a rather tricky criterion when discussing a large
body of theory. It's a bit like saying that the philosophical position of Wittgen-
stein is an argument for behaviorism because that's what is up front in his
writing. Yet anyone reading the late Wittgenstein must realize that his work
taken as a whole offers an impassioned and profound attack on behaviorism,
along with idealism. It is simply a method of argumentation that is up front.

With 'modernism,' too, it was precisely its methodology that was important
to a lot of us who began to write about art in the early 1960s. That method
demanded lucidity. It demanded that one not talk about anything in a work of
art that one could not point to. It involved tying back one's perceptions about
art in the present to what one knew about the art of the past. It involved a
language that was open to some mode of testing. [. . .]

In the '50s we had been alternately tyrannized and depressed by the psycho-
logizing whine of 'Existentialist' criticism. It had seemed evasive to us - the
impenetrable hedge of subjectivity whose prerogatives we could not assent to.
The remedy had to have, for us, the clear provability of an 'if x then y.' The
syllogism we took up was historical in character, which meant that it read only
in one direction; it was progressive. No a rebours was possible, no going
backward against the grain. The history we saw from Manet to the Impressio-
nists to Cezanne and then to Picasso was like a series of rooms en filade. Within
each room the individual artist explored, to the limits of his experience and his
formal intelligence, the separate constituents of his medium. The effect of his
pictorial act was to open simultaneously the door to the next space and close
out access to the one behind him. The shape and dimensions of the new space
were discovered by the next pictorial act; the only thing about that unstable
position that was clearly determined beforehand was its point of entrance. [ . . . ]



I



956 Institutions and Objections

Insofar as modernism was tied to the objective datum of that history, it had, I
thought, nothing to do with 'sensibility.'

Obviously modernism is a sensibility - one that reaches out past that small
band of art critics of which I was a part, to include a great deal more than,
and ultimately to criticize, what I stood for. One part of that sensibility embraces
analysis as an act of humility, trying to catch itself in the middle of the very
act of judgment, to glimpse itself unawares in the mirror of consciousness. The
attention to self-reflexivity, or what the Structuralist critics term dedoublement,
is thus one of the most general features of the larger modernist sensibility. And
because of that attention, another part of the modernist sensibility feels extreme
wariness over the question of perspective. [. . .]

Perspective is the visual correlate of causality that one thing follows the next
in space according to rule. In that sense, despite differences of historical
development, it can be likened to the literary tradition of the omniscient narrator
and the conventional plot, . . . and within that temporal succession - given as
a spatial analogue - was secreted the 'meaning' of both that space and those
events. And it is that very prior assumption of meaning that the larger modernist
sensibility abhors [. . .]

We can no longer fail to notice that if we make up schemas of meaning based
on history, we are playing into systems of control and censure. We are no longer
innocent. 'For if the norms of the past serve to measure the present, they also
serve to construct it.'

If someone asks us what's so good about a painting by Stella and our answer
is that he has to paint stripes because of Manet, etc., etc., and Impressionism,
etc., etc., and then Cubism, and then onto a history of the necessity of flatness,
what we have made the Stella painting into is a particular kind of screen onto
which we project a special form of narrative. The flatness that modernist
criticism reveres may have expunged spatial perspective, but it has substituted
a temporal one - i.e., history. It is this history that the modernist critic
contemplates looking into the vortex of, say, Stella's concentric stripes: a
perspective view that opens backward into that receding vista of past doors and
rooms, which because they are not re-enterable, can only manifest themselves
in the present by means of diagrammatic flatness.

Modernist criticism is innocent. And its innocence obtains on three counts:
it refuses to see the temporality which it never tires of invoking - 'the entire
history of painting since Manet' - as that perspectival armature on which it
structures the art in question (and on which that art has increasingly tended to
structure itself); it thinks of that history as 'objective' - beyond the dictates of
sensibility, beyond ideology; and it is unself-critically prescriptive. Failing to
see that its 'history' is a perspective, my perspective - only, that is to say, a
point of view - modernist criticism has stopped being suspicious of what it sees
as self-evident, its critical intelligence having ceased to be wary of what it has
taken as given. Although its disclaimers to being a prescriptive position are
sincerely meant, it has failed to put a check on the ways that its belief in the
'reality' of a certain version of the past has led it to construct (in its coercive
sense) the present. [. . .]



VIId Critical Revisions 957

9 Jean Baudrillard (b. 1929) 4 Ethic of Labour,
Aesthetic of Play'

Marxism had dominated French intellectual life since the end of the Second World War.
In the wake of the failure of 1968 it came under increasing critical scrutiny. Here Jean
Baudrillard establishes the ground for what would later become a central preoccupation
in the cultural theory and 'postmodernist' art of the 1980s. For him Marx's critique of
political economy merely serves to reduplicate the work-ethic of modern capitalism; no
less tied to it is the sphere of the remainder, of art and aesthetic play. Both together
constitute for Baudrillard a 'mirror of production' rather than a workable strategy for
overcoming capitalism. Instead he argues that in the modern world the critique of
political economy must itself be subject to transformation through a focus on the
characteristic feature of that modernity: its overload of information, knowledges, and
meanings. Baudrillard proposes to focus not on material exchange but on symbolic
exchange; to offer a materialist critique of what he calls the 'political economy of the
sign'. The present extracts are taken from Chapter 1 of Le miroir de production, Paris
1973, translated into English as The Mirror of Production, St Louis, 1975, pp. 35-51.

This logic of material production, this dialectic of modes of production, always
returns beyond history to a generic definition of man as a dialectical being; a
notion intelligible only through the process of the objectification of nature. This
position is heavy with consequences to the extent that, even through the
vicissitudes of his history, man (whose history is also his 'product') will be ruled
by this clear and definitive reason, this dialectical scheme that acts as an implicit
philosophy. Marx develops it in the 1844 Manuscripts', Marcuse revives it in his
critique of the economic concept of labor: '. . . labor is an ontological concept
of human existence as such.' 1 [. . .] The dialectical culmination of all of this
is the concept of nature as 'the inorganic body of man:' the naturalization of
man and the humanization of nature. 2

On this dialectical base, Marxist philosophy unfolds in two directions: an ethic
of labor and an esthetic of non-labor. The former traverses all bourgeois and
socialist ideology. It exalts labor as value, as end in itself, as categorical
imperative. Labor loses its negativity and is raised to an absolute value. But is
the 'materialist' thesis of man's generic productivity very far from this 'idealist'
sanctification of labor? [ . . . ]

Confronted by the absolute idealism of labor, dialectical materialism is perhaps
only a dialectical idealism of productive forces. We will return to this to see if
the dialectic of means and end at the heart of the principle of the transformation
of nature does not already virtually imply the autonomization of means (the
autonomization of science, technology, and labor; the autonomization of pro-
duction as generic activity; the autonomization of the dialectic itself as the
general scheme of development). 3

The regressive character of this work ethic is evidently related to what it
represses: Marx's chief discovery regarding the double nature of labor (his
discovery of abstract and measurable social labor). In the fine points of Marxist
thought, confronting the work ethic is an esthetic of non-work or play itself



958 Institutions and Objections



based on the dialectic of quantity and quality. Beyond the capitalist mode of
production and the quantitative measure of labor, this is the perspective of a
definitive qualitative mutation in communist society: the end of alienated labor
and the free objectification of man's own powers. [ . . . ]

This realm beyond political economy called play, non-work, or non-alienated
labor, is defined as the reign of a finality without end. In this sense it is and
remains an esthetic, in the extremely Kantian sense, with all the bourgeois
ideological connotations which that implies. Although Marx's thought settled
accounts with bourgeois morality, it remains defenseless before its esthetic,
whose ambiguity is more subtle but whose complicity with the general system
of political economy is just as profound. Once again, at the heart of its strategy,
in its analytic distinction between quantity and quality, Marxist thought inherits
the esthetic and humanistic virus of bourgeois thought, since the concept of
quality is burdened with all the finalities - whether those concrete finalities of
use value, or those endless ideal and transcendent finalities. Here stands the
defect of all notions of play, freedom, transparence, or disalienation: it is the
defect of the revolutionary imagination since, in the ideal types of play and
the free play of human faculties, we are still in a process of repressive desub-
limation. In effect, the sphere of play is defined as the fulfillment of human
rationality, the dialectical culmination of man's activity of incessant objectifica-
tion of nature and control of his exchanges with it. It presupposes the full
development of productive forces; it 'follows in the footsteps' of the reality
principle and the transformation of nature. Marx clearly states that it can
flourish only when founded on the reign of necessity. Wishing itself beyond
labor but in its continuation, the sphere of play is always merely the esthetic
sublimation of labor's constraints. With this concept we remain rooted in the
problematic of necessity and freedom, a typically bourgeois problematic whose
double ideological expression has always been the institution of a reality principle
(repression and sublimation, the principle of labor) and its formal overcoming
in an ideal transcendence.

Work and non-work: here is a 'revolutionary' theme. It is undoubtedly the
most subtle form of the type of binary, structural opposition discussed above.
The end of the end of exploitation by work is this reverse fascination with
non-work, this reverse mirage of free time (forced time-free time, full time-
empty time: another paradigm that fixes the hegemony of a temporal order
which is always merely that of production). Non-work is still only the repressive
desublimation of labor power, the antithesis which acts as the alternative. Such
is the sphere of non-work: even if it is not immediately conflated with leisure
and its present bureaucratic organization, where the desire for death and
mortification and its management by social institutions are as powerful as in
the sphere of work; even if it is viewed in a radical way which represents it as
other than the mode of 'total disposability' or 'freedom' for the individual to
'produce' himself as value, to 'express himself,' to 'liberate himself as a
(conscious or unconscious) authentic content, in short, as the ideality of time
and of the individual as an empty form to be filled finally by his freedom. The
finality of value is always there. It is no longer inscribed in determined contents



VIId Critical Revisions 959

as in the sphere of productive activity; henceforth it is a pure form, though no
less determining. Exactly as the pure institutional form of painting, art, and
theater shines forth in anti-painting, anti-art, and anti-theater, which are emptied
of their contents, the pure form of labor shines forth in non-labor. Although
the concept of non-labor can thus be fantasized as the abolition of political
economy, it is bound to fall back into the sphere of political economy as the
sign, and only the sign, of its abolition. It already escapes revolutionaries to
enter into the programmatic field of the 'new society.'



Comprehending itself as a form of the rationality of production superior to that
of bourgeois political economy, the weapon Marx created turns against him and
turns his theory into the dialectical apotheosis of political economy. At a much
higher level, his critique falters under his own objection to Feuerbach of making
a radical critique of the contents of religion but in a completely religious form.
Marx made a radical critique of political economy, but still in the form of
political economy. These are the ruses of the dialectic, undoubtedly the limit
of all 'critique.' The concept of critique emerged in the West at the same time
as political economy and, as the quintessence of Enlightenment rationality, is
perhaps only the subtle, long-term expression of the system's expanded repro-
duction. The dialectic does not avoid the fate of every critique. Perhaps the
inversion of the idealist dialectic into a materialist dialectic was only a meta-
morphosis; perhaps the very logic of political economy, capital, and the com-
modity is dialectical; and perhaps, under the guise of producing its fatal internal
contradiction, Marx basically only rendered a descriptive theory. The logic of
representation - of the duplication of its object - haunts all rational discursive-
ness. Every critical theory is haunted by this surreptitious religion, this desire
bound up with the construction of its object, this negativity subtly haunted by
the very form that it negates.

This is why Marx said that after Feuerbach the critique of religion was
basically completed (cf. Critique of HegeVs Philosophy of Right) and that, to
overcome the ambiguous limit beyond which it can no longer go (the reinversion
of the religious form beneath the critique), it is necessary to move resolutely
to a different level: precisely to the critique of political economy, which alone
is radical and which can definitively resolve the problem of religion by bringing
out the true contradictions. Today we are exactly at the same point with respect
to Marx. For us, the critique of political economy is basically completed. The
materialist dialectic has exhausted its content in reproducing its form. At this
level, the situation is no longer that of a critique: it is inextricable. And following
the same revolutionary movement as Marx did, we must move to a radically
different level that, beyond its critique, permits the definitive resolution of
political economy. This level is that of symbolic exchange and its theory. And
just as Marx thought it necessary to clear the path to the critique of political
economy with a critique of the philosophy of law, the preliminary to this radical
change of terrain is the critique of the metaphysic of the signifier and the code,
in all its current ideological extent. For lack of a better term, we call this the
critique of the political economy of the sign.



960 Institutions and Objections

H. Marcuse, l On the Concept of Labor 1 , Telos, 16, Summer 1973 pp. 11-12.
Engels, always a naturalist, goes so far as to exalt the role played by work in the transition from
ape to man.
" But this autonomization is the key which turns Marxism toward Social Democracy, to its present
revisionism, and to its total positivist decay (which includes bureaucratic Stalinism as well as
Social Democratic liberalism).



10 Julia Kristeva (b. 1941) 'Prolegomenon' to

Revolution in Poetic Language

Bulgarian by birth, Kristeva arrived in Paris in 1966 on a doctoral research fellowship.
She quickly became established at the centre of French intellectual life. In common with
many of the French left in the late 1960s she was drawn both to semiotics and to
Maoism, and - a more enduring commitment- to the emergent feminist movement and
its interest in psychoanalysis. Formed by these commitments, and by the pervasive
Structuralist view of language, Kristeva's doctoral thesis set out to show the way in
which meaning was generated in capitalist society while the roots of that process in
the embodiment of the human subject were simultaneously repressed. For her, modern
literature, and by extension art, attested to the ideological crisis of this coercive social
structure. Such apparently esoteric signifying practices, by continually shattering social
and linguistic norms, thereby took on a kindred status to transgressive social practice:
revolution. Kristeva thus links the disruptive pleasure of the text to social liberation.
Originally published as La revolution du langage poetique, Paris, 1974. This work was
eventually published in English, in a translation by Margaret Waller, as Revolution in
Poetic Language, New York, 1984. The present text is taken from the 'Prolegomenon',
pp. 13-17.

Our philosophies of language, embodiments of the idea, are nothing more than
the thoughts of archivists, archaeologists, and necrophiliacs. Fascinated by the
remains of a process which is partly discursive, they substitute this fetish for
what actually produced it. Egypt, Babylon, Mycenae: we see their pyramids,
their carved tablets, and fragmented codes in the discourse of our contempo-
raries, and think that by codifying them we can possess them.

These static thoughts, products of a leisurely cogitation removed from his-
torical turmoil, persist in seeking the truth of language by formalizing utterances
that hang in midair, and the truth of the subject by listening to the narrative
of a sleeping body - a body in repose, withdrawn from its socio-historical
imbrication, removed from direct experience: 'To be or not to be ... To die,
to sleep ... To sleep - perchance to dream.'

And yet, this thinking points to a truth, namely, that the kind of activity
encouraged and privileged by (capitalist) society represses the process pervading
the body and the subject, and that we must therefore break out of our
interpersonal and intersocial experience if we are to gain access to what is
repressed in the social mechanism: the generating of signifiance.

The archivistic, archaeological, and necrophilic methods on which the scien-
tific imperative was founded - the building of arguments on the basis of
empirical evidence, a systematizable given, and an observable object - in this



7



VIId Critical Revisions 961

case, language - are an embarrassment when applied to modern or contemporary
phenomena. These methods show that the capitalist mode of production has
stratified language into idiolects and divided it into self-contained, isolated
islands - heteroclite spaces existing in different temporal modes (as relics or
projections), and oblivious of one another.

These random discursive instances have yet to be assigned a typology corre-
sponding to the subjective and socioeconomic typologies in society as a whole.
Instead, as agents of totality, in positions of control, science and theory intervene
to make such discursive instances intelligible, each within their separate domain,
even though they may lose them and have to start unifying them over and over
again, if only provisionally - for that is their Long March. Linguistics, semiotics,
anthropology, and psychoanalysis reveal that the thinking subject, the Cartesian
subject who defines his being through thought or language, subsumes within
that being and the operations which supposedly structure it, all trans-linguistic
practice - a practice in which language and the subject are merely moments.
From this perspective, the philosophy of language and the 'human sciences' that
stem from it emerge as reflections on moments. Whether they are viewed as
simply linguistic, subjective, or more largely socioeconomic - depending on the
'discipline' - such moments are nevertheless fragments, remains; their individual
articulation is often examined, but rarely their interdependence or inception.

The critical question is not whether one can do otherwise. One clearly cannot
if the object chosen is a human universe of full subjects who simply make
systematic combinations in language and are themselves implicated in communi-
cation. Nor is it a question of calculating the pyramid's base and slant height
and miming traces on Babylonian tablets or letters in Cretan linear writing.
Such refinements in economics, phenomenology, and psychoanalysis de-structure
finite systems and show that they are produced by a random albeit necessary
causality. But one must still posit an 'outside' that is in fact internal to each
closed set, since otherwise the set would remain enclosed, even if internal differen-
tiation could be extended indefinitely. One must, then, decenter the closed set and
elaborate the dialectic of a process within plural and heterogeneous universes.

We will make constant use of notions and concepts borrowed from Freudian
psychoanalytic theory and its various recent developments in order to give the
advances of dialectical logic a materialist foundation - a theory of signification
based on the subject, his formation, and his corporeal, linguistic, and social
dialectic. Our purpose is not to adhere to the orthodoxy of any particular school,
but rather to select those aspects of analytic theory capable of rationalizing the
signifying process as it is practiced within texts. Does this dialectic itself avoid
archivism? At least it indicates its own position, and renounces both the
totalizing fragmentation characteristic of positivist discourse, which reduces all
signifying practices to a formalism, and a reductive identification with other
(discursive, ideological, economic) islands of the social aggregate.

From this position, it seems possible to perceive a signifying practice which,
although produced in language, is only intelligible through it. By exploding the
phonetic, lexical, and syntactic object of linguistics, this practice not only escapes
the attempted hold of all anthropomorphic sciences, it also refuses to identify



962 Institutions and Objections

with the recumbent body subjected to transference onto the analyser. Ultimately,
it exhausts the ever tenacious ideological institutions and apparatuses, thereby
demonstrating the limits of formalist and psychoanalytic devices. This signifying
practice - a particular type of modern literature - attests to a 'crisis' of social
structures and their ideological, coercive, and necrophilic manifestations. To be
sure, such crises have occurred at the dawn and decline of every mode of
production: the Pindaric obscurity that followed Homeric clarity and community
is one of many examples. However, with Lautreamont, Mallarme, Joyce, and
Artaud, to name only a few, this crisis represents a new phenomenon. For the
capitalist mode of production produces and marginalizes, but simultaneously
exploits for its own regeneration, one of the most spectacular shatterings of
discourse. By exploding the subject and his ideological limits, this phenomenon
has a triple effect, and raises three sets of questions:

1. Because of its specific isolation within the discursive totality of our time,
this shattering of discourse reveals that linguistic changes constitute changes in
the status of the subject - his relation to the body, to others, and to objects; it
also reveals that normalized language is just one of the ways of articulating the
signifying process that encompasses the body, the material referent, and language
itself. How are these strata linked? What is their interrelation within signifying
practice?

2. The shattering further reveals that the capitalist mode of production,
having attained a highly developed means of production through science and
technology, no longer need remain strictly within linguistic and ideological
norms, but can also integrate their process qua process. As art, this shattering can
display the productive basis of subjective and ideological signifying formations
- a foundation that primitive societies call 'sacred' and modernity has rejected
as 'schizophrenia.' What is the extent of this integration? Under what conditions
does it become indispensable, censured, repressed, or marginal?

3. Finally, in the history of signifying systems and notably that of the arts,
religion, and rites, there emerge, in retrospect, fragmentary phenomena which
have been kept in the background or rapidly integrated into more communal
signifying systems but point to the very process of signifiance. Magic, shaman-
ism, esoterism, the carnival, and 'incomprehensible' poetry all underscore the
limits of socially useful discourse and attest to what it represses: the process that
exceeds the subject and his communicative structures. But at what historical
moment does social exchange tolerate or necessitate the manifestation of the
signifying process in its 'poetic' or 'esoteric' form? Under what conditions does
this 'esoterism,' in displacing the boundaries of socially established signifying
practices, correspond to socioeconomic change, and, ultimately, even to revolution?
And under what conditions does it remain a blind alley, a harmless bonus offered
by a social order which uses this 'esoterism' to expand, become flexible, and thrive?

If there exists a 'discourse' which is not a mere depository of thin linguistic
layers, an archive of structures, or the testimony of a withdrawn body, and is,
instead, the essential element of a practice involving the sum of unconscious,
subjective, and social relations in gestures of confrontation and appropriation,



1



i



viid Critical Revisions 963

destruction and construction - productive violence, in short - it is 'literature,'
or, more specifically, the text. Although simply sketched out, this notion of the
text (to which we shall return) already takes us far from the realm of 'discourse'
and 'art.' The text is a practice that could be compared to political revolution:
the one brings about in the subject what the other introduces into society. The
history and political experience of the twentieth century have demonstrated that
one cannot be transformed without the other - but could there be any doubt
after the overturning [renversement] of the Hegelian dialectic and especially after
the Freudian revolution? Hence, the questions we will ask about literary practice
will be aimed at the political horizon from which this practice is inseparable,
despite the efforts of aestheticizing esoterism and repressive sociologizing or
formalist dogmatics to keep them apart. We shall call this heterogeneous practice
signifiance to indicate, on the one hand, that biological urges are socially
controlled, directed, and organized, producing an excess with regard to social
apparatuses; and on the other, that this instinctual operation becomes a practice -
a transformation of natural and social resistances, limitations, and stagnations - if
and only if it enters into the code of linguistic and social communication. [. . .]

What we call signifiance, then, is precisely this unlimited and unbounded
generating process, this unceasing operation of the drives toward, in, and
through language; toward, in, and through the exchange system and its prota-
gonists - the subject and his institutions. This heterogeneous process, neither
anarchic, fragmented foundation nor schizophrenic blockage, is a structuring
practice, a passage to the outer boundaries of the subject and society. Then -
and only then - can it be jouissance and revolution.

11 Laura Mulvey (b. 1941) from 'Visual Pleasure
and Narrative Cinema'

In the 1970s the British journal Screen did much to introduce an English-speaking
audience to French theories of culture and, in particular, to those theories of film which
were rooted in structuralism and semiology. Laura Mulvey's influential study linked types
of looking, and the pleasures to be derived from them, to gender differences in society.
Not merely 'differences', one should add, nor yet merely 'society'. Rather, it was
emphasized that these differences took the form of inequality and oppression within a
capitalist, but more particularly, patriarchal, society. Mulvey linked the pleasures of film
and, by extension, of much modern art, to an essentially repressive social structure.
Her article set out, as she said, to destroy these pleasures. Initially delivered as a paper
at the University of Wisconsin in Spring 1973, the essay was first published in Screen,
16, no. 3, London, Autumn 1975, pp. 6-18, from which the present extracts are taken.
(Reprinted in Mulvey, Visual and Other Pleasures, London, 1989.)

I Introduction

A. A Political Use of Psychoanalysis

This paper intends to use psychoanalysis to discover where and how the

fascination of film is reinforced by preexisting patterns of fascination already at



964 Institutions and Objections

work within the individual subject and the social formations that have molded
him. It takes as starting point the way film reflects, reveals, and even plays on
the straight, socially established interpretation of sexual difference that controls
images, erotic ways of looking, and spectacle. It is helpful to understand what
the cinema has been, how its magic has worked in the past, while attempting
a theory and a practice that will challenge this cinema of the past. Psychoanalytic
theory is thus appropriated here as a political weapon, demonstrating the way
the unconscious of patriarchal society has structured film form.

The paradox of phallocentrism in all its manifestations is that it depends on
the image of the castrated woman to give order and meaning to its world. An
idea of woman stands as linchpin to the system: it is her lack that produces the
phallus as a symbolic presence, it is her desire to make good the lack that the
phallus signifies. Recent writing in Screen about psychoanalysis and the cinema
has not sufficiently brought out the importance of the representation of the
female form in a symbolic order in which, in the last resort, it speaks castration
and nothing else. To summarize briefly: the function of woman in forming the
patriarchal unconscious is twofold; she first symbolizes the castration threat by
her real absence of a penis and second thereby raises her child into the symbolic.
Once this has been achieved, her meaning in the process is at an end, it does
not last into the world of law and language except as a memory that oscillates
between memory of maternal plenitude and memory of lack. Both are posited
on nature (or on 'anatomy' in Freud's famous phrase). Woman's desire is
subjected to her image as bearer of the bleeding wound: she can exist only in
relation to castration and cannot transcend it. She turns her child into the
signifier of her own desire to possess a penis (the condition, she imagines, of
entry into the symbolic). Either she must gracefully give way to the word, the
Name of the Father and the Law, or else struggle to keep her child down with
her in the half-light of the imaginary. Woman, then, stands in patriarchal culture
as signifier for the male other, bound by a symbolic order in which man can
live out his fantasies and obsessions through linguistic command by imposing
them on the silent image of woman still tied to her place as bearer of meaning,
not maker of meaning.

There is an obvious interest in this analysis for feminists, a beauty in its exact
rendering of the frustration experienced under the phallocentric order. It gets
us nearer to the roots of our oppression, it brings an articulation of the problem
closer, it faces us with the ultimate challenge: how to fight the unconscious
structured like a language (formed critically at the moment of arrival of language)
while still caught within the language of the patriarchy. There is no way in
which we can produce an alternative out of the blue, but we can begin to make
a break by examining partriarchy with the tools it provides, of which psycho-
analysis is not the only but an important one. We are still separated by a great
gap from important issues for the female unconscious that are scarcely relevant
to phallocentric theory: the sexing of the female infant and her relationship to
the symbolic, the sexually mature woman as nonmother, maternity outside the
signification of the phallus, the vagina . . . But, at this point, psychoanalytic



1



VIId Critical Revisions 965

theory as it now stands can at least advance our understanding of the status
quo, of the patriarchal order in which we are caught.

B. Destruction of Pleasure as a Radical Weapon

As an advanced representation system, the cinema poses questions of the ways
the unconscious (formed by the dominant order) structures ways of seeing and
pleasure in looking. Cinema has changed over the last few decades. It is no
longer the monolithic system based on large capital investment exemplified at
its best by Hollywood in the 1930s, 1940s, and 1950s. Technological advances
(16mm, etc.) have changed the economic conditions of cinematic production,
which can now be artisanal as well as capitalist. Thus it has been possible for
an alternative cinema to develop. However self-conscious and ironic Hollywood
managed to be, it always restricted itself to a formal mise-en-scene reflecting
the dominant ideological concept of the cinema. The alternative cinema provides
a space for a cinema to be born that is radical in both a political and an aesthetic
sense and challenges the basic assumptions of the mainstream film. This is not
to reject the latter moralistically, but to highlight the ways in which its formal
preoccupations reflect the psychical obsessions of the society that produced it,
and, further, to stress that the alternative cinema must start specifically by
reacting against these obsessions and assumptions. A politically and aesthetically
avant-garde cinema is now possible, but it can still only exist as a counterpoint.
The magic of the Hollywood style at its best (and of all the cinema that fell
within its sphere of influence) arose, not exclusively but in one important aspect,
from its skilled and satisfying manipulation of visual pleasure. Unchallenged,
mainstream film coded the erotic into the language of the dominant patriarchal
order. In the highly developed Hollywood cinema it was only through these
codes that the alienated subject, torn in his imaginary memory by a sense of
loss, by the terror of potential lack in fantasy, came near to finding a glimpse
of satisfaction: through its formal beauty and its play on his own formative
obsessions. This essay will discuss the interweaving of that erotic pleasure in
film, its meaning, and in particular the central place of the image of woman.
It is said that analyzing pleasure, or beauty, destroys it. That is the intention
of this essay. The satisfaction and reinforcement of the ego that represent the
high point of film history hitherto must be attacked; not in favor of a
reconstructed new pleasure, which cannot exist in the abstract, or of intellec-
tualized unpleasure, but to make way for a total negation of the ease and
plenitude of the narrative fiction film. The alternative is the thrill that comes
from leaving the past behind without rejecting it, transcending outworn or
oppressive forms, or daring to break with normal pleasurable expectations in
order to conceive a new language of desire.

II Pleasure in Looking - Fascination with the Human Form

A. The cinema offers a number of possible pleasures. One is scopophilia.
There are circumstances in which looking itself is a source of pleasure, just as,
in the reverse formation, there is pleasure in being looked at. Originally, in his



966 Institutions and Objections

Three Essays on Sexuality, Freud isolated scopophilia as one of the component
instincts of sexuality that exist as drives quite independently of the erotogenic
zones. At this point he associated scopophilia with taking other people as objects,
subjecting them to a controlling and curious gaze. His particular examples center
around the voyeuristic activities of children, their desire to see and make sure
of the private and the forbidden (curiosity about other people's genital and
bodily functions, about the presence or absence of the penis and, retrospectively,
about the primal scene). In this analysis scopophilia is essentially active. (Later,
in Instincts and Their Vicissitudes, Freud developed his theory of scopophilia
further, attaching it initially to pregenital autoeroticism, after which the pleasure
of the look is transferred to others by analogy. There is a close working here
of the relationship between the active instinct and its further development in a
narcissistic form.) Although the instinct is modified by other factors, in par-
ticular the constitution of the ego, it continues to exist as the erotic basis for
pleasure in looking at another person as object. At the extreme, it can become
fixated into a perversion, producing obsessive voyeurs and Peeping Toms, whose
only sexual satisfaction can come from watching, in an active controlling sense,
an objectified other.

At first glance, the cinema would seem to be remote from the undercover
world of the surreptitious observation of an unknowing and unwilling victim.
What is seen of the screen is so manifestly shown. But the mass of mainstream
film, and the conventions within which it has consciously evolved, portray a
hermetically sealed world that unwinds magically, indifferent to the presence of
the audience, producing for them a sense of separation and playing on their
voyeuristic fantasy. Moreover, the extreme contrast between the darkness in the
auditorium (which also isolates the spectators from one another) and the
brilliance of the shifting patterns of light and shade on the screen helps to
promote the illusion of voyeuristic separation. Although the film is really being
shown, is there to be seen, conditions of screening and narrative conventions
give the spectator an illusion of looking in on a private world. Among other
things, the position of the spectators in the cinema is blatantly one of repression
of their exhibitionism and projection of the repressed desire onto the performer.

B. The cinema satisfies a primordial wish for pleasurable looking, but it also
goes further, developing scopophilia in its narcissistic aspect. The conventions
of mainstream film focus attention on the human form. Scale, space, stories are
all anthropomorphic. Here, curiosity and the wish to look intermingle with a
fascination with likeness and recognition: the human face, the human body, the
relationship between the human form and its surroundings, the visible presence
of the person in the world. Jacques Lacan has described how the moment when
a child recognizes its own image in the mirror is crucial for the constitution of
the ego [see Vb7]. Several aspects of this analysis are relevant here. The mirror
phase occurs at a time when the child's physical ambitions outstrip his motor
capacity, with the result that his recognition of himself is joyous in that he
imagines his mirror image to be more complete, more perfect than he experi-
ences his own body. Recognition is thus overlaid with misrecognition: the image



II



!



VIId Critical Revisions 967

recognized is conceived as the reflected body of the self, but its misrecognition
as superior projects this body outside itself as an ideal ego, the alienated subject,
which, reintrojected as an ego ideal, gives rise to the future generation of
identification with others. This mirror moment predates language for the child.
Important for this essay is the fact that it is an image that constitutes the
matrix of the imaginary, of recognition/misrecognition and identification, and
hence of the first articulation of the T of subjectivity. This is a moment when
an older fascination with looking (at the mother's face, for an obvious example)
collides with the initial inklings of self-awareness. Hence it is the birth of the
long love affair/despair between image and self-image that has found such
intensity of expression in film and such joyous recognition in the cinema
audience. Quite apart from the extraneous similarities between screen and mirror
(the framing of the human form in its surroundings, for instance), the cinema
has structures of fascination strong enough to allow temporary loss of ego while
simultaneously reinforcing the ego. The sense of forgetting the world as the ego
has subsequently come to perceive it (I forgot who I am and where I was) is
nostalgically reminiscent of that presubjective moment of image recognition. At
the same time the cinema has distinguished itself in the production of ego ideals
as expressed in particular in the star system, the stars centering both screen
presence and screen story as they act out a complex process of likeness and
difference (the glamorous impersonates the ordinary).



Ill Woman as Image, Man as Bearer of the Look

A. In a world ordered by sexual imbalance, pleasure in looking has been
split between active/male and passive/female. The determining male gaze
projects its fantasy onto the female figure, which is styled accordingly. In their
traditional exhibitionist role women are simultaneously looked at and displayed,
with their appearance coded for strong visual and erotic impact so that they
can be said to connote to-be-looked-at-ness. Woman displayed as sexual object is
the leitmotiv of erotic spectacle: from pinups to striptease, from Ziegfeld to
Busby Berkeley, she holds the look, plays to, and signifies male desire. Main-
stream film neatly combined spectacle and narrative. (Note, however, how in
the musical song-and-dance numbers break the flow of the diegesis.) The
presence of woman is an indispensable element of spectacle in normal narrative
film, yet her visual presence tends to work against the development of a story
line, to freeze the flow of action in moments of erotic contemplation. [. , .]

B. An active/passive heterosexual division of labor has similarly controlled
narrative structure. According to the principles of the ruling ideology and the
psychical structures that back it up, the male figure cannot bear the burden of
sexual objectification. Man is reluctant to gaze at his exhibitionist like. Hence
the split between spectacle and narrative supports the man's role as the active
one of forwarding the story, making things happen. The man controls the film
fantasy and also emerges as the representative of power in a further sense: as



968 Institutions and Objections

the bearer of the look of the spectator, transferring it behind the screen to
neutralize the extradiegetic tendencies represented by woman as spectacle. This
is made possible through the processes set in motion by structuring the film
around a main controlling figure with whom the spectator can identify. As the
spectator identifies with the main male protagonist, he projects his look onto
that of his like, his screen surrogate, so that the power of the male protagonist
as he controls events coincides with the active power of the erotic look, both
giving a satisfying sense of omnipotence. A male movie star's glamorous
characteristics are thus not those of the erotic object of the gaze, but those of
the more perfect, more complete, more powerful ideal ego conceived in the
original moment of recognition in front of the mirror. The character in the
story can make things happen and control events better than the subject/spec-
tator, just as the image in the mirror was more in control of motor coordination.
In contrast to woman as icon, the active male figure (the ego ideal of the
identification process) demands a three-dimensional space corresponding to that
of the mirror recognition in which the alienated subject internalized his own
representation of this imaginary existence. He is a figure in a landscape. Here
the function of film is to reproduce as accurately as possible the so-called natural
conditions of human perception. Camera technology (as exemplified by deep
focus in particular) and camera movements (determined by the action of the
protagonist), combined with invisible editing (demanded by realism), all tend to
blur the limits of screen space. The male protagonist is free to command the stage,
a stage of spatial illusion in which he articulates the look and creates the action.

C 1. Sections III A and B have set out a tension between a mode of
representation of woman in film and conventions surrounding the diegesis. Each
is associated with a look: that of the spectator in direct scopophilic contact with
the female form displayed for his enjoyment (connoting male fantasy) and that
of the spectator fascinated with the image of his like set in an illusion of natural
space, and through him gaining control and possession of the woman within the
diegesis. (This tension and the shift from one pole to the other can structure
a single text. Thus both in Only Angels Have Wings and To Have and Have
Not the film opens with the woman as object of the combined gaze of spectator
and all the male protagonists in the film. She is isolated, glamorous, on display,
sexualized. But as the narrative progresses, she falls in love with the main male
protagonist and becomes his property, losing her outward glamorous charac-
teristics, her generalized sexuality, her showgirl connotations; her eroticism is
subjected to the male star alone. By means of identification with him, through
participation in his power, the spectator can indirectly possess her too.)

But in psychoanalytic terms, the female figure poses a deeper problem. She
also connotes something that the look continually circles around but disavows:
her lack of a penis, implying a threat of castration and hence unpleasure.
Ultimately, the meaning of woman is sexual difference, the absence of the penis
is visually ascertainable, the material evidence on which is based the castration
complex essential for the organization of entrance to the symbolic order and the
Law of the Father. Thus the woman as icon, displayed for the gaze and



i|



VIId Critical Revisions 969

enjoyment of men, the active controllers of the look, always threatens to evoke
the anxiety it originally signified. The male unconscious has two avenues of
escape from this castration anxiety: preoccupation with the reenactment of the
original trauma (investigating the woman, demystifying her mystery), counter-
balanced by the devaluation, punishment, or saving of the guilty object (an
avenue typified by the concerns of the film noir)\ or else complete disavowal of
castration by the substitution of a fetish object or turning the represented figure
itself into a fetish so that it becomes reassuring rather than dangerous (hence
overvaluation, the cult of the female star). This second avenue, fetishistic
scopophilia, builds up the physical beauty of the object, transforming it into
something satisfying in itself. The first avenue, voyeurism, on the contrary, has
associations with sadism: pleasure lies in ascertaining guilt (immediately associ-
ated with castration), asserting control, and subjecting the guilty person through
punishment or forgiveness. This sadistic side fits in well with narrative. Sadism
demands a story, depends on making something happen, forcing a change in
another person, a battle of will and strength, victory/defeat, all occurring in a
linear time with a beginning and an end. Fetishistic scopophilia, on the other
hand, can exist outside linear time as the erotic instinct is focused on the look
alone. These contradictions and ambiguities can be illustrated more simply by
using works by Hitchcock and von Sternberg, both of whom take the look almost
as the content or subject matter of many of their films. Hitchcock is the more
complex, as he uses both mechanisms. Von Sternberg's work on the other hand,
provides many pure examples of fetishistic scopophilia.



i IV Summary

The psychoanalytic background that has been discussed in this essay is relevant
to the pleasure and unpleasure offered by traditional narrative film. The
scopophilic instinct (pleasure in looking at another person as an erotic object)
and, in contradistinction, ego libido (forming identification processes) act as
formations, mechanisms, which this cinema has played on. The image of woman
as (passive) raw material for the (active) gaze of men takes the argument a step
further into the structure of representation, adding a further layer demanded
by the ideology of the patriarchal order as it is worked out in its favorite
cinematic form - illusionistic narrative film. The argument returns again to the
psychoanalytic background in that woman as representation signifies castration,
inducing voyeuristic or fetishistic mechanisms to circumvent her threat. None
of these interacting layers is intrinsic to film, but it is only in the film form
that they can reach a perfect and beautiful contradiction, thanks to the possibility
in the cinema of shifting the emphasis of the look. It is the place of the look
that defines cinema, the possibility of varying it and exposing it. This is what
makes cinema quite different in its voyeuristic potential from, say, striptease,
theater, shows, etc. Going far beyond highlighting a woman's to-be-looked-at-
ness, cinema builds the way she is to be looked at into the spectacle itself.
Playing on the tension between film as controlling the dimension of time



970 Institutions and Objections

(editing, narrative) and film as controlling the dimension of space (changes in
distance, editing), cinematic codes create a gaze, a world, and an object, thereby
producing an illusion cut to the measure of desire. It is these cinematic codes
and their relationship to formative external structures that must be broken down
before mainstream film and the pleasure it provides can be challenged.

To begin with (as an ending), the voyeuristic-scopophilic look that is a crucial
part of traditional filmic pleasure can itself be broken down. There are three
different looks associated with cinema: that of the camera as it records the
profilmic event, that of the audience as it watches the final product, and that
of the characters at each other within the screen illusion. The conventions of
narrative film deny the first two and subordinate them to the third, the conscious
aim being always to eliminate intrusive camera presence and prevent a distancing
awareness in the audience. Without these two absences (the material existence
of the recording process, the critical reading of the spectator), fictional drama
cannot achieve reality, obviousness, and truth. Nevertheless, as this essay has
argued, the structure of looking in narrative fiction film contains a contradiction
in its own premises: the female image as a castration threat constantly endangers
the unity of the diegesis and bursts through the world of illusion as an intrusive,
static, one-dimensional fetish. Thus the two looks, materially present in time
and space are obsessively subordinated to the new erotic needs of the male ego.
The camera becomes the mechanism for producing an illusion of Renaissance
space, flowing movements compatible with the human eye, an ideology of
representation that revolves around the perception of the subject; the camera's
look is disavowed in order to create a convincing world in which the spectator's
surrogate can perform with verisimilitude. Simultaneously, the look of the
audience is denied an intrinsic force: as soon as fetishistic representation of the
female image threatens to break the spell of illusion, and the erotic image on the
screen appears directly (without mediation) to the spectator, the fact of fetishi-
zation, concealing as it does castration-fear, freezes the look, fixates the spectator,
and prevents him from achieving any distance from the image in front of him.

This complex interaction of looks is specific to film. The first blow against
the monolithic accumulation of traditional film conventions (already undertaken
by radical filmmakers) is to free the look of the camera into its materiality in
time and space and the look of the audience into dialectics, passionate detach-
ment. There is no doubt that this destroys the satisfaction, pleasure, and
privilege of the 'invisible guest,' and highlights how film has depended on
voyeuristic active/passive mechanisms. Women, whose image has continually
been stolen and used for this end, cannot view the decline of the traditional
film form with anything much more than sentimental regret.



12 Michel Foucault (1926-1984) A Lecture

This lecture does not specifically address problems of art and culture, but the argument
represented has been central to thought about culture and the practice of art in the
present period. Foucault proposes a radical departure from the governing norms of



VIId Critical Revisions 971

traditional avant-garde practice, playing on the passages between certain forms of
cultural and political 'vanguardism' which are connected if far from isomorphic. The
lecture is informed by his own work on control and punishment, and by his findings
regarding the forms of 'knowledge' which are typically controlled and punished. He
draws attention to a widespread modern refusal to accept global criteria of rationality,
and hence of emancipation and freedom, as these criteria had become enshrined both
in the official Communist movement and in Western liberalism. Contrary to the methods
of both liberal and Marxist analysis, he proposes a 'non-economic analysis of power'.
To this end he makes a tactical connection, under the term 'genealogy', between 'erudite
knowledge' and a disregarded, more-or-less plebeian cluster of rules-of-thumb for
negotiating a hostile world. This new constellation of knowledges is opposed, founda-
tional^, to the assumptions of an avant-garde. The upshot is a heightened focus on the
variant mechanisms of power: on the questions of who exercises it, how, to what ends,
and by what strategies it may be interrupted. The consequence of Foucault's work has
been to affirm critical activity in the predominantly institutional nexuses of 'power-knowl-
edge' over the attractions of the 'universal intellectual'. The ideas here articulated have
come to constitute an agenda for radical cultural practice on the part of a generation
as motivated by social concerns as it has been wary of global solutions to them.
Delivered on 7 January 1976 in Paris, and transcribed by Alessandro Fontana and
Pasquale Pasquino; translated in Colin Gordon (ed.), Michel Foucault Power/Knowledge,
London, 1980. The present version is taken from pp. 78-89 of that edition.

[. . ] It seems to me that the work we have done could be justified by the claim
that it is adequate to a restricted period, that of the last ten, fifteen, at most
twenty years, a period notable for two events which for all they may not be
really important are nonetheless to my mind quite interesting.

On the one hand, it has been a period characterized by what one might term
the efficacy of dispersed and discontinuous offensives. There are a number of
things I have in mind here. I am thinking, for example, where it was a case
of undermining the function of psychiatric institutions, of that curious efficacy
of localised anti-psychiatric discourses. These are discourses which you are well
aware lacked and still lack any systematic principles of coordination of the kind
that would have provided or might today provide a system of reference for
them. I am thinking of the original reference towards existential analysis or of
certain directions inspired in a general way by Marxism, such as Reichian theory.
Again, I have in mind that strange efficacy of the attacks that have been directed
against traditional morality and hierarchy, attacks which again have no reference
except perhaps in a vague and fairly distant way to Reich and Marcuse. On the
other hand there is also the efficacy of the attacks upon the legal and penal
system, some of which had a very tenuous connection with the general and in
any case pretty dubious notion of class justice, while others had a rather more
precisely defined affinity with anarchist themes. Equally, I am thinking of the
efficacy of a book such as UAnti-Oedipe [Deleuze and Guattari], which really
has no other source of reference than its own prodigious theoretical inventive-
ness: a book, or rather a thing, an event, which has managed, even at the most
mundane level of psychoanalytic practice, to introduce a note of shrillness into
that murmured exchange that has for so long continued uninterrupted between
couch and armchair.



972 Institutions and Objections

I would say, then, that what has emerged in the course of the last ten or
fifteen years is a sense of the increasing vulnerability to criticism of things
institutions, practices, discourses. A certain fragility has been discovered in the
very bedrock of existence - even, and perhaps above all, in those aspects of it
that are most familiar, most solid and most intimately related to our bodies and
to our everyday behaviour. But together with this sense of instability and this
amazing efficacy of discontinuous, particular and local criticism, one in fact also
discovers something that perhaps was not initially foreseen, something one might
describe as precisely the inhibiting effect of global, totalitarian theories. It is not
that these global theories have not provided nor continue to provide in a fairly
consistent fashion useful tools for local research: Marxism and psychoanalysis
are proofs of this. But I believe these tools have only been provided on the
condition that the theoretical unity of these discourses was in some sense put
in abeyance, or at least curtailed, divided, overthrown, caricatured, theatricalised,
or what you will. In each case, the attempt to think in terms of a totality has
in fact proved a hindrance to research.

So, the main point to be gleaned from these events of the last fifteen years,
their predominant feature, is the local character of criticism. That should not,
I believe, be taken to mean that its qualities are those of an obtuse, naive or
primitive empiricism; nor is it a soggy eclecticism, an opportunism that laps up
any and every kind of theoretical approach; nor does it mean a self-imposed
ascetism which taken by itself would reduce to the worst kind of theoretical
impoverishment. I believe that what this essentially local character of criticism
indicates in reality is an autonomous, non-centralised kind of theoretical pro-
duction, one that is to say whose validity is not dependent on the approval of
the established regimes of thought.

It is here that we touch upon another feature of these events that has been
manifest for some time now: it seems to me that this local criticism has
proceeded by means of what one might term 'a return of knowledge'. What I
mean by that phrase is this: it is a fact that we have repeatedly encountered,
at least at a superficial level, in the course of most recent times, an entire
thematic to the effect that it is not theory but life that matters, not knowledge
but reality, not books but money etc.; but it also seems to me that over and
above, and arising out of this thematic, there is something else to which we
are witness, and which we might describe as an insurrection of subjugated
knowledges.

By subjugated knowledges I mean two things: on the one hand, I am referring
to the historical contents that have been buried and disguised in a functionalist
coherence or formal systemisation. Concretely, it is not a semiology of the life
of the asylum, it is not even a sociology of delinquency, that has made it possible
to produce an effective criticism of the asylum and likewise of the prison, but
rather the immediate emergence of historical contents. And this is simply
because only the historical contents allow us to rediscover the ruptural effects
of conflict and struggle that the order imposed by functionalist or systematising
thought is designed to mask. Subjugated knowledges are thus those blocs of
historical knowledge which were present but disguised within the body of



^



VIId Critical Revisions 973

functionalist and systematizing theory and which criticism - which obviously
draws upon scholarship - has been able to reveal.

On the other hand, I believe that by subjugated knowledges one should
understand something else, something which in a sense is altogether different,
namely, a whole set of knowledges that have been disqualified as inadequate to
their task or insufficiently elaborated: naive knowledges, located low down on
the hierarchy, beneath the required level of cognition or scientificity. I also
believe that it is through the re-emergence of these low-ranking knowledges,
these unqualified, even directly disqualified knowledges (such as that of the
psychiatric patient, of the ill person, of the nurse, of the doctor - parallel and
marginal as they are to the knowledge of medicine - that of the delinquent,
etc.), and which involve what I would call a popular knowledge (le savoir des
gens) though it is far from being a general commonsense knowledge, but is on
the contrary a particular, local, regional knowledge, a differential knowledge
incapable of unanimity and which owes its force only to the harshness with
which it is opposed by everything surrounding it - that it is through the
re-appearance of this knowledge, of these local popular knowledges, these
disqualified knowledges, that criticism performs its work.

However, there is a strange kind of paradox in the desire to assign to this
same category of subjugated knowledges what are on the one hand the products
of meticulous, erudite, exact historical knowledge, and on the other hand local
and specific knowledges which have no common meaning and which are in some
fashion allowed to fall into disuse whenever they are not effectively and explicitly
maintained in themselves. Well, it seems to me that our critical discourses of
the last fifteen years have in effect discovered their essential force in this
association between the buried knowledges of erudition and those disqualified
from the hierarchy of knowledges and sciences.

In the two cases - in the case of the erudite as in that of the disqualified
knowledges - with what in fact were these buried, subjugated knowledges really
concerned? They were concerned with a historical knowledge of struggles. In the
specialised areas of erudition as in the disqualified, popular knowledge there lay
the memory of hostile encounters which even up to this day have been confined
to the margins of knowledge.

What emerges out of this is something one might call a genealogy, or rather
a multiplicity of genealogical researches, a painstaking rediscovery of struggles
together with the rude memory of their conflicts. And these genealogies, that
are the combined product of an erudite knowledge and a popular knowledge,
were not possible and could not even have been attempted except on one
condition, namely that the tyranny of globalizing discourses with their hierarchy
and all their privileges of a theoretical avant-garde was eliminated.

Let us give the term genealogy to the union of erudite knowledge and local
memories which allows us to establish a historical knowledge of struggles and
to make use of this knowledge tactically today. This then will be a provisional
definition of the genealogies which I have attempted to compile with you over
the last few years.

You are well aware that this research activity, which one can thus call



974 Institutions and Objections

genealogical, has nothing at all to do with an opposition between the abstract
unity of theory and the concrete multiplicity of facts. It has nothing at all to
do with a disqualification of the speculative dimension which opposes to it, in
the name of some kind of scientism, the rigour of well established knowledges.
It is not therefore via an empiricism that the genealogical project unfolds, nor
even via a positivism in the ordinary sense of that term. What it really does is
to entertain the claims to attention of local, discontinuous, disqualified, illegit-
imate knowledges against the claims of a unitary body of theory which would
filter, hierarchize and order them in the name of some true knowledge and some
arbitrary idea of what constitutes a science and its objects. Genealogies are
therefore not positivistic returns to a more careful or exact form of science.
They are precisely anti-sciences. Not that they vindicate a lyrical right to
ignorance or non-knowledge: it is not that they are concerned to deny knowledge
or that they esteem the virtues of direct cognition and base their practice upon
an immediate experience that escapes encapsulation in knowledge. It is not that
with which we are concerned. We are concerned, rather, with the insurrection
of knowledges that are opposed primarily not to the contents, methods or
concepts of a science, but to the effects of the centralizing powers which are
linked to the institution and functioning of an organized scientific discourse
within a society such as ours. Nor does it basically matter all that much that
this institutionalization of scientific discourse is embodied in a university, or,
more generally, in an educational apparatus, in a theoretical-commercial institu-
tion such as psychoanalysis or within the framework of reference that is provided
by a political system such as Marxism; for it is really against the effects of the
power of a discourse that is considered to be scientific that the genealogy must
wage its stuggle.

To be more precise, I would remind you how numerous have been those who
for many years now, probably for more than half a century, have questioned
whether Marxism was, or was not, a science. One might say that the same issue
has been posed, and continues to be posed, in the case of psychoanalysis, or
even worse, in that of the semiology of literary texts. But to all these demands
of: 'Is it or is it not a science?', the genealogies or the genealogists would reply:
'If you really want to know, the fault lies in your very determination to make
a science out of Marxism or psychoanalysis or this or that study'. If we have
any objection against Marxism, it lies in the fact that it could effectively be a
science. In more detailed terms, I would say that even before we can know the
extent to which something such as Marxism or psychoanalysis can be compared
to a scientific practice in its everday functioning, its rules of construction, its
working concepts, that even before we can pose the question of a formal and
structural analogy between Marxist or psychoanalytic discourse, it is surely
necessary to question ourselves about our aspirations to the kind of power that
is presumed to accompany such a science. It is surely the following kinds of
question that would need to be posed: What types of knowledge do you want
to disqualify in the very instant of your demand: 'Is it a science'? Which
speaking, discoursing subjects - which subjects of experience and knowledge -
do you then want to 'diminish' when you say: 'I who conduct this discourse



VIId Critical Revisions 975

am conducting a scientific discourse, and I am a scientist'? Which theoretical-
political avant-garde do you want to enthrone in order to isolate it from all the
discontinuous forms of knowledge that circulate about it? When I see you
straining to establish the scientificity of Marxism I do not really think that you
are demonstrating once and for all that Marxism has a rational structure and
that therefore its propositions are the outcome of verifiable procedures; for me
you are doing something altogether different, you are investing Marxist dis-
courses and those who uphold them with the effects of a power which the West
since Medieval times has attributed to science and has reserved for those engaged
in scientific discourse.

By comparison, then, and in contrast to the various projects which aim to
inscribe knowledges in the hierarchical order of power associated with science,
a genealogy should be seen as a kind of attempt to emancipate historical
knowledges from that subjection, to render them, that is, capable of opposition
and of struggle against the coercion of a theoretical, unitary, formal and scientific
discourse. It is based on a reactivation of local knowledges - of minor know-
ledges, as Deleuze might call them - in opposition to the scientific hierarchisation
of knowledges and the effects intrinsic to their power: this, then, is the project
of these disordered and fragmentary genealogies. If we were to characterize it
in two terms, then 'archaeology' would be the appropriate methodology of this
analysis of local discursivities, and 'genealogy' would be the tactics whereby, on
the basis of the descriptions of these local discursivities, the subjected know-
ledges which were thus released would be brought into play.
* * *

What is at stake in all these genealogies is the nature of this power which
has surged into view in all its violence, aggression and absurdity in the course
of the last forty years, contemporaneously, that is, with the collapse of Fascism
and the decline of Stalinism. What, we must ask, is this power - or rather,
since that is to give a formulation to the question that invites the kind of
theoretical coronation of the whole which I am so keen to avoid - what are
these various contrivances of power, whose operations extend to such differing
levels and sectors of society and are possessed of such manifold ramifications?
What are their mechanisms, their effects and their relations? The issue here
can, I believe, be crystallized essentially in the following question: is the analysis
of power or of powers to be deduced in one way or another from the economy?
Let me make this question and my reasons for posing it somewhat clearer. It
is not at all my intention to abstract from what are innumerable and enormous
differences; yet despite, and even because of these differences, I consider there
to be a certain point in common between the juridical, and let us call it, liberal,
conception of political power (found in the philosophes of the eighteenth century)
and the Marxist conception, or at any rate a certain conception currently held
to be Marxist. I would call this common point an economism in the theory of
power. By that I mean that in the case of the classic, juridical theory, power
is taken to be a right, which one is able to possess like a commodity, and which
one can in consequence transfer or alienate, either wholly or partially, through
a legal act or through some act that establishes a right, such as takes place



976 Institutions and Objections

through cession or contract. Power is that concrete power which every individual
holds, and whose partial or total cession enables political power or sovereignty
to be established. This theoretical construction is essentially based on the idea
that the constitution of political power obeys the model of a legal transaction
involving a contractual type of exchange (hence the clear analogy that runs
through all these theories between power and commodities, power and wealth).
In the other case - I am thinking here of the general Marxist conception of
power - one finds none of all that. Nonetheless, there is something else inherent
in this latter conception, something which one might term an economic func-
tionality of power. This economic functionality is present to the extent that
power is conceived primarily in terms of the role it plays in the maintenance
simultaneously of the relations of production and of a class domination which
the development and specific forms of the forces of production have rendered
possible. On this view, then, the historical raison d'etre of political power is to
be found in the economy. Broadly speaking, in the first case we have a political
power whose formal model is discoverable in the process of exchange, the
economic circulation of commodities; in the second case, the historical raison
d'etre of political power and the principle of its concrete forms and actual
functioning, is located in the economy. Well then, the problem involved in the
researches to which I refer can, I believe, be broken down in the following
manner: in the first place, is power always in a subordinate position relative to
the economy? Is it always in the service of, and ultimately answerable to, the
economy? Is its essential end and purpose to serve the economy? Is it destined
to realize, consolidate, maintain and reproduce the relations appropriate to the
economy and essential to its functioning? In the second place, is power modelled
upon the commodity? Is it something that one possesses, acquires, cedes through
force or contract, that one alienates or recovers, that circulates, that voids this
or that region? Or, on the contrary, do we need to employ varying tools in its
analysis - even, that is, when we allow that it effectively remains the case that
the relations of power do indeed remain profoundly enmeshed in and with
economic relations and participate with them in a common circuit? If that is
the case, it is not the models of functional subordination or formal isomorphism
that will characterize the interconnection between politics and the economy.
Their indissolubility will be of a different order. [ . . . ]



13 Fredric Jameson (b. 1934) from 'Reflections on
the Brecht-Lukacs Debate'

In the radical climate of the 1970s the far-reaching Marxist cultural debate of the 1930s
was rediscovered, after having been occluded by decades of the Cold War. In 1977
several contributions were gathered and republished under the title Aesthetics and
Politics. Fredric Jameson, by then established as a leading Marxist intellectual, con-
tributed an Afterword to the collection in which he surveyed the materials of the debate.
His conclusion was that not only Socialist Realism but its protagonist Modernism were
now both inadequate to the experience of modern society: the former through its



VIId Critical Revisions 977

archaism and its assumption of the transparency of representation; the latter for the
way in which the emancipatory promise of its disinterested aesthetic had been sub-
verted by the commodification of art. Jameson held out the necessity of reinventing a
new 'realism' appropriate to' this world. First published as 'Reflections in Conclusion' to
Adorno et al., Aesthetics and Politics, London, 1977, pp. 196-213; reprinted under
the present title in Jameson, The Ideologies of Theory Vol. 2, The Syntax of History,
London and Minnesota, 1988, pp. 133-47.



[...] Politically, the classical Marxian notion of the necessity, during the
transition to socialism, of a 'dictatorship of the proletariat' -that is, a withdrawal
of effective power from those with a vested interest in the re-establishment of
the old order - has surely not become outmoded. Yet it may emerge conceptually
transformed when once we think of it together with the necessity for a cultural
revolution that involves collective re-education of all the classes. This is the
perspective in which Lukacs's emphasis on the great bourgeois novelists seems
most inadequate to the task, but it is one in which the anti-bourgeois thrust of
the great modernisms also appears inappropriate. It is then that Bloch's medi-
tation on the Erbe, on the repressed cultural difference of the past and the
Utopian principle of the invention of a radically different future, will for the
first time come into its own, at a point when the conflict between Realism and
Modernism recedes behind us.

But surely in the West, and perhaps elsewhere as well, that point is still
beyond us. In our present cultural situation, if anything, both alternatives of
realism and of modernism seem intolerable to us: realism because its forms
revive older experiences of a kind of social life (the classical inner city, the
traditional opposition city /country) which is no longer with us in the already
decaying future of consumer society: modernism because its contradictions have
proved in practice even more acute than those of realism. An aesthetic of novelty
today - already enthroned as the dominant critical and formal ideology - must
seek desperately to renew itself by ever more rapid rotations of its own axis:
modernism seeking to become post-modernism without ceasing to be modern.
Thus today we witness the spectacle of a predictable return, after abstraction
has itself become a tired convention, to figurative art, but this time to a
figurative art - so-called hyperrealism or photorealism - which turns out to be
the representation, not of things themselves, but of the latter's photographs: a
representational art which is really 'about' art itself! In literature, meanwhile,
amidst a weariness with plotless or poetic fiction, a return to intrigue is achieved,
not by the latter's rediscovery, but rather by pastiche of older narratives and
depersonalized imitation of traditional voices, similar to Stravinsky's pastiche of
the classics criticized by Adorno's Philosophy of Music.

In these circumstances, indeed, there is some question whether the ultimate
renewal of modernism, the final dialectical subversion of the now automatized
conventions of an aesthetics of perceptual revolution, might not simply be . . .
realism itself ! For when modernism and its accompanying techniques of 'es-
trangement' have become the dominant style whereby the consumer is reconciled
with capitalism, the habit of fragmentation itself needs to be 'estranged' and



978 Institutions and Objections

corrected by a more totalizing way of viewing phenomena. In an unexpected
denouement, it may be Lukacs - wrong as he might have been in the 1930s -
who has some provisional last word for us today. Yet this particular Lukacs, if
he be imaginable, would be one for whom the concept of realism has been
rewritten in terms of the categories of History and Class Consciousness, in
particular those of reification and totality. Unlike the more familiar concept of
alienation, a process that pertains to activity and in particular to work (disso-
ciating the worker from his labour, his product, his fellow workers and ultimately
from his very 'species being' itself), reification is a process that affects our
cognitive relationship with the social totality. It is a disease of that mapping
function whereby the individual subject projects and models his or her insertion
into the collectivity. The reification of late capitalism - the transformation of
human relations into an appearance of relationships between things - renders
society opaque: it is the lived source of the mystifications on which ideology is
based and by which domination and exploitation are legitimized. Since the
fundamental structure of the social 'totality' is a set of class relationships - an
antagonistic structure such that the various social classes define themselves in
terms of that antagonism and by opposition with one another - reification
necessarily obscures the class character of that structure, and is accompanied,
not only by anomie, but also by that increasing confusion as to the nature and
even the existence of social classes which can be abundantly observed in all the
'advanced' capitalist countries today. If the diagnosis is correct, the intensifica-
tion of class consciousness will be less a matter of a populist or ouvrierist
exaltation of a single class by itself, than of the forcible reopening of access to
a sense of society as a totality, and of the reinvention of possibilities of cognition
and perception that allow social phenomena once again to become transparent,
as moments of the struggle between classes.

Under these circumstances, the function of a new realism would be clear; to
resist the power of reification in consumer society and to reinvent that category
of totality which, systematically undermined by existential fragmentation on all
levels of life and social organization today, can alone project structural relations
between classes as well as class struggles in other countries, in what has
increasingly become a world system. Such a conception of realism would
incorporate what was always most concrete in the dialectical counter-concept of
modernism - its emphasis on violent renewal of perception in a world in which
experience has solidified into a mass of habits and automatisms. Yet the
habituation which it would be the function of the new aesthetic to disrupt would
no longer be thematized in the conventional modernistic terms of desacralized
or dehumanizing reason, of mass society and the industrial city or technology
in general, but rather as a function of the commodity system and the reifying
structure of late capitalism.

Other conceptions of realism, other kinds of political aesthetics, obviously
remain conceivable. The Realism/Modernism debate teaches us the need to
judge them in terms of the historical and social conjuncture in which they are
called to function. To take an attitude of partisanship towards key struggles of
the past does not mean either choosing sides, or seeking to harmonize irrecon-



VIId Critical Revisions 979

cilable differences. In such extinct yet still virulent intellectual conflicts, the
fundamental contradiction is between history itself and the conceptual apparatus
which, seeking to grasp its realities, only succeeds in reproducing their discord
within itself in the form of an enigma for thought, an aporia. It is to this aporia
that we must hold, which contains within its structure the crux of a history
beyond which we have not yet passed. It cannot of course tell us what our
conception of realism ought to be; yet its study makes it impossible to us not
to feel the obligation to reinvent one.



14 Raymond Williams (1921-1988) 'Dominant,
Residual and Emergent'

Williams's Marxism, which in his earlier work had tended to be subsumed within the
innovatory conceptions of his own thought, had by the 1970s become more explicitly
acknowledged. By then Williams's own work had contributed significantly to the enrich-
ment of an area of study the barrenness of which had earlier been the principal cause
of his oblique entry into the field. Here, building on his already established conception
of culture as a 'way of life', he attempted to analyse the dynamics of such a phenomenon
at any given moment: for a culture thus conceived will not be a static arrangement of
forms, but a continually changing interplay of forces, some rising in significance, some
on the decline. Published as Chapter 8 of Marxism and Literature, Oxford, 1977, pp.
121-8.



The complexity of a culture is to be found not only in its variable processes
and their social definitions - traditions, institutions, and formations - but also
in the dynamic interrelations, at every point in the process, of historically varied
and variable elements. In what I have called 'epochal' analysis, a cultural process
is seized as a cultural system, with determinate dominant features: feudal culture
or bourgeois culture or a transition from one to the other. This emphasis on
dominant and definitive lineaments and features is important and often, in
practice, effective. But it then often happens that its methodology is preserved
for the very different function of historical analysis, in which a sense of
movement within what is ordinarily abstracted as a system is crucially necessary,
especially if it is to connect with the future as well as with the past. In authentic
historical analysis it is necessary at every point to recognize the complex
interrelations between movements and tendencies both within and beyond a
specific and effective dominance. It is necessary to examine how these relate to
the whole cultural process rather than only to the selected and abstracted
dominant system. Thus 'bourgeois culture' is a significant generalizing descrip-
tion and hypothesis, expressed within epochal analysis by fundamental compari-
sons with 'feudal culture' or 'socialist culture'. However, as a description of
cultural process, over four or five centuries and in scores of different societies,
it requires immediate historical and internally comparative differentiation. More-
over, even if this is acknowledged or practically carried out, the 'epochal'
definition can exert its pressure as a static type against which all real cultural



980 Institutions and Objections



process is measured, either to show 'stages' or 'variations' of the type (which
is still historical analysis) or, at its worst, to select supporting and exclude
'marginal' or 'incidental' or 'secondary' evidence.

Such errors are avoidable if, while retaining the epochal hypothesis, we can
find terms which recognize not only 'stages' and 'variations' but the internal
dynamic relations of any actual process. We have certainly still to speak of the
'dominant' and the 'effective', and in these senses of the hegemonic. But we
find that we have also to speak, and indeed with further differentiation of each,
of the 'residual' and the 'emergent', which in any real process, and at any
moment in the process, are significant both in themselves and in what they
reveal of the characteristics of the 'dominant'.

By 'residual' I mean something different from the 'archaic', though in practice
these are often very difficult to distinguish. Any culture includes available
elements of its past, but their place in the contemporary cultural process is
profoundly variable. I would call the 'archaic' that which is wholly recognized
as an element of the past, to be observed, to be examined, or even on occasion
to be consciously 'revived', in a deliberately specializing way. What I mean by
the 'residual' is very different. The residual, by definition, has been effectively
formed in the past, but it is still active in the cultural process, not only and
often not at all as an element of the past, but as an effective element of the
present. Thus certain experiences, meanings, and values which cannot be
expressed or substantially verified in terms of the dominant culture, are never-
theless lived and practised on the basis of the residue - cultural as well as social
- of some previous social and cultural institution or formation. It is crucial to
distinguish this aspect of the residual, which may have an alternative or even
oppositional relation to the dominant culture, from that active manifestation of
the residual (this being its distinction from the archaic) which has been wholly
or largely incorporated into the dominant culture. In three characteristic cases
in contemporary English culture this distinction can become a precise term of
analysis. Thus organized religion is predominantly residual, but within this there
is a significant difference between some practically alternative and oppositional
meanings and values (absolute brotherhood, service to others without reward)
and a larger body of incorporated meanings and values (official morality, or the
social order of which the other-worldly is a separated neutralizing or ratifying
component). Again, the idea of rural community is predominantly residual, but
is in some limited respects alternative or oppositional to urban industrial
capitalism, though for the most part it is incorporated, as idealization or fantasy,
or as an exotic - residential or escape - leisure function of the dominant order
itself. Again, in monarchy, there is virtually nothing that is actively residual
(alternative or oppositional), but, with a heavy and deliberate additional use of
the archaic, a residual function has been wholly incorporated as a specific
political and cultural function - marking the limits as well as the methods - of
a form of capitalist democracy.

A residual cultural element is usually at some distance from the effective
dominant culture, but some part of it, some version of it - and especially if the
residue is from some major area of the past - will in most cases have had to



VIID Critical Revisions 981

be incorporated if the effective dominant culture is to make sense in these areas.
Moreover, at certain points the dominant culture cannot allow too much residual
experience and practice outside itself, at least without risk. It is in the incor-
poration of the actively residual - by reinterpretation, dilution, projection,
discriminating inclusion and exclusion - that the work of the selective tradition
is especially evident. This is very notable in the case of versions of 'the literary-
tradition', passing through selective versions of the character of literature to
connecting and incorporated definitions of what literature now is and should
be. This is one among several crucial areas, since it is in some alternative or
even oppositional versions of what literature is (has been) and what literary
experience (and in one common derivation, other significant experience) is and
must be, that, against the pressures of incorporation, actively residual meanings
and values are sustained.

By 'emergent' I mean, first, that new meanings and values, new practices,
new relationships and kinds of relationship are continually being created. But
it is exceptionally difficult to distinguish between those which are really elements
of some new phase of the dominant culture (and in this sense 'species-specific')
and those which are substantially alternative or oppositional to it: emergent in
the strict sense, rather than merely novel. Since we are always considering
relations within a cultural process, definitions of the emergent, as of the residual,
can be made only in relation to a full sense of the dominant. Yet the social
location of the residual is always easier to understand, since a large part of it
(though not all) relates to earlier social formations and phases of the cultural
process, in which certain real meanings and values were generated. In the
subsequent default of a particular phase of a dominant culture there is then a
reaching back to those meanings and values which were created in actual societies
and actual situations in the past, and which still seem to have significance
because they represent areas of human experience, aspiration, and achievement
which the dominant culture neglects, undervalues, opposes, represses, or even
cannot recognize.

The case of the emergent is radically different. It is true that in the structure
of any actual society, and especially in its class structure, there is always a social
basis for elements of the cultural process that are alternative or oppositional to
the dominant elements. One kind of basis has been valuably described in the
central body of Marxist theory: the formation of a new class, the coming to
consciousness of a new class, and within this, in actual process, the (often
uneven) emergence of elements of a new cultural formation. Thus the emergence
of the working class as a class was immediately evident (for example, in
nineteenth-century England) in the cultural process. But there was extreme
unevenness of contribution in different parts of the process. The making of new
social values and institutions far outpaced the making of strictly cultural
institutions, while specific cultural contributions, though significant, were less
vigorous and autonomous than either general or institutional innovation. A new
class is always a source of emergent cultural practice, but while it is still, as a
class, relatively subordinate, this is always likely to be uneven and is certain to
be incomplete. For new practice is not, of course, an isolated process. To the



982 Institutions and Objections

degree that it emerges, and especially to the degree that it is oppositional rather
than alternative, the process of attempted incorporation significantly begins.
This can be seen, in the same period in England, in the emergence and then
the effective incorporation of a radical popular press. It can be seen in the
emergence and incorporation of working-class writing, where the fundamental
problem of emergence is clearly revealed, since the basis of incorporation, in
such cases, is the effective predominance of received literary forms - an
incorporation, so to say, which already conditions and limits the emergence. But
the development is always uneven. Straight incorporation is most directly
attempted against the visibly alternative and oppositional class elements: trade
unions, working-class political parties, working-class life styles (as incorporated
into 'popular' journalism, advertising, and commercial entertainment). The
process of emergence, in such conditions, is then a constantly repeated, an always
renewable, move beyond a phase of practical incorporation: usually made much
more difficult by the fact that much incorporation looks like recognition,
acknowledgement, and thus a form of acceptance. In this complex process there
is indeed regular confusion between the locally residual (as a form of resistance
to incorporation) and the generally emergent.

Cultural emergence in relation to the emergence and growing strength of a
class is then always of major importance, and always complex. But we have also
to see that it is not the only kind of emergence. This recognition is very difficult,
theoretically, though the practical evidence is abundant. What has really to be
said, as a way of defining important elements of both the residual and the
emergent, and as a way of understanding the character of the dominant, is that
no mode of production and therefore no dominant social order and therefore no
dominant culture ever in reality includes or exhausts all human practice, human
energy, and human intention. This is not merely a negative proposition, allowing
us to account for significant things which happen outside or against the
dominant mode. On the contrary it is a fact about the modes of domination,
that they select from and consequently exclude the full range of human practice.
What they exclude may often be seen as the personal or the private, or as the
natural or even the metaphysical. Indeed it is usually in one or other of these
terms that the excluded area is expressed, since what the dominant has effec-
tively seized is indeed the ruling definition of the social.

It is this seizure that has especially to be resisted. For there is always, though
in varying degrees, practical consciousness, in specific relationships, specific
skills, specific perceptions, that is unquestionably social and that a specifically
dominant social order neglects, excludes, represses, or simply fails to recognize.
A distinctive and comparative feature of any dominant social order is how far
it reaches into the whole range of practices and experiences in an attempt at
incorporation. There can be areas of experience it is willing to ignore or dispense
with: to assign as private or to specialize as aesthetic or to generalize as natural.
Moreover, as a social order changes, in terms of its own developing needs, these
relations are variable. Thus in advanced capitalism, because of changes in the
social character of labour, in the social character of communications, and in the
social character of decision-making, the dominant culture reaches much further



^



VIId Critical Revisions 983

than ever before in capitalist society into hitherto 'reserved' or 'resigned' areas
of experience and practice and meaning. The area of effective penetration of
the dominant order into the whole social and cultural process is thus now
significantly greater. This in turn makes the problem of emergence especially
acute, and narrows the gap between alternative and oppositional elements. The
alternative, especially in areas that impinge on significant areas of the dominant,
is often seen as oppositional and, by pressure, often converted into it. Yet even
here there can be spheres of practice and meaning which, almost by definition
from its own limited character, or in its profound deformation, the dominant
culture is unable in any real terms to recognize. Elements of emergence may
indeed be incorporated, but just as often the incorporated forms are merely
facsimiles of the genuinely emergent cultural practice. Any significant emer-
gence, beyond or against a dominant mode, is very difficult under these
conditions; in itself and in its repeated confusion with the facsimiles and
novelties of the incorporated phase. Yet, in our own period as in others, the
fact of emergent cultural practice is still undeniable, and together with the fact
of actively residual practice is a necessary complication of the would-be dominant
culture.

This complex process can still in part be described in class terms. But there
is always other social being and consciousness which is neglected and excluded:
alternative perceptions of others, in immediate relationships; new perceptions
and practices of the material world. In practice these are different in quality
from the developing and articulated interests of a rising class. The relations
between these two sources of the emergent - the class and the excluded social
(human) area - are by no means necessarily contradictory. At times they can
be very close and on the relations between them much in political practice
depends. But culturally and as a matter of theory the areas can be seen as
distinct.

What matters, finally, in understanding emergent culture, as distinct from
both the dominant and the residual, is that it is never only a matter of immediate
practice; indeed it depends crucially on finding new forms or adaptations of
form. Again and again what we have to observe is in effect a pre-emergence,
active and pressing but not yet fully articulated, rather than the evident
emergence which could be more confidently named. It is to understand more
closely this condition of pre-emergence, as well as the more evident forms of
the emergent, the residual, and the dominant, that we need to explore the
concept of structures of feeling.



1



Part VIII

Ideas of the
Postmodern



1



VIII

Introduction



Inquiry into the artistic character of the postmodern might well commence at
that point in the later 1960s when the virtue and authority of Modernism itself
first came under sustained examination from within the actual practice of
modern art. The explicit theorization of the postmodern was a concern of the
late 1970s and 1980s, however; which is to say of a period which extends
| approximately from the end of the Vietnam War in 1975 to the reunification
of Germany fifteen years later. Each of these events marked a defeat for one
of the two superpowers whose opposition had defined the Cold War. America
has survived as a major power, though its economic standing has declined. The
Soviet Union now no longer exists, having fragmented into its constituent parts
during the period of preparation of this anthology.

The intellectual culture of the Cold War had been characterized by a structure
of oppositions and contrasts, not simply between East and West or between
Communism and capitalism, but between those values which each was supposed
to stand for in the eyes of the other. This reciprocating structure was constantly
available to be mobilized in argument, as a kind of background against which
virtually any position could be first located, and then distinguished from its
assumed rhetorical opposite. Thus wherever Modernist art served as a model
of apolitical virtue there would be a tendency to disparage Realism as the cultural
form of a political dogmatism; while to those for whom Realism betokened social
and historical relevance and purposeful instruction, Modernist abstraction
seemed redolent of bourgeois idealism and mystification.

In thus associating the opposed terms of modern art theory with forms of
political opposition and cliche we do not mean to reduce the one to a function
| of the other. Our purpose is twofold. On the one hand, we mean to suggest
that interest in the concept of Postmodernism in the arts grew on the fertile
ground of substantial historical change. On the other, we mean to suggest that
while the end of the Cold War may have seemed to come suddenly, a review
of the art and art theory of the 1970s and 1980s will show an accelerating
breakdown in the familiar structure of rhetorical oppositions. The intellectual
structure dividing Modernism from Realism, penetrated by the criticism of the
late 1930s, had been carefully repaired during the Cold War years. But it had
been breached once again well before the fall of the Berlin Wall.



988 Ideas of the Postmodern



VIII Introduction 989



In making this point we do not accord priority to artistic and intellectual
changes over more historically basic forms of change. On the contrary, we mean
to suggest that some of the conditions leading to the 'new (geo-political) world
order' may have been identical with some of those which led to a postmodern
relaxation and redrawing of conceptual boundaries in the theorization of art.

How one does one's singling out determines what gets singled out. The aim
of a theory of postmodern art will be to identify some new set of characteristics.
This will involve both the critical abandonment of the supposedly outmoded
paradigm, and the singling out of some set of examples of art in which these
new characteristics are supposedly exhibited. There can be no theory of the
postmodern - no sensible identification of some art as postmodern art - which
does not assume a certain means of identifying the modern. To claim the status
of 'postmodern' for some form of art is to reveal the nature of one's beliefs and
attitudes concerning the modern. Similarly, to talk of Postmodernww is to
assume a certain meaning and value for Modernism. Fredric Jameson, for
instance, suggests that the artistic signs of the postmodern are to be recognized
in works which abjure all pretense to spontaneity and directness of expression,
making use instead of forms of pastiche and discontinuity (VIIIB9). But it could
well be argued that pastiche and discontinuity are deployed to telling effect in
the works of such paradigmatically modern artists as Manet and Picasso; that
they are in fact modes of representation endemic to Modernist art. Jameson's
Postmodernism thus appears to be established with regard to a Modernism
stripped of complexity. Craig Owens offers a similar account of current art, but
forms his concept of the postmodern with regard to Modernism as a critical
rather than a practical tradition, thus avoiding the danger of Jameson's approach
(VIIIB2). Owens's argument is that Modernist criticism systematically misrep-
resents the way in which modern art actually works. His paradigm Modernist
observer is someone who insistently and mistakenly intuits complete and im-
manent meanings in face of what are in fact complex and discontinuous
allegories. Postmodernism as thus conceived is not immediately a new form of
the practice of art, but rather a critical redirection of tradition on the basis of
a revised understanding of the immediate past.

The relation between these two approaches raises the question of the status
of theory and criticism relative to the current practice of art. We have surveyed
a large body of theory in this concluding section (although it could have been
much larger), not in order to favour a particular approach to that question, but
rather in recognition that the question is itself substantial, if only because
involvement with the fascinations of theory was such a marked characteristic of
the modern art of the 1980s. In 1954 Clement Greenberg could write that 'Art
is a matter strictly of experience, not of principles . . . ' {Art and Culture, 1961,
p. 133). This position was strongly opposed during the Conceptual Art move-
ment of the late 1960s and 1970s on both general and specific grounds. The
general case was that the relations between experience and principles are not
such as can be reduced to bald statements of priority, or to a one-way traffic,
with experience always informing principles, and principles never serving to
illuminate experiences. The specific case was that for all its claim to an absolute



empiricism, Modernist criticism was engaged in the dogmatization of expression:
that it was tending to define and even to constitute the expressive artistic objects
of its own regard, in precise reversal of the supposed one-way traffic. As a form
of corrective, various of the Conceptual Artists proposed that works of art theory
should be accorded the conjectural status of works of art. The weak form of
justification of this proposal was that it would lead to the uncovering of new
forms of exotic art object. The stronger form was that it would serve to
overcome the typically Modernist division of labour between art objects and
interpretations, or between producers and explainers.

During the same period, however, the discourses of modern art were caught
by the flaring of theory which had commenced in France in the area of literary
and linguistic studies. Science and philosophy were also badly burned in the
area of their supposedly rational principles. In an intellectual world suddenly
reduced to competing narratives, literature laid claim to dominance. Whereas
the earlier claim to language had had the force of a breaking of boundaries, by
H the 1980s artists like Mary Kelly, Barbara Kruger and Jenny Holzer, who saw
themselves as having broken for whatever reason with the protocols of Mod-
ernism, were laying claim to language, but to language conceived as a form of
art, not as a form of literature. At the same time critics were tending to claim
an equivalent status for themselves, but the claim was in virtue of criticism
conceived as a form of writing, not as a form of art.

If there is a postmodern theory of the arts, then, it is to be sorted from a
complex mix of historical and art-historical reconsiderations, political theories,
literary theories, practices and critiques of practices, which have nothing so
much in common as their self-orientation with respect to the idea of the modern
and to the supposed culture of Modernism. In face of these considerable and
diverse resources, we offer a schematic breakdown into three broad themes with
regard to which that orientation has been both established and disputed:
Postmodernism as a critique of historical narratives; Postmodernism as a critique
of the myth of originality; and Postmodernism as a critique of the grounds of
difference.

At issue under the first of these themes is the question of the continuity of
our culture and our values. On what grounds should we now examine, criticize
and compare appeals for continuity of values and institutions on the one hand,
and appeals for radical change on the other? For the conservative Daniel Bell,
writing in 1978, Modernism was characterized by a disruptive agnosticism
(VIIlAl). Now that its oppositional impetus was exhausted, the hope of the
postmodern lay in a return to consensus based on the shared need for moral
and economic order. For Jiirgen Habermas, on the other hand, Bell's formation
of the postmodern is effectively a revivified anti-Modernism (VIIIA3). A strong
resource of aesthetic resistance remains necessary as a counter to the increasing
power and autonomy of economic and administrative systems. The value of
Modernism lies in its continued maintenance of just this resource. A third
position is represented by Jean-Francois Lyotard (VIIIA2 and 4). In opposition
to Bell he equates the postmodern with a continuing scepticism regarding the
possibility of an underlying consensus. Unlike Habermas, however, he sees the



990 Ideas of the Postmodern

scepticism of Modernism as tinged with a form of nostalgia for the experience
of an unattainable wholeness or presence. This is perhaps the very wholeness
which Owens's typical Modernist observer intuits even when it is not there to
be found. But the pursuit of wholeness is disqualified in Lyotard's view not so
much by the actuality of art, as by the changed and changing character of
quotidian experience. The task of the postmodern, as Lyotard sees it, is to 'wage
a war on totality'. According to this view, postmodern forms of art are those
which make manifest the very impossibility of presenting that which cannot be
presented. It should be noted that while each of the writers cited speaks for a
different view of the postmodern, he also articulates that view from a different
country (respectively the United States, West Germany and France), which is
to say from within the different determining conditions of specific social,
historical and political frameworks.

The second of our themes concerns the combined implications of two the-
oretical propositions: that there is no one natural 'reality' which is available to
us to explain our beliefs and sensations; and that the prizing of originality in
art and writing, so central to the whole value-structure of Modernism, is shown
up as a form of idealization in face of the convergence of philosophical,
psychoanalytical and literary theory upon a single point: that in so far as any
form of utterance has meaning, it has it only by virtue of its relation to other
utterances; it follows that to single out any one work as a discrete 'text' is
merely to pull a single thread apart from the 'textile' within which it has its
semantic place. The French writer Jean Baudrillard has given a sociological slant
to the critique of originality. His concept of 'Hyper-Realism' designates an
experience of the contemporary world which is radically 'unoriginal', in the
sense that it is an experience of signs and simulations taken for 'real' (see
VIIlBl). Assuming the validity of this framework, we might see the postmod-
ernist artist as one who treats the 'hyper-real' surface as a kind of nature, in
order knowingly and ironically to play with the power of its simulations (VIIIB8
and 10).

Those preoccupied with the third of our themes start from the assumption
that Modernism refers to the typical forms of a hegemonic culture. This culture
is defined as Western in its orientation, capitalist in its determining economic
tendency, bourgeois in its class-character, white in its racial complexion, and
masculine in its dominant gender. Others of the characteristics of this culture,
such as its investment in the separation of the 'high' from the 'popular' arts,
its tendency to forms of specialization and abstruseness, and its individualism,
are seen as following from these. For those thus persuaded of the character of
Modernism - or persuaded, at least, of the inescapable implication of Modernist
art in the values of modern culture thus characterized - to talk of a postmodern
culture or of postmodern forms of art is to talk of forms of opposition to
hegemony. It is to conceive of work which articulates the 'meanings of the
dominated' - Modernism's 'others' - and which, in doing so, gives imaginative
realization to the reversal of powers (VIIIcl, 5 and 9). The tools for this work
are the available tools of liberation. Classically, so far as the twentieth century
is concerned, these have been found in the Marxist intellectual tradition and in



VIII Introduction 991

Freudian psychoanalysis, and in various forms of transaction between the two.
The Marxist tradition has been considerably extended through its application
to the analysis of colonialism (VIIIc9). Since the later 1970s the resources of
Freudian theory have been substantially transformed by feminists in pursuit of
relevant insights and critiques (VIIIC5). The two resources have been brought
together in analysis of the mechanisms of social and psychological power and
control. Analysis along these lines has also been a concern of the work of Michel
Foucault, though his work constitutes a mediation of the intellectual traditions
of Marx and Freud by the legacy of Nietzsche (see VIID12).

If different writers tend to stress one rather than another of these broad
themes it is nevertheless clear that no one of the three can be considered
independently of any of the others. The critique of history, for example, must
clearly take account of the position from which history is written. An 'art
history' which is an apparently disinterested narrative of 'original' works may
actually depend for its coherence on a mere stereotype of originality, and may
thus be unresponsive to the work of those who challenge the authority of that
stereotype. And so on.

It should also be noted that where the postmodern theory of the 1980s was
written and read in English, it was generally written and read under regimes
which were both conservative and largely philistine. If Lyotard's 'war on totality'
was waged with any success during the decade, it was waged in the face of
considerable attempts to restore 'fundamental values' in cultural as in social
policy. Over the same period there appears to have been a substantial if by no
means sensational gain in the representation of women and of racial and sexual
minorities in the making of art and of artistic theory. Yet these gains were
accompanied by a large-scale backing down from the larger social goals with
which Modernism was widely identified. In both the United States and Britain
the gap between rich and poor widened during the 1980s. It is not always easy
under these conditions to distinguish between committed and coopted art.

So how are we to conceive of the postmodern and what are we to take as its
typical artistic forms? Should we emphasize those forms which may be defined
as forms of high art, precisely through their difference from and resistance to
the incoming tides of the media - forms which, by the same token, may exhibit
a familiar indifference under new conditions (VIIIClO)? Or should we associate
the postmodern with the activities of those who would remove the typically
Modernist barrier (as they see it) between the 'high arts' and 'popular culture',
whose independent artistic works take a mechanically reproducible form, either
to make the pleasures of art in principle available to all, or in order to insinuate
a critical aesthetic content into the existing media of mass-distribution, or both
(VIIIB7, VIIIC3)? Or should we identify the postmodern as a culture made by
and representative of those typically marginalized by Modernism: women, the
racially disadvantaged and the colonized, members of the working class, members
of oppressed sexual minorities, variously converging in their purpose to reflect
back to Modernism an inescapable representation of its own Otherness (VIIIc2
and 4)? Or is there a form of postmodernist Hyper-Realism to be identified in
the productions of those who take the commodities of the consumer world as



992 Ideas of the Postmodern



forms of a modern 'nature' - a nature which they then represent in the form
of pastiche (VIIIB8 and 10)? Or alternatively, and finally, is it possible apparently
to acknowledge both the interconnectedness and the unoriginality of all utter-
ance, yet to persist in the attempt to achieve expression; and if so is this not
an enterprise in which the postmodern and the modern are as one (VIIIA6, 9
and 10)?



VIIlA

The Condition of History



1 Daniel Bell (b. 1919) from 'Modernism and
Capitalism'

Bell is a conservative American sociologist associated with the related concepts of the
'post-industrial society' and the 'end of ideology'. In his schema it is 'theoretical
knowledge' that is the central dynamic of change in the advanced societies of the late
twentieth century, and not, for example, the conflict of classes as proposed in Marxist
theory. In this essay Bell identifies Modernism both as the 'avowed enemy' of the ruling
class and as the new 'regnant orthodoxy of the day'. As such it is disruptive of the
desirable authority of judgements of value and destructive of the possibility of a shared
moral order. In Bell's new version of the Call to Order, the agnostic impetus of
Modernism awaits its postmodern counter from 'the deepest needs of individuals
sharing a common awakening'. First published in Partisan Review, vol. 45, New York,
1978, pp. 206-22, and reprinted as a preface to the second edition of Bell's The
Cultural Contradictions of Capitalism in the same year. The present extract is taken
from sections IV VII of the original version.



IV

The realm of culture is the realm of meanings, the effort in some imaginative
form to make sense of the world through the expressiveness of art and ritual,
particularly those 'incomprehensions' such as tragedy and death that arise out
of the existential predicaments which every self-conscious human being must
confront at some point in his life. In these encounters, one becomes aware of
the fundamental questions - what Goethe called Urphdnomen - which frame all
others. Religion, as the oldest effort to comprehend these 'mysteries,' has
historically been the source of cultural symbols.

If science is the search for the unity of nature, religion has been the quest
for the unity of culture in the different historical periods of civilizations. To
close that circle, religion has woven tradition as the fabric of meaning and
guarded the portals of culture by rejecting those works of art which threatened
the moral norms of religion.

The modern movement disrupts that unity. It does so in three ways: by
insisting on the autonomy of the aesthetic from moral norms; by valuing more



994 Ideas of the Postmodern



highly the new and experimental; and by taking the self (in its quest for
originality and uniqueness) as the touchstone of cultural judgment. The most
aggressive outrider of the movement is the self-proclaimed avant-garde which
calls itself Modernism. I see Modernism as the agency for the dissolution of
the bourgeois world view and, in the past half-century, as gaining hegemony in
the culture.

The difficulties of defining Modernism are notorious. Schematically, I would
specify three different dimensions:

1 Thematically Modernism has been a rage against order, and in particular,
bourgeois orderliness. The emphasis is on the self, and the unceasing search for
experience. If Terence once said, 'Nothing human is alien to me,' the Modernist
could say with equal fervor, 'Nothing inhuman is alien to me.' Rationalism is
seen as devitalizing; the surge to creativity is propelled by an exploration of the
demonic. In that exploration, one cannot set aesthetic limits (or even moral
norms) to this protean reach of the imagination. The crucial insistence is that
experience is to have no boundaries to its cravings, that there be 'nothing sacred.'

2 Stylistically, there is a common syntax in what I have called 'the eclipse
of distance.' This is the effort to achieve immediacy, impact, simultaneity, and
sensation by eliminating aesthetic and psychic distance. In diminishing aesthetic
distance, one annihilates contemplation and envelops the spectator in the
experience. By eliminating psychic distance, one emphasizes (in Freudian terms)
the 'primary process' of dream and hallucination, of instinct and impulse. In
all this Modernism rejects the 'rational cosmology' that was introduced into the
arts during the Renaissance and codified by Alberti: of foreground and back-
ground in pictorial space; of beginning, middle, and end, or sequence, in time;
and the distinction of genres and the modes of work appropriate to each genre.
This eclipse of distance, as a formal syntax, cuts across all the arts: in literature,
the 'stream of consciousness'; in painting, the elimination of the 'interior
distance' within the canvas; in music, the upset of the balance of melody and
harmony; in poetry, the disruption of the ordered meter. In the broadest sense,
this common syntax repudiates mimesis as a principle of art. [ . . . ]

3 The preoccupation with the medium. In all periods of cultural history,
artists have been conscious of the nature and complexity of the medium as a
formal problem in transmuting the 'pre-figured' into the 'figured' result. In the
last twenty-five years, we have seen a preoccupation not with the content or
form (i.e., style and genre), but with the medium of art itself: with the actual
texture of paint and materials in painting, with the abstract 'sounds' in music,
with phonology or even 'breath' in poetry, and with the abstract properties of
language in literature - often to the exclusion of anything else. Thus it is the
encaustic surface, not the image, that generates excitement in the paintings of
Jasper Johns; the aleatory or chance factors in the music of John Cage; the
aspirate rather than the syllable, as a measure of line in poetry of Robert Creeley
- all of these as expressions of the self, rather than formal explorations of the
limits and nature of the medium itself.

Modernism has, beyond dispute, been responsible for one of the great surges
of creativity in Western culture. The period from 1850 to 1930 probably saw



VHIa The Condition of History 995

more varied experiments in literature, poetry, music and painting - if not more
great masterpieces - than any previous period we have known. Much of this
arose out of the creative tension of culture, with its adversary stance, against
the bourgeois social structure [. . .]

There has been a price. One cost has been the loss of coherence in culture,
particularly in the spread of an antinomian attitude to moral norms and even
to the idea of cultural judgment itself. The greater price was exacted when the
distinction between art and life became blurred so that what was once permitted
in the imagination (the novels of murder, lust, perversity) has often passed over
into fantasy, and is acted out by individuals who want to make their lives a
work of art, and when, with the 'democratization' of criticism, the touchstone
of judgment is no longer some consensual agreement on standards, but each
'self's' judgment as to how art enhances that 'self.'

Changes in culture interact with a social structure in complicated ways. Where
there is a patronage system, the patron - be it prince, or church, or state -
commissions a work of art, and the cultural needs of the institution, such as
the Church, or the tastes of the prince, or the demands for glorification by the
State, will shape the regnant style of the time. But where art is bought and
sold, the market is where culture and social structure cross. One would expect
that where culture has become a commodity the bourgeois taste would prevail.
But in extraordinary historical fact, this has not been the case.

The phrase 'cultural hegemony' - identified with the Italian Marxist Antonio
Gramsci - signifies the dominance of a single group in shaping the prevailing
world view which gives a people an interpretation of the age. [. . .]

Marxists have assumed that under capitalism there has . . . been a single
cultural hegemony - the ideas of the 'ruling class.' Yet the astonishing fact is
that in the past hundred years, if there has been a dominant influence - in the
high culture at least - it has been the avowed enemy of that class, Modernism.

At the start the capitalist economic impulse and the cultural drive of mod-
ernity shared a common source, the ideas of liberty and liberation, whose
embodiments were 'rugged individualism' in economic affairs and the 'unre-
strained self in culture. Though the two had a common origin in the repudi-
ation of tradition and the authority of the past, an adversary relation between
them quickly developed. One can say, as Freud would, that the discipline
required by work was threatened by the libidinal energies diverted to culture.
This may perhaps be true, but it is abstract. What would seem to be the more
likely historical explanation is that the bourgeois attitudes of calculation and
methodical restraint came into conflict with the impulsive searchings for sensa-
tion and excitement that one found in Romanticism, and which passed over into
Modernism. The antagonism deepened as the organization of work and produc-
tion became bureaucratized and individuals were reduced to roles, so that the
norms of the workplace were increasingly at variance with the emphasis on
self-exploration and self-gratification. The thread connecting Blake to Byron to
Baudelaire - who is the avatar of Modernism - may not be literal, but it is a
figurative symbolic lineage.

So long as work and wealth had a religious sanction, they possessed a



996 Ideas of the Postmodern



transcendental justification. But when that ethic eroded, there was a loss of
legitimation, for the pursuit of wealth alone is not a calling that justifies itself.
As Schumpeter once shrewdly remarked: The stock exchange is a poor substitute
for the Holy Grail. The central point is that - at first, for the advanced social
groups, the intelligentsia and the educated social classes, and later for the middle
class itself - the legitimations of social behavior passed from religion to modernist
culture. And with it there was a shift in emphasis from 'character, 1 which is the
unity of moral codes and disciplined purpose, to an emphasis on 'personality,'
which is the enhancement of self through the compulsive search for individual
differentiation. In brief, not work but the 'life style' became the source of
satisfaction and criterion for desirable behavior in the society.

Yet paradoxically, the life style that became the imago of the free self was
not that of the businessman, expressing himself through his 'dynamic drive/
but that of the artist defying the conventions of the society. Increasingly, it is
the artist who begins to dominate the audience, and to impose his judgment as
to what is to be desired and bought. The paradox is completed when the
bourgeois ethic, having collapsed in the society, finds few defenders in the
culture (do any writers defend any institutions?) and Modernism as an attack
on orthodoxy, has triumphed and become the regnant orthodoxy of the day.

V

Any tension creates its own dialectic. Since the market is where social structure
and culture cross, what has happened is that in the last fifty years, the economy
has been geared to producing the life styles paraded by the culture. Thus, not
only has there been a contradiction between the realms, but that tension has
produced a further contradiction within the economic realm itself. In the world
of capitalist enterprise, the nominal ethos in the spheres of production and
organization is still one of work, delayed gratification, career orientation, devo-
tion to the enterprise. Yet, on the marketing side, the sale of goods, packaged
in the glossy images of glamour and sex, promotes a hedonistic way of life
whose promise is the voluptuous gratification of the lineaments of desire. The
consequence of this contradiction is that a corporation finds its people being
straight by day and swingers by night.

What has happened in society in the last fifty years - as a result of the erosion
of the religious ethic and the increase in discretionary income - is that the culture
has taken the initiative in promoting change, and the economy has been geared
to meeting these new wants. In this respect, there has been a significant reversal
in the historical pattern of social change. During the rise of capitalism - in the
'modernization' of any traditional society - one could more readily change the
economic structure of a society: by forcing people off the land into factories,
by imposing a new rhythm and discipline of work, by using brutal means or
incentives ... to raise capital. But the superstructure - the patterns of family
life, the attachments to religion and authority, the received ideas that shaped
people's perceptions of a social reality - was more stubbornly resistant to change.

Today, by contrast, it is the economic structure that is the more difficult to



VIIIa The Condition of History 997

change. Within the enterprise, the heavy bureaucratic layers reduce flexible
adaptation, while union rules inhibit the power of management to control the
assignment of jobs. In the society, the economic enterprise is subject to the
challenges of various veto groups (e.g., on the location of plants or the use of
the environment) and subject more and more to regulation by government.

But in the culture, fantasy reigns almost unconstrained. The media are geared
to feeding new images to people, to unsettling traditional conventions, and the
highlighting of aberrant and quirky behavior which becomes images for others
to imitate. The traditional is stodgy, and the 'orthodox' institutions such as
family and church are on the defensive about their inability to change. Yet if
capitalism has been routinized, Modernism has been trivialized. After all, how
often can it continue to shock, if there is nothing shocking left? If experiment
is the norm, how original can anything new be? And like all bad history,
Modernism has repeated its end, once in the popgun outbursts of Futurism and
Dadaism, the second time in the phosphorescent parodies of Pop paintings and
the mindless minimalism of conceptual art. The exclamation points that end
each sentence of the Manifestoes, have simply become four dots that trail away
in the tedium of endless repetition.

In the revelation of wisdom, the Owl of Minerva flies at dusk because life
had become gray on gray [a paraphrase from the Preface to Hegel's Philosophy
of Right}. In the victorious apocalypse of Modernism, the dawn is a series of
gaudy colors whirling in strobismic light. Today, Modernism has become not
the work of serious artists but the property of the culturati, the 'cultural mass,'
the distribution sector of cultural production, for whom the shock of the old
has become the chic of the new. The culturati have carried over, in rhetoric,
the adversary stance against bourgeois orderliness and sobriety, yet they impose
a conformity of their own on those who deviate from its guarded canons. [ . . . ]

In this double contradiction of capitalism, what has been established in the
last thirty years has been the tawdry rule of fad and fashion: of 'multiples' for
the culturati, hedonism for the middle classes, and pornotopia for the masses.
And in the very nature of fashion, it has trivialized the culture.



VI

Has Modernism been 'co-opted, 1 as Herbert Marcuse suggests? In one dimen-
sion, yes. It has been converted into a commodity for promotion and profit.
But in the deeper transformations of structure, that process can only undermine
the foundations of capitalism itself. The sociological truism is that a societal
order is shored up by its legitimations, which provide the defenses against its
despisers. But the legitimation of the culture, as I have argued, is the quest for
self-gratification and the expression of 'personality.' It attacks established or-
thodoxy in the name of personal autonomy and heterodoxy. Yet what modern
culture has failed to understand is that orthodoxy is not the guardian of an
existent order, but is itself a judgment on the adequacy and moral character of
beliefs, from the standpoint of 'right reason.' The paradox is that 'heterodoxy'
itself has become conformist in liberal circles and exercises that conformity



998 Ideas of the Postmodern

under the banner of an antinomian flag. It is a prescription, in its confusions
for the dissolution of a shared moral order. [ . . . ]

VII

[.. .] We stand, I believe, with a clearing ahead of us. The exhaustion of
Modernism, the aridity of Communist life, the tedium of the unrestrained self,
and the meaningless of the monolithic political chants, all indicate that a long
era is coming to a slow close. The impulse of Modernism was to leap beyond:
beyond nature, beyond culture, beyond tragedy - to explore the apeiron, the
boundless, driven by the self-infinitizing spirit of the radical self. Bourgeois
society sundered economics from moral norms to allow the individual to pursue
his own self-defined wants, yet at the same time sought to bend the culture to
its restricted moral norms. Modernism was the major effort to break away from
those restrictions in the name of experience, the aesthetic and the experimental
and, in the end, broke all boundaries. Yet if we now seek to return economics
to moral norms, is there not a similar warranty for culture?

We are groping for a new vocabulary whose keyword seems to be limits: a limit
to growth, a limit to the spoliation of the environment, a limit to arms, a limit
to the tampering with biological nature. Yet if we seek to establish a set of
limits in the economy and technology, will we also set a limit to the exploration
of those cultural experiences which go beyond moral norms and embrace the
demonic in the delusion that all experience is 'creative'? Can we set a limit to
hubris? The answer to that question could resolve the cultural contradiction of
capitalism and its deceptive double, semblable et frere, the culture of modernity
['Hypocrite lecteur - mon semblable - mon frere', Baudelaire, Les Fleurs du
Mal\. It would leave only the economic and political mundane to be tamed.



2 Jean-Francis Lyotard (b. 1924) Introduction to
The Postmodern Condition

The French philosopher Lyotard is a one-time member of the group Socialisme ou
Barbarie (Socialism or Barbarity). In thus drawing its name from a well-known essay by
Rosa Luxemburg, the group signalled a position within the classical socialist tradition,
yet distinct from its corruption under the Stalinism of the official Communist movement.
This identification lost pertinence after 1968, however, and Lyotard repositioned himself
at the forefront of those seeking new explanations for the conditions of contemporary
capitalism. The study which the following passage introduces was produced by request
of the Conseil des Universites of the government of Quebec, and was first published
as La Condition postmoderne: rapport sur le savoir, Paris, 1979. Although he addresses
similar evidence to Bell, Lyotard draws quite contrary conclusions. Where Bell sees the
institutionalization of Modernist scepticism and experimentalism as favourable to the
implementation of a new consensus in a restabilized economic order, Lyotard equates
the postmodern with scepticism as to the possibility of an underlying consensus and
with recognition of the inevitability of differences and incommensurabilities. His Post-
modernism is thus a form of critically revivified Modernism, retaining the intellectual



VIIIa The Condition of History 999

prospect of a new form of social existence. The present text is taken from pp. xxiii-xxv
in the translation by Geoff Bennington and Brian Massumi r published as The Postmodern
Condition: A Report on Knowledge, Minnesota and Manchester, 1984.

[ . . . ] Science has always been in conflict with narratives. Judged by the yardstick
of science, the majority of them prove to be fables. But to the extent that science
does not restrict itself to stating useful regularities and seeks the truth, it is
obliged to legitimate the rules of its own game. It then produces a discourse of
legitimation with respect to its own status, a discourse called philosophy. I will
use the term modern to designate any science that legitimates itself with reference
to a metadiscourse of this kind making an explicit appeal to some grand narrative,
such as the dialectics of Spirit, the hermeneutics of meaning, the emancipation
of the rational or working subject, or the creation of wealth. For example, the
rule of consensus between the sender and addressee of a statement with truth-
value is deemed acceptable if it is cast in terms of a possible unanimity between
rational minds: this is the Enlightenment narrative, in which the hero of
knowledge works toward a good ethico-political end - universal peace. As can
be seen from this example, if a metanarrative implying a philosophy of history
is used to legitimate knowledge, questions are raised concerning the validity of
the institutions governing the social bond: these must be legitimated as well.
Thus justice is consigned to the grand narrative in the same way as truth.

Simplifying to the extreme, I define postmodern as incredulity toward meta-
narratives. This incredulity is undoubtedly a product of progress in the sciences:
but that progress in turn presupposes it. To the obsolescence of the metanar-
rative apparatus of legitimation corresponds, most notably, the crisis of meta-
physical philosophy and of the university institution which in the past relied
on it. The narrative function is losing its functors, its great hero, its great
dangers, its great voyages, its great goal. It is being dispersed in clouds of
narrative language elements - narrative, but also denotative, prescriptive, de-
scriptive, and so on. Conveyed within each cloud are pragmatic valencies specific
to its kind. Each of us lives at the intersection of many of these. However, we
do not necessarily establish stable language combinations, and the properties of
the ones we do establish are not necessarily communicable.

Thus the society of the future falls less within the province of a Newtonian
anthropology (such as stucturalism or systems theory) than a pragmatics of
language particles. There are many different language games - a heterogeneity
of elements. They only give rise to institutions in patches - local determinism.

The decision makers, however, attempt to manage these clouds of sociality
according to input/output matrices, following a logic which implies that their
elements are commensurable and that the whole is determinable. They allocate
our lives for the growth of power. In matters of social justice and of scientific
truth alike, the legitimation of that power is based on its optimizing the system's
performance - efficiency. The application of this criterion to all of our games
necessarily entails a certain level of terror, whether soft or hard: be operational
(that is, commensurable) or disappear.

The logic of maximum performance is no doubt inconsistent in many ways,



1000 Ideas of the Postmodern

particularly with respect to contradiction in the socio-economic field: it demands
both less work (to lower production costs) and more (to lessen the social burden
of the idle population). But our incredulity is now such that we no longer expect
salvation to rise from these inconsistencies, as did Marx.

Still, the postmodern condition is as much a stranger to disenchantment as it
is to the blind positivity of delegitimation. Where, after the metanarratives, can
legitimacy reside? The operativity criterion is technological; it has no relevance
for judging what is true or just. Is legitimacy to be found in consensus obtained
through discussion, as Jurgen Habermas thinks? Such consensus does violence to
the heterogeneity of language games. And invention is always born of dissension.
Postmodern knowledge is not simply a tool of the authorities; it refines our
sensitivity to differences and reinforces our ability to tolerate the incommensur-
able. Its principle is not the expert's homology, but the inventor's paralogy.

Here is the question: is a legitimation of the social bond, a just society, feasible
in terms of a paradox analogous to that of scientific activity? What would such
a paradox be?



3 Jurgen Habermas (b. 1929) 'Modernity - An
Incomplete Project'

This text originated in September 1980 as an address given on receipt of the Theodor
W. Adorno prize from the city of Frankfurt. As the most distinguished of the Frankfurt
School's 'second generation', Habermas maintains that commitment to the critical
potential of Modernist high art for which Adorno had been a forceful spokesman. In line
with this commitment he interprets recent theorization of the postmodern as a form of
legitimation of those reactionary tendencies to which Modernism was always opposed.
Noting a coincidence of interests between the putatively postmodern and the anti-mod-
ern, he argues that a resource of aesthetic resistance remains necessary as a counter
to the increasing autonomy of economic and administrative systems. Habermas's
argument is distinguished from more positive assessments of a 'postmodern condition'
by his continued recourse to the notion of a shared life world', against which emanci-
patory claims can be measured. The position of many 'postmodernists' is that it is
precisely the loss of a shared space which puts the postmodern condition out of the
reach of older programmes inspired by Marxism. Conversely, for Habermas, this very
position is itself tantamount to a new conservatism. This address was repeated as the
James lecture at the New York Institute for the Humanities, New York University, March
1981, and published in the present translation by Seyla Ben-Habib as 'Modernity versus
Postmodernity' in New German Critique, 22, Winter 1981; reprinted under the present
title in H. Foster (ed.), Postmodern Culture, London, 1985 (originally The Anti-Aesthetic,
Seattle, 1983), pp. 3-15, from which the present text is taken.

The Discipline of Aesthetic Modernity

The spirit and discipline of aesthetic modernity assumed clear contours in the
work of Baudelaire. Modernity then unfolded in various avant-garde movements



VIIIa The Condition of History 1001

and finally reached its climax in the Cafe Voltaire of the dadaists and in
surrealism. Aesthetic modernity is characterized by attitudes which find a
common focus in a changed consciousness of time. This time consciousness
expresses itself through metaphors of the vanguard and the avant-garde. The
avant-garde understands itself as invading unknown territory, exposing itself to
the dangers of sudden, shocking encounters, conquering an as yet unoccupied
future. The avant-garde must find a direction in a landscape into which no one
seems to have yet ventured.

But these forward gropings, this anticipation of an undefined future and the
cult of the new mean in fact the exaltation of the present. The new time
consciousness, which enters philosophy in the writings of Bergson, does more
than express the experience of mobility in society, of acceleration in history, of
discontinuity in everyday life. The new value placed on the transitory, the
elusive and the ephemeral, the very celebration of dynamism, discloses a longing
for an undefiled, immaculate and stable present.

This explains the rather abstract language in which the modernist temper has
spoken of the 'past.' Individual epochs lose their distinct forces. Historical
memory is replaced by the heroic affinity of the present with the extremes of
history - a sense of time wherein decadence immediately recognizes itself in the
barbaric, the wild and the primitive. We observe the anarchistic intention of
blowing up the continuum of history, and we can account for it in terms of the
subversive force of this new aesthetic consciousness. Modernity revolts against
the normalizing functions of tradition; modernity lives on the experience of
rebelling against all that is normative. This revolt is one way to neutralize the
standards of both morality and utility. This aesthetic consciousness continuously
stages a dialectical play between secrecy and public scandal; it is addicted to a
fascination with that horror which accompanies the act of profaning, and yet is
always in flight from the trivial results of profanation.

On the other hand, the time consciousness articulated in avant-garde art is
not simply ahistorical; it is directed against what might be called a false
normativity in history. The modern, avant-garde spirit has sought to use the
past in a different way; it disposes those pasts which have been made available
by the objectifying scholarship of historicism, but it opposes at the same time
a neutralized history which is locked up in the museum of historicism.

Drawing upon the spirit of surrealism, Walter Benjamin constructs the
relationship of modernity to history in what I would call a posthistoricist
attitude. He reminds us of the self-understanding of the French Revolution:
'The Revolution cited ancient Rome, just as fashion cites an antiquated dress.
Fashion has a scent for what is current, whenever this moves within the thicket
of what was once.' This is Benjamin's concept of the jfetztzeit, of the present
as a moment of revelation; a time in which splinters of a messianic presence
are enmeshed. In this sense, for Robespierre, the antique Rome was a past laden
with momentary revelations.

Now, this spirit of aesthetic modernity has recently begun to age. It has been
recited once more in the 1960s; after the 1970s, however, we must admit to
ourselves that this modernism arouses a much fainter response today than it



1002 Ideas of the Postmodern

did fifteen years ago. Octavio Paz, a fellow-traveller of modernity, noted already
in the middle of the 1960s that 'the avant-garde of 1967 repeats the deeds and
gestures of those of 1917. We are experiencing the end of the idea of modern
art.' The work of Peter Burger has since taught us to speak of 'post-avant-garde*
art; this term is chosen to indicate the failure of the surrealist rebellion. But
what is the meaning of this failure? Does it signal a farewell to modernity?
Thinking more generally, does the existence of a post-avant-garde mean there
is a transition to that broader phenomenon called postmodernity?

This is in fact how Daniel Bell, the most brilliant of the American neocon-
servatives, interprets matters. In his book, The Cultural Contradictions of Capi-
talism, Bell argues that the crises of the developed societies of the West are to
be traced back to a split between culture and society. Modernist culture has
come to penetrate the values of everyday life; the life-world is infected by
modernism. Because of the forces of modernism, the principle of unlimited
self-realization, the demand for authentic self-experience and the subjectivism
of a hyperstimulated sensitivity have come to be dominant. This temperament
unleashes hedonistic motives irreconcilable with the discipline of professional
life in society, Bell says. Moreover, modernist culture is altogether incompatible
with the moral basis of a purposive, rational conduct of life. In this manner,
Bell places the burden of responsibility for the dissolution of the Protestant
ethic (a phenomenon which had already disturbed Max Weber) on the 'adversary
culture.' Culture in its modern form stirs up hatred against the conventions and
virtues of everyday life, which has become rationalized under the pressures of
economic and administrative imperatives.

I would call your attention to a complex wrinkle in this view. The impulse
of modernity, we are told on the other hand, is exhausted; anyone who considers
himself avant-garde can read his own death warrant. Although the avant-garde
is still considered to be expanding, it is supposedly no longer creative. Mod-
ernism is dominant but dead. For the neoconservative the question then arises:
how can norms arise in society which will limit libertinism, re-establish the
ethic of discipline and work? What new norms will put a brake on the levelling
caused by the social welfare state so that the virtues of individual competition
for achievement can again dominate? Bell sees a religious revival to be the only
solution. Religious faith tied to a faith in tradition will provide individuals with
clearly defined identities and existential security.

Cultural Modernity and Societal Modernization

One can certainly not conjure up by magic the compelling beliefs which
command authority. Analyses like Bell's, therefore, only result in an attitude
which is spreading in Germany no less than in the States: an intellectual and
political confrontation with the carriers of cultural modernity. [. . .]

Neoconservatism shifts onto cultural modernism the uncomfortable burdens
of a more or less successful capitalist modernization of the economy and society.
The neoconservative doctrine blurs the relationship between the welcomed
process of societal modernization on the one hand, and the lamented cultural



VIIIa The Condition of History 1003

development on the other. The neoconservative does not uncover the economic
and social causes for the altered attitudes towards work, consumption, achieve-
ment and leisure. Consequently, he attributes all of the following - hedonism,
the lack of social identification, the lack of obedience, narcissism, the withdrawal
from status and achievement competition - to the domain of 'culture.' In fact,
however, culture is intervening in the creation of all these problems in only a
very indirect and mediated fashion.

In the neoconservative view, those intellectuals who still feel themselves
committed to the project of modernity are then presented as taking the place
of those unanalyzed causes. The mood which feeds neoconservatism today in
no way originates from discontent about the antinomian consequences of a
culture breaking from the museums into the stream of ordinary life. This
discontent has not been called into life by modernist intellectuals. It is rooted
in deep-seated reactions against the process of societal modernization. Under the
pressures of the dynamics of economic growth and the organizational accom-
plishments of the state, this social modernization penetrates deeper and deeper
into previous forms of human existence. I would describe this subordination of
the life-worlds under the system's imperatives as a matter of disturbing the
communicative infrastructure of everyday life.

Thus, for example, neopopulist protests only express in pointed fashion a
widespread fear regarding the destruction of the urban and natural environment
and of forms of human sociability. There is a certain irony about these protests
in terms of neoconservatism. The tasks of passing on a cultural tradition, of
social integration and of socialization require adherence to what I call communi-
cative rationality. But the occasions for protest and discontent originate precisely
when spheres of communicative action, centered on the reproduction and
transmission of values and norms, are penetrated by a form of modernization
guided by standards of economic and administrative rationality - in other words,
by standards of rationalization quite different from those of communicative
rationality on which those spheres depend. But neoconservative doctrines turn our
attention precisely away from such societal processes: they project the causes, which
they do not bring to light, onto the plane of a subversive culture and its advocates.

To be sure, cultural modernity generates its own aporias as well. Inde-
pendently from the consequences of societal modernization and within the
perspective of cultural development itself, there originate motives for doubting
the project of modernity. Having dealt with a feeble kind of criticism of
modernity - that of neoconservatism - let me now move our discussion of
modernity and its discontents into a different domain that touches on these
aporias of cultural modernity - issues that often serve only as a pretense for
those positions which either call for a postmodernity, recommend a return to
some form of premodernity, or throw modernity radically overboard.

I The Project of Enlightenment

The idea of modernity is intimately tied to the development of European art,
but what I call 'the project of modernity' comes only into focus when we



1004 Ideas of the Postmodern

dispense with the usual concentration upon art. Let me start a different analysis
by recalling an idea from Max Weber. He characterized cultural modernity as
the separation of the substantive reason expressed in religion and metaphysics
into three autonomous spheres. They are: science, morality and art. These came
to be differentiated because the unified world-views of religion and metaphysics
fell apart. Since the eighteenth century, the problems inherited from these older
world-views could be arranged so as to fall under specific aspects of validity:
truth, normative rightness, authenticity and beauty. They could then be handled
as questions of knowledge, or of justice and morality, or of taste. Scientific
discourse, theories of morality, jurisprudence, and the production and criticism
of art could in turn be institutionalized. Each domain of culture could be made
to correspond to cultural professions in which problems could be dealt with as
the concern of special experts. This professionalized treatment of the cultural
tradition brings to the fore the intrinsic structures of each of the three
dimensions of culture. There appear the structures of cognitive-instrumental,
of moral-practical and of aesthetic-expressive rationality, each of these under
the control of specialists who seem more adept at being logical in these particular
ways than other people are. As a result, the distance grows between the culture
of the experts and that of the larger public. What accrues to culture through
specialized treatment and reflection does not immediately and necessarily become
the property of everyday praxis. With cultural rationalization of this sort, the
threat increases that the life-world, whose traditional substance has already been
devalued, will become more and more impoverished.

The project of modernity formulated in the eighteenth century by the
philosophers of the Enlightenment consisted in their efforts to develop objective
science, universal morality and law, and autonomous art according to their inner
logic. At the same time, this project intended to release the cognitive potentials
of each of these domains from their esoteric forms. The Enlightenment philo-
sophers wanted to utilize this accumulation of specialized culture for the
enrichment of everyday life - that is to say, for the rational organization of
everyday social life.

Enlightenment thinkers of the cast of mind of Condorcet still had the
extravagant expectation that the arts and sciences would promote not only the
control of natural forces but also understanding of the world and of the self,
moral progress, the justice of institutions and even the happiness of human
beings. The twentieth century has shattered this optimism. The differentiation
of science, morality and art has come to mean the autonomy of the segments
treated by the specialist and their separation from the hermeneutics of everyday
communication. This splitting off is the problem that has given rise to efforts
to 'negate 1 the culture of expertise. But the problem won't go away: should we
try to hold on to the intentions of the Enlightenment, feeble as they may be, or
should we declare the entire project of modernity a lost cause? I now want to
return to the problem of artistic culture, having explained why, historically,
aesthetic modernity is only a part of cultural modernity in general.



1



VIIIa The Condition of History 1005

The False Programs of the Negation of Culture

Greatly oversimplifying, I would say that in the history of modern art one can
detect a trend towards ever greater autonomy in the definition and practice of
art. The category of 'beauty' and the domain of beautiful objects were first
constituted in the Renaissance. In the course of the eighteenth century, lit-
erature, the fine arts and music were institutionalized as activities independent
from sacred and courtly life. Finally, around the middle of the nineteenth
century an aestheticist conception of art emerged, which encouraged the artist
to produce his work according to the distinct consciousness of art for art's sake.
The autonomy of the aesthetic sphere could then become a deliberate project:
the talented artist could lend authentic expression to those experiences he had
in encountering his own de-centered subjectivity, detached from the constraints
of routinized cognition and everyday action.

[. . .] But by the time of Baudelaire, who repeated this promesse de bonheur
via art, the Utopia of reconciliation with society had gone sour. A relation of
opposites had come into being; art had become a critical mirror, showing the
irreconcilable nature of the aesthetic and the social worlds. This modernist
transformation was all the more painfully realized, the more art alienated itself
from life and withdrew into the untouchableness of complete autonomy. Out of
such emotional currents finally gathered those explosive energies which unloaded
in the surrealist attempt to blow up the autarkical sphere of art and to force a
reconciliation of art and life.

But all those attempts to level art and life, fiction and praxis, appearance and
reality to one plane; the attempts to remove the distinction between artifact and
object of use, between conscious staging and spontaneous excitement; the
attempts to declare everything to be art and everyone to be an artist, to retract
all criteria and to equate aesthetic judgment with the expression of subjective
experiences - all these undertakings have proved themselves to be sort of
nonsense experiments. These experiments have served to bring back to life, and
to illuminate all the more glaringly, exactly those structures of art which they
were meant to dissolve. They gave a new legitimacy, as ends in themselves, to
appearance as the medium of fiction, to the transcendence of the artwork over
society, to the concentrated and planned character of artistic production as well
as to the special cognitive status of judgments of taste. The radical attempt to
negate art has ended up ironically by giving due exactly to these categories
through which Enlightenment aesthetics had circumscribed its object domain.
The surrealists waged the most extreme warfare, but two mistakes in particular
destroyed their revolt. First, when the containers of an autonomously developed
cultural sphere are shattered, the contents get dispersed. Nothing remains from
a desublimated meaning or a destructured form; an emancipatory effect does
not follow.

Their second mistake has more important consequences. In everyday com-
munication, cognitive meanings, moral expectations, subjective expressions and
evaluations must relate to one another. Communication processes need a cultural
tradition covering all spheres - cognitive, moral-practical and expressive. A



1006 Ideas of the Postmodern

rationalized everyday life, therefore, could hardly be saved from cultural im-
poverishment through breaking open a single cultural sphere - art - and so
providing access to just one of the specialized knowledge complexes. The
surrealist revolt would have replaced only one abstraction. [. . .]

A reified everyday praxis can be cured only by creating unconstrained
interaction of the cognitive with the moral-practical and the aesthetic-expressive
elements. Reification cannot be overcome by forcing just one of those highly
stylized cultural spheres to open up and become more accessible. [ . . . ]

Alternatives

I think that instead of giving up modernity and its project as a lost cause, we
should learn from the mistakes of those extravagant programs which have tried
to negate modernity. Perhaps the types of reception of art may offer an example
which at least indicates the direction of a way out.

Bourgeois art had two expectations at once from its audiences. On the one
hand, the layman who enjoyed art should educate himself to become an expert.
On the other hand, he should also behave as a competent consumer who uses
art and relates aesthetic experiences to his own life problems. This second, and
seemingly harmless, manner of experiencing art has lost its radical implications
exactly because it had a confused relation to the attitude of being expert and
professional.

To be sure, artistic production would dry up, if it were not carried out in
the form of a specialized treatment of autonomous problems and if it were to
cease to be the concern of experts who do not pay so much attention to exoteric
questions. Both artists and critics accept thereby the fact that such problems
fall under the spell of what I earlier called the 'inner logic' of a cultural domain.
But this sharp delineation, this exclusive concentration on one aspect of validity
alone and the exclusion of aspects of truth and justice, break down as soon as
aesthetic experience is drawn into an individual life history and is absorbed into
ordinary life. The reception of art by the layman, or by the 'everyday expert,' goes
in a rather different direction than the reception of art by the professional critic.

Albrecht Wellmer has drawn my attention to one way that an aesthetic
experience which is not framed around the experts' critical judgments of taste
can have its significance altered: as soon as such an experience is used to
illuminate a life-historical situation and is related to life problems, it enters into
a language game which is no longer that of the aesthetic critic. The aesthetic
experience then not only renews the interpretation of our needs in whose light
we perceive the world. It permeates as well our cognitive significations and our
normative expectations and changes the manner in which all these moments
refer to one another. Let me give an example of this process.

This manner of receiving and relating to art is suggested in the first volume
of the work The Aesthetics of Resistance by the German-Swedish writer Peter
Weiss. Weiss describes the process of reappropriating art by presenting a group
of politically motivated, knowledge-hungry workers in 1937 in Berlin. These
were young people who, through an evening high-school education, acquired



VHIa The Condition of History 1007

the intellectual means to fathom the general and social history of European art.
Out of the resilient edifice of this objective mind, embodied in works of art
which they saw again and again in the museums in Berlin, they started removing
their own chips of stone, which they gathered together and reassembled in the
context of their own milieu. This milieu was far removed from that of traditional
education as well as from the then existing regime. These young workers went
back and forth between the edifice of European art and their own milieu until
they were able to illuminate both.

In examples like this which illustrate the reappropriation of the expert's
culture from the standpoint of the life-world, we can discern an element which
does justice to the intentions of the hopeless surrealist revolts, perhaps even
more to Brecht's and Benjamin's interests in how art works, which having lost
their aura, could yet be received in illuminating ways. In sum, the project of
modernity has not yet been fulfilled. And the reception of art is only one of at
least three of its aspects. The project aims at a differentiated relinking of modern
culture with an everyday praxis that still depends on vital heritages, but would
be impoverished through mere traditionalism. This new connection, however,
can only be established under the condition that societal modernization will also
be steered in a different direction. The life-world has to become able to develop
institutions out of itself which set limits to the internal dynamics and imperatives
of an almost autonomous economic system and its administrative complements.
If I am not mistaken, the chances for this today are not very good. More or
less in the entire Western world a climate has developed that furthers capitalist
modernization processes as well as trends critical of cultural modernism. The
disillusionment with the very failures of those programs that called for the
negation of art and philosophy has come to serve as a pretense for conservative
positions. Let me briefly distinguish the anti-modernism of the 'young conser-
vatives' from the premodernism of the 'old conservatives' and from the post-
modernism of the neoconservatives.

The 'young conservatives' recapitulate the basic experience of aesthetic mod-
ernity. They claim as their own the revelations of a decentered subjectivity,
emancipated from the imperatives of work and usefulness, and with this
experience they step outside the modern world. On the basis of modernistic
attitudes they justify an irreconcilable antimodernism. They remove into the
sphere of the far-away and the archaic the spontaneous powers of imagination,
self-experience and emotion. To instrumental reason they juxtapose in
Manichean fashion a principle only accessible through evocation, be it the will
to power or sovereignty, Being or the Dionysiac force of the poetical. In France
this line leads from Georges Bataille via Michel Foucault to Jacques Derrida.
The 'old conservatives' do not allow themselves to be contaminated by cultural
modernism. They observe the decline of substantive reason, the differentiation
of science, morality and art, the modern world view and its merely procedural
rationality, with sadness and recommend a withdrawal to a position anterior to
modernity. Neo-Aristotelianism, in particular, enjoys a certain success today. In
view of the problematic of ecology, it allows itself to call for a cosmological
ethic. [. . .]



1008 Ideas of the Postmodern

Finally, the neoconservatives welcome the development of modern science, as
long as this only goes beyond its sphere to carry forward technical progress,
capitalist growth and rational administration. Moreover, they recommend a
politics of defusing the explosive content of cultural modernity. According to
one thesis, science, when properly understood, has become irrevocably meaning-
less for the orientation of the life-world. A further thesis is that politics must
be kept as far aloof as possible from the demands of moral-practical justification.
And a third thesis asserts the pure immanence of art, disputes that it has a
Utopian content, and points to its illusory character in order to limit the aesthetic
experience to privacy. (One could name here the early Wittgenstein, Carl
Schmitt of the middle period, and Gottfried Benn of the late period.) But with
the decisive confinement of science, morality and art to autonomous spheres
separated from the life-world and administered by experts, what remains from
the project of cultural modernity is only what we would have if we were to
give up the project of modernity altogether. As a replacement one points to
traditions which, however, are held to be immune to demands of (normative)
justification and validation.

This typology is like any other, of course, a simplification, but it may not
prove totally useless for the analysis of contemporary intellectual and political
confrontations. I fear that the ideas of antimodernity, together with an additional
touch of premodernity, are becoming popular in the circles of alternative culture.
When one observes the transformations of consciousness within political parties
in Germany, a new ideological shift (Tendenzwende) becomes visible. And this
is the alliance of postmodernists with premodernists. It seems to me that there
is no party in particular that monopolizes the abuse of intellectuals and the
position of neoconservatism. [. . .]



4 Jean-Francois Lyotard (b. 1924) 'What Is
Postmodernism?'

In this postscript to his earlier publication, Lyotard takes issue with Habermas and with
the latter's equation of Postmodernism with anti-Modernism, arguing instead that the
postmodern and the modern are continually bound in a dialectical relationship, so that
the postmodern supersedes the modern only in order itself to become the modern.
Within the terms of this framework, however, Lyotard proposes a new distinction: on
the one hand those forms of art which cater in whatever fashion to the nostalgia for
an unattainable wholeness or sense of presence (an echo, perhaps, of the 'presentness'
valued by Fried in VIIa6); on the other those ingenious forms - for which he now reserves
the name of postmodern - through which the very impossibility of this attainment is
what is presented. First published as 'Reponse a la question: qu'est-ce que le postmod-
erne?' in Critique, no. 419, Paris, April 1982. This translation by Regis Durand published
ac 'Answering the Question: "What is Postmodernism?"', in I. and S. Hassan (eds.),
Innovation/Renovation, Madison, Wisconsin, 1983; reprinted as an appendix to the
English edition of Lyotard, The Postmodern Condition, op. cit, pp. 71-82, from which
the present text is taken.



VIIIa The Condition of History 1009



A Demand







This is a period of slackening - I refer to the color of the times. From every
direction we are being urged to put an end to experimentation, in the arts and
elsewhere. I have read an art historian who extols realism and is militant for
the advent of a new subjectivity. I have read an art critic who packages and
sells Transavantgardism' in the marketplace of painting. I have read that under
the name of postmodernism, architects are getting rid of the Bauhaus project,
throwing out the baby of experimentation with the bathwater of functionalism.
I have read that a new philosopher is discovering what he drolly calls Judaeo-
Christianism, and intends by it to put an end to the impiety which we are
supposed to have spread. [. . .] I have read from the pen of a reputable historian
that writers and thinkers of the 1960 and 1970 avant-gardes spread a reign of
terror in the use of language, and that the conditions for a fruitful exchange
must be restored by imposing on the intellectuals a common way of speaking,
that of the historians. I have been reading a young philosopher of language who
complains that Continental thinking, under the challenge of speaking machines,
has surrendered to the machines the concern for reality, that it has substituted
for the referential paradigm that of 'adlinguisticity' (one speaks about speech,
writes about writing, intertextuality), and who thinks that the time has now
come to restore a solid anchorage of language in the referent. I have read a
talented theatrologist for whom postmodernism, with its games and fantasies,
carries very little weight in front of political authority, especially when a worried
public opinion encourages authority to a politics of totalitarian surveillance in
the face of nuclear warfare threats.

I have read a thinker of repute who defends modernity against those he calls
the neoconservatives. Under the banner of postmodernism, the latter would like,
he believes, to get rid of the uncompleted project of modernism, that of the
Enlightenment. Even the last advocates of Aufkldrung, such as Popper or
Adorno, were only able, according to him, to defend the project in a few
particular spheres of life - that of politics for the author of The Open Society,
and that of art for the author of Asthetische Theorie. Jiirgen Habermas (everyone
had recognized him) thinks that if modernity has failed, it is in allowing the
totality of life to be splintered into independent specialties which are left to the
narrow competence of experts, while the concrete individual experiences 'de-
sublimated meaning' and 'destructured form,' not as a liberation but in the
mode of that immense ennui which Baudelaire described over a century ago.

Following a prescription of Albrecht Wellmer, Habermas considers that the
remedy for this splintering of culture and its separation from life can only come
from 'changing the status of aesthetic experience when it is no longer primarily
expressed in judgments of taste,' but when it is 'used to explore a living
historical situation,' that is, when 'it is put in relation with problems of
existence.' For this experience then 'becomes a part of a language game which
is no longer that of aesthetic criticism'; it takes part 'in cognitive processes and
normative expectations'; 'it alters the manner in which those different moments
refer to one another.' What Habermas requires from the arts and the experiences



1010 Ideas of the Postmodern

they provide is, in short, to bridge the gap between cognitive, ethical, and
political discourses, thus opening the way to a unity of experience.

My question is to determine what sort of unity Habermas has in mind. I s
the aim of the project of modernity the constitution of sociocultural unity within
which all the elements of daily life and of thought would take their places as
in an organic whole? Or does the passage that has to be charted between
heterogeneous language games - those of cognition, of ethics, of politics - belong
to a different order from that? And if so, would it be capable of effecting a real
synthesis between them? [ . . . ]

Realism

The demands I began by citing are not all equivalent. They can even be
contradictory. Some are made in the name of postmodernism, others in order
to combat it. It is not necessarily the same thing to formulate a demand for
some referent (and objective reality), for some sense (and credible transcend-
ence), for an addressee (and audience), or an addressor (and subjective expres-
siveness) or for some communicational consensus (and a general code of
exchanges, such as the genre of historical discourse). But in the diverse
invitations to suspend artistic experimentation, there is an identical call for
order, a desire for unity, for identity, for security, or popularity (in the sense
of Offentlichkeit, of 'finding a public'). Artists and writers must be brought back
into the bosom of the community, or at least, if the latter is considered to be
ill, they must be assigned the task of healing it.

There is an irrefutable sign of this common disposition: it is that for all those
writers nothing is more urgent than to liquidate the heritage of the avant-gardes

[...]

* * *

As for the artists and writers who question the rules of plastic and narrative
arts and possibly share their suspicions by circulating their work, they are
destined to have little credibility in the eyes of those concerned with 'reality'
and 'identity'; they have no guarantee of an audience. Thus it is possible to
ascribe the dialectics of the avant-gardes to the challenge posed by the realisms
of industry and mass communication to painting and the narrative arts. Du-
champ's 'ready made' does nothing but actively and parodistically signify this
constant process of dispossession of the craft of painting or even of being an
artist. As Thierry de Duve penetratingly observes, the modern aesthetic question
is not 'What is beautiful?' but 'What can be said to be art (and literature)?'

Realism, whose only definition is that it intends to avoid the question of
reality implicated in that of art, always stands somewhere between academicism
and kitsch. When power assumes the name of a party, realism and its neoclassical
complement triumph over the experimental avant-garde by slandering and
banning it - that is, provided the 'correct' images, the 'correct' narratives, the
'correct' forms which the party requests, selects, and propagates can find a
public to desire them as the appropriate remedy for the anxiety and depression
that public experiences. The demand for reality - that is, for unity, simplicity,



VIIIa The Condition of History 1011

communicability, etc. - did not have the same intensity nor the same continuity
in German society between the two world wars and in Russian society after the
Revolution: this provides a basis for a distinction between Nazi and Stalinist
realism.

What is clear, however, is that when it is launched by the political apparatus,
the attack on artistic experimentation is specifically reactionary: aesthetic judg-
ment would only be required to decide whether such or such work is in
conformity with the established rules of the beautiful. Instead of the work of
art having to investigate what makes it an art object and whether it will be able
to find an audience, political academicism possesses and imposes a priori criteria
of the beautiful, which designate some works and a public at a stroke and
forever. The use of categories in aesthetic judgment would thus be of the same
nature as in cognitive judgment. To speak like Kant, both would be determining
judgments: the expression is 'well formed' first in the understanding, then the
only cases retained in experience are those which can be subsumed under this
expression.

When power is that of capital and not that of a party, the 'transavantgardist'
or 'postmodern' (in Jencks's sense) solution proves to be better adapted than
the antimodern solution. Eclecticism is the degree zero of contemporary general
culture: one listens to reggae, watches a western, eats McDonald's food for
lunch and local cuisine for dinner, wears Paris perfume in Tokyo and 'retro'
clothes in Hong Kong; knowledge is a matter for TV games. It is easy to find
a public for eclectic works. By becoming kitsch, art panders to the confusion
which reigns in the 'taste' of the patrons. Artists, gallery owners, critics, and
public wallow together in the 'anything goes,' and the epoch is one of slackening.
But this realism of the 'anything goes' is in fact that of money; in the absence
of aesthetic criteria, it remains possible and useful to assess the value of works
of art according to the profits they yield. Such realism accommodates all
tendencies, just as capital accommodates all 'needs,' providing that the tenden-
cies and needs have purchasing power. As for taste, there is no need to be
delicate when one speculates or entertains oneself.

Artistic and literary research is doubly threatened, once by the 'cultural policy'
and once by the art and book market. What is advised, sometimes through one
channel, sometimes through the other, is to offer works which, first, are relative
to subjects which exist in the eyes of the public they address, and second, works
so made ('well made') that the public will recognize what they are about, will
understand what is signified, will be able to give or refuse its approval knowingly,
and if possible, even to derive from such work a certain amount of comfort.

The interpretation which has just been given of the contact between the
industrial and mechanical arts, and literature and the fine arts is correct in its
outline, but it remains narrowly sociologizing and historicizing - in other words,
one-sided. Stepping over Benjamin's and Adorno's reticences, it must be recalled
that science and industry are no more free of the suspicion which concerns
reality than are art and writing. To believe otherwise would be to entertain
an excessively humanistic notion of the mephistophelian functionalism of scien-
ces and technologies. There is no denying the dominant existence today of



1012 Ideas of the Postmodern

techno-science, that is, the massive subordination of cognitive statements to the
finality of the best possible performance, which is the technological criterion.
But the mechanical and the industrial, especially when they enter fields tradi-
tionally reserved for artists, are carrying with them much more than power
effects. The objects and the thoughts which originate in scientific knowledge
and the capitalist economy convey with them one of the rules which supports
their possibility: the rule that there is no reality unless testified by a consensus
between partners over a certain knowledge and certain commitments.

This rule is of no little consequence. It is the imprint left on the politics of
the scientist and the trustee of capital by a kind of flight of reality out of the
metaphysical, religious, and political certainties that the mind believed it held.
This withdrawal is absolutely necessary to the emergence of science and
capitalism. No industry is possible without a suspicion of the Aristotelian theory
of motion, no industry without a refutation of corporatism, of mercantilism, and
of physiocracy. Modernity, in whatever age it appears, cannot exist without a
shattering of belief and without discovery of the 'lack of reality' of reality,
together with the invention of other realities.

What does this iack of reality' signify if one tries to free it from a narrowly
historicized interpretation? The phrase is of course akin to what Nietzsche calls
nihilism. But I see a much earlier modulation of Nietzschean perspectivism in
the Kantian theme of the sublime. I think in particular that it is in the aesthetic
of the sublime that modern art (including literature) finds its impetus and the
logic of avant-gardes finds its axioms.

The sublime sentiment, which is also the sentiment of the sublime, is,
according to Kant, a strong and equivocal emotion: it carries with it both
pleasure and pain. Better still, in it pleasure derives from pain. Within the
tradition of the subject, which comes from Augustine and Descartes and which
Kant does not radically challenge, this contradiction, which some would call
neurosis or masochism, develops as a conflict between the faculties of a subject,
the faculty to conceive of something and the faculty to 'present' something.
Knowledge exists if, first, the statement is intelligible, and second, if 'cases' can
be derived from the experience which 'corresponds' to it. Beauty exists if a
certain 'case' (the work of art), given first by the sensibility without any
conceptual determination, the sentiment of pleasure independent of any interest
the work may elicit, appeals to the principle of a universal consensus (which
may never be attained).

Taste, therefore, testifies that between the capacity to conceive and the
capacity to present an object corresponding to the concept, an undetermined
agreement, without rules, giving rise to a judgment which Kant calls reflective,
may be experienced as pleasure. The sublime is a different sentiment. It takes
place, on the contrary, when the imagination fails to present an object which
might, if only in principle, come to match a concept. We have the Idea of the
world (the totality of what is), but we do not have the capacity to show an
example of it. We have the Idea of the simple (that which cannot be broken
down, decomposed), but we cannot illustrate it with a sensible object which
would be a 'case' of it. We can conceive the infinitely great, the infinitely



VIIIa The Condition of History 1013

powerful, but every presentation of an object destined to 'make visible' this
absolute greatness or power appears to us painfully inadequate. Those are Ideas
of which no presentation is possible. Therefore, they impart no knowledge about
reality (experience); they also prevent the free union of the faculties which gives
rise to the sentiment of the beautiful; and they prevent the formation and the
stabilization of taste. They can be said to be unpresentable.

I shall call modern the art which devotes its 'little technical expertise' (son
'petit technique'), as Diderot used to say, to present the fact that the unpresen-
table exists. To make visible that there is something which can be conceived
and which can neither be seen nor made visible: this is what is at stake in
modern painting. But how to make visible that there is something which cannot
be seen? Kant himself shows the way when he names 'formlessness, the absence
of form,' as a possible index to the unpresentable. He also says of the empty
'abstraction' which the imagination experiences when in search for a presentation
of the infinite (another unpresentable): this abstraction itself is like a presenta-
tion of the infinite, its 'negative presentation.' He cites the commandment,
'Thou shalt not make graven images' (Exodus), as the most sublime passage in
the Bible in that it forbids all presentation of the Absolute. Little needs to be
added to those observations to outline an aesthetic of sublime paintings. As
painting, it will of course 'present' something though negatively; it will therefore
avoid figuration or representation. It will be 'white' like one of Malevitch's
squares; it will enable us to see only by making it impossible to see; it will
please only by causing pain. One recognizes in those instructions the axioms of
avant-gardes in painting, inasmuch as they devote themselves to making an
allusion to the unpresentable by means of visible presentations. The systems in
the name of which, or with which, this task has been able to support or to
justify itself deserve the greatest attention; but they can originate only in the
vocation of the sublime in order to legitimize it, that is, to conceal it. They
remain inexplicable without the incommensurability of reality to concept which
is implied in the Kantian philosophy of the sublime.

It is not my intention to analyze here in detail the manner in which the
various avant-gardes have, so to speak, humbled and disqualified reality by
examining the pictorial techniques which are so many devices to make us believe
in it. Local tone, drawing, the mixing of colors, linear perspective, the nature
of the support and that of the instrument, the treatment, the display, the
museum: the avant-gardes are perpetually flushing out artifices of presentation
which make it possible to subordinate thought to the gaze and to turn it away
from the unpresentable. If Habermas, like Marcuse, understands this task of
derealization as an aspect of the (repressive) 'desublimation' which characterizes
the avant-garde, it is because he confuses the Kantian sublime with Freudian
sublimation, and because aesthetics has remained for him that of the beautiful.



The Postmodern

What, then, is the postmodern? What place does it or does it not occupy in
the vertiginous work of the questions hurled at the rules of image and narration?



1014 Ideas of the Postmodern

It is undoubtedly a part of the modern. All that has been received, if only
yesterday (modo, mode, Petronius used to say), must be suspected. What space
does Cezanne challenge? The Impressionists'. What object do Picasso and
Braque attack? Cezanne's. What presupposition does Duchamp break with in
1912? That which says one must make a painting, be it cubist. And Buren
questions that other presupposition which he believes had survived untouched
by the work of Duchamp: the place of presentation of the work. In an amazing
acceleration, the generations precipitate themselves. A work can become modern
only if it is first postmodern. Postmodernism thus understood is not modernism
at its end but in the nascent state, and this state is constant.

Yet I would like not to remain with this slightly mechanistic meaning of the
word. If it is true that modernity takes place in the withdrawal of the real and
according to the sublime relation between the presentable and the conceivable,
it is possible, within this relation, to distinguish two modes (to use the musician's
language). The emphasis can be placed on the powerlessness of the faculty of
presentation, on the nostalgia for presence felt by the human subject, on the
obscure and futile will which inhabits him in spite of everything. The emphasis
can be placed, rather, on the power of the faculty to conceive, on its 'inhumanity'
so to speak (it was the quality Apollinaire demanded of modern artists), since
it is not the business of our understanding whether or not human sensibility or
imagination can match what it conceives. The emphasis can also be placed on
the increase of being and the jubilation which result from the invention of new
rules of the game, be it pictorial, artistic, or any other. What I have in mind
will become clear if we dispose very schematically a few names on the chessboard
of the history of avant-gardes: on the side of melancholia, the German Expres-
sionists, and on the side of novatw, Braque and Picasso, on the former Malevitch
and on the latter Lissitsky, on the one Chirico and on the other Duchamp. The
nuance which distinguishes these two modes may be infinitesimal; they often
coexist in the same piece, are almost indistinguishable; and yet they testify to
a difference (un differend) on which the fate of thought depends and will depend
for a long time, between regret and assay.

Here, then, lies the difference: modern aesthetics is an aesthetic of the
sublime, though a nostalgic one. It allows the unpresentable to be put forward
only as the missing contents; but the form, because of its recognizable consist-
ency, continues to offer to the reader or viewer matter for solace and pleasure.
Yet these sentiments do not constitute the real sublime sentiment, which is in
an intrinsic combination of pleasure and pain: the pleasure that reason should
exceed all presentation, the pain that imagination or sensibility should not be
equal to the concept.

The postmodern would be that which, in the modern, puts forward the
unpresentable in presentation itself; that which denies itself the solace of good
forms, the consensus of a taste which would make it possible to share collectively
the nostalgia for the unattainable; that which searches for new presentations,
not in order to enjoy them but in order to impart a stronger sense of the
unpresentable. A postmodern artist or writer is in the position of a philosopher:



VIIIa The Condition of History 1015

the text he writes, the work he produces are not in principle governed by
preestablished rules, and they cannot be judged according to a determining
judgment, by applying familiar categories to the text or to the work. Those
rules and categories are what the work of art itself is looking for. The artist
and the writer, then, are working without rules in order to formulate the rules
of what will have been done. Hence the fact that work and text have the characters
of an event; hence also, they always come too late for their author, or, what
amounts to the same thing, their being put into work, their realization (mise en
oeuvre) always begin too soon. Post modern would have to be understood
according to the paradox of the future (post) anterior (modo).

It seems to me that the essay (Montaigne) is postmodern, while the fragment
(The Athenaeum) is modern.

Finally, it must be clear that it is our business not to supply reality but to
invent allusions to the conceivable which cannot be presented. And it is not to
be expected that this task will effect the last reconciliation between language
games (which, under the name of faculties, Kant knew to be separated by a
chasm), and that only the transcendental illusion (that of Hegel) can hope to
totalize them into a real unity. But Kant also knew that the price to pay for
such an illusion is terror. The nineteenth and twentieth centuries have given
us as much terror as we can take. We have paid a high enough price for the
nostalgia of the whole and the one, for the reconciliation of the concept and
the sensible, of the transparent and the communicable experience. Under the
general demand for slackening and for appeasement, we can hear the mutterings
of the desire for a return of terror, for the realization of the fantasy to seize
reality. The answer is: Let us wage a war on totality; let us be witnesses to
the unpresentable; let us activate the differences and save the honor of the
name.



5 Julia Kristeva (b. 1941) Towers of Horror'

The gradual shift in the emphasis of Kristeva's work - from linguistics to psychoanalysis
- is consistent with a conclusion reached by many intellectuals during the 1970s, and
particularly by those espousing forms of feminism: that it is the psychoanalyst's couch
and not the class struggle that is now the true site of iiberation. Kristeva's work is
exceptional in its literary power. Her critique of scientific and rationalistic accounts of
language is given practical effect through the actual poetic eloquence of her writing.
Like both Bell and Lyotard, Kristeva addresses a condition of loss of faith in unified
rational or religious systems, though unlike them she sees the individual subject's sense
of abjection as the basic condition which these systems serve to mask. Originally
published as the eponymously titled Chapter 1 1 of Kristeva, Pouvoirs de I'horreur, Paris,
1980. Translated by Leon S. Roudiez as Powers of Horror; An Essay on Abjection, New
York, 1982. The present text is taken from pp. 207-10 of that edition.



Throughout a night without images but buffeted by black sounds; amidst a
throng of forsaken bodies beset with no longing but to last against all odds and



1016 Ideas of the Postmodern

for nothing, on a page where I plotted out the convolutions of those who, in
transference, presented me with the gift of their void - I have spelled out
abjection. Passing through the memories of a thousand years, a fiction without
scientific objective but attentive to religious imagination, it is within literature
that I finally saw it carrying, with its horror, its full power into effect.

On close inspection, all literature is probably a version of the apocalypse that
seems to me rooted, no matter what its socio-historical conditions might be, on
the fragile border (borderline cases) where identities (subject/object, etc.) do
not exist or only barely so - double, fuzzy, heterogeneous, animal, metamor-
phosed, altered, abject.

[. . .] I have sought ... to demonstrate on what mechanism of subjectivity
(which I believe to be universal) such horror, its meaning as well as its power,
is based. By suggesting that literature is its privileged signifier, I wish to point
out that, far from being a minor, marginal activity in our culture, as a general
consensus seems to have it, this kind of literature, or even literature as such,
represents the ultimate coding of our crises, of our most intimate and most
serious apocalypses. Hence its nocturnal power, 'the great darkness' (Angela of
Foligno). Hence its continual compromising: 'Literature and Evil' (Georges
Bataille). Hence also its being seen as taking the place of the sacred, which, to
the extent that it has left us without leaving us alone, calls forth the quacks
from all four corners of perversion. Because it occupies its place, because it
hence decks itself out in the sacred power of horror, literature may also involve
not an ultimate resistance to but an unveiling of the abject: an elaboration, a
discharge, and a hollowing out of abjection through the Crisis of the Word.

If 'something maternal' happens to bear upon the uncertainty that I call
abjection, it illuminates the literary scription of the essential struggle that a
writer (man or woman) has to engage in with what he calls demonic only to
call attention to it as the inseparable obverse of his very being, of the other
(sex) that torments and possesses him. Does one write under any other condition
than being possessed by abjection, in an indefinite catharsis? Leaving aside
adherents of a feminism that is jealous of conserving its power - the last of the
power-seeking ideologies - none will accuse of being a usurper the artist who,
even if he does not know it, is an undoer of narcissism and of all imaginary
identity as well, sexual included.

And yet, in these times of dreary crisis, what is the point of emphasizing the
horror of being?

Perhaps those that the path of analysis, or scription, or of a painful or ecstatic
ordeal has led to tear the veil of the communitarian mystery, on which love of
self and others is set up, only to catch a glimpse of the abyss of abjection with
which they are underlaid - they perhaps might be able to read this book as
something other than an intellectual exercise. For abjection, when all is said
and done, is the other facet of religious, moral, and ideological codes on which
rest the sleep of individuals and the breathing spells of societies. Such codes
are abjection's purification and repression. But the return of their repressed
makes up our 'apocalypse,' and that is why we cannot escape the dramatic
convulsions of religious crises.



VIIIa The Condition of History 1017

In the end, our only difference is our unwillingness to have a face-to-face
confrontation with the abject. Who would want to be a prophet? For we have
lost faith in One Master Signifier. We prefer to foresee or seduce; to plan ahead,
promise a recovery, or esthetize; to provide social security or make art not too
far removed from the level of the media.

In short, who, I ask you, would agree to call himself abject, subject of or
subject to abjection?

Nothing preordains the psychoanalyst to take the place of the mystic. Psy-
choanalytic establishments seem even less suited to this, so much does their
intrinsic perversion consign them to mummifying transference in the production
of mini-paranoids if not merely stereotyped besotments. And yet, it would
perhaps be possible for an analyst (if he could manage to stay in the only place
that is his, the void, that is, the unthinkable of metaphysics) to begin hearing,
actually to listen to himself build up a discourse around the braided horror and
fascination that bespeaks the incompleteness of the speaking being but, because
it is heard as a narcissistic crisis on the outskirts of the feminine, shows up
with a comic gleam the religious and political pretensions that attempt to give
meaning to the human adventure. For, facing abjection, meaning has only a
scored, rejected, ab-jected meaning - a comical one. 'Divine,' 'human,' or 'for
some other time,' the comedy or the enchantment can be realized, on the whole,
only by reckoning with the impossible for later or never, but set and maintained
right here.

Fastened to meaning like Raymond Roussel's parrot to its chain, the analyst,
since he interprets, is probably among the rare contemporary witnesses to our
dancing on a volcano. If he draws perverse jouissance from it, fine; provided
that, in his or her capacity as a man or woman without qualities, he allow the
most deeply buried logic of our anguish and hatred to burst out. Would he
then be capable of X-raying horror without making capital out of its power? Of
displaying the abject without confusing himself for it?

Probably not. Because of knowing it, however, with a knowledge undermined
by forgetfulness and laughter, an abject knowledge, he is, she is preparing to
go through the first great demystification of Power (religious, moral, political,
and verbal) that mankind has ever witnessed; and it is necessarily taking place
within that fulfillment of religion as sacred horror, which is Judeo-Christian
monotheism. In the meantime, let others continue their long march toward idols
and truths of all kinds, buttressed with the necessarily righteous faith for wars
to come, wars that will necessarily be holy.

Is it the quiet shore of contemplation that I set aside for myself, as I lay
bare, under the cunning, orderly surface of civilizations, the nurturing horror
that they attend to pushing aside by purifying, systematizing, and thinking; the
horror that they seize on in order to build themselves up and function? I rather
conceive it as a work of disappointment, of frustration, and hollowing - probably
the only counterweight to abjection. While everything else - its archeology and
its exhaustion - is only literature: the sublime point at which the abject collapses
in a burst of beauty that overwhelms us - and 'that cancels our existence'
(Celine).



1018 Ideas of the Postmodern

6 Art & Language (Michael Baldwin b. 1945, Mel
Ramsden b. 1944, Charles Harrison b. 1942) 'Art
& Language Paints a Picture'

The reference in the title is to a series originally published in Art News during the 1950s
and 1960s: 'X (or Y, etc.) paints a picture'. The text concerns paintings made by Baldwin
and Ramsden in the series index: The Studio at 3 Wesiey Piace in 1982 and early 1983.
The first two pictures in this series were painted by mouth, the third was given the title
The Studio , . . in the Dark, the fourth was destroyed after its first exhibition. Art &
Language is a collaborative practice. The text both represents and fictionalizes the
conversation of the studio, which addresses the problem of working with the kinds of
fragmentary 'postmodern' materials proposed by Lyotard. The titles Burial at Ornans,
Donnez Votre Travail and Lenin at the Rostrum refer to further works by Art & Language,
the first two represented in the Studio paintings, the third destroyed. Erased de Kooning
is a work of 1953 by Robert Rauschenberg (see VIId7). First published as 'Art &
Language Paints a Picture (a Fragment)' in Gewad informatief, Ghent, March 1983, to
accompany an exhibition of Studios . . . WV; reprinted in Art & Language, Ikon Gallery,
Birmingham, 1983, pp. 48-61, from which the present text is taken.



Direction:

Art & Language paints a picture in a studio at 3 Wesley Place, Chacombe.
Chacombe is a village on the border of Oxfordshire and Northamptonshire,
England. The studio is small (approximately 6m x 3.55m) with a single window
facing south. It has a small washbasin in one corner. There is an impromptu
table near the door. A roll of paper rests across the entire width of the room.
It rests on an internal tube which is fixed to the top of the skirting board on
either side. There are drums of acrylic emulsion standing among the junk
underneath the table and packets of pigment are piled in a small recess cupboard.
Two artists, (1) and (2), are unwrapping a brown paper parcel containing white
cotton-duck canvas. A large pencil drawing is pinned to one long wall; a smaller
half-tone sketch is pinned to the other. The pencil drawing is divided into 6cm
squares with green ink.

1: 'A fresh canvas. What it is to start the day with a fresh canvas of almost

the best quality.'
2: I want to say, but it is by no means going far enough . . . , I want to enjoin,

'Do paintings addressed to the expression of emotion and do it reconstructably

- in the pattern of causality.' This might be the route to nothing. You might

say the paradigmatic route.
1: What would a Studio said to express, e.g. anger be like? And how would

this question be affected by our 'presence' or 'absence' as figures in the

picture?
2: If we were excluded, how? That we are in the dark does not mean we are

not there. There are other questions of lighting, of representational order and

so forth.



VIII a The Condition of History 1019

1: The possibility of spiritual penitence doesn't seem to be a possibility of
expression. Is this why we want to make expression claims? We can only hang
our heads in silence by not seeming to do that at all.

2: The Studio genre is hardly penitent. It goes to platitudes of autonomy.

1: We make a hiatus of these.

2: 'But it is our hiatus.'

1: Does that mean it was made for us?

2: We talk of penitence or perhaps of revenge. We used to speak of 'subver-
sion'. Revenge implies upholding the cause but also exacting retribution. It's
hot and nasty - you can have a career in superstructural subversion. We are
taking the work out of that virtuoso debate and into . . . what?

We adopt various personae. We are artists acting 'artist'. The works,
paintings we produce are like masks which are invitations to look behind
them, where meaning and signification is perpetually fugitive. If you talk of
fugitive significance . . .

1: Eh?

2: ... you could perhaps talk of a kind of criminality. A criminal goes in for
various kinds of fugitive activities - robs, murders, embezzles, etc. A criminal
doesn't usually make a display of his criminal activities. Unless you go in for
a kind of fashionable terrorism, which is a kind of revenge I suppose, flaunting
criminality rather than concealing it.

Direction:

(1) and (2) unfold the canvas and attach one short edge to the paper roll with
white tape. They then roll the canvas around the paper until what remains
unrolled lays flat and covers most of the floor.

1: 'The freshness of fresh cotton duck.'

2: 'Such prospects of our own incompetence.'

1: To keep one's 'head hung' is the problem.

2: What is 'hanging one's head' in what Christian Schlatter calls 'occidental

culture'?
1: It can hardly amount to 'being depressed'.
2: It might be 'seeming depressed'.
1: Is it perhaps making your work in a circumstance of some more or less

adequate 'genetic' knowledge? And to make nothing, nothing 'aesthetic', of this?
2: This seems just like 'refusing'.
1: What I'm trying to grope for is the idea that our work is made of antecedent

aesthetic materials and other genetic conditions. It presents these materials,

these genres, these finesses, these symbols 'without resolution' in a rather

special way: as hiatus. This is a penitence in our emotivist aesthetic culture.

You cannot be penitent sub specie aeterni.
2: So there is some sort of contingency.
1: The work must be open to investigation. Reconstructable, adequately retro-

dictable. And this goes to a morality of moral strenuousness.



1020 Ideas of the Postmodern

Direction:

(1) and (2) tack strips of wood to the long edges of the canvas with the aid of
a hardboard straight edge. The hardboard is then used as a square and strips
are tacked across the canvas so as to form a rectangle approximately 3.5m x 4m.

2: 'Perfection: the absorbent surface. I can hardly contain my desire, my need,

to mark it.'
1: The world of modern art has become a world of hysterical malingering.
2; We are producers of representations, not only in the sense that we are

involved genetically, with retrodiction to various cultural conditions, but we

also seem to be involved paranoically.
1: Demolition of the emotivist instrumentalities of the manager's culture entails

systematic demolition of the agent of demolition.
2: Our culture is not so much a ruin as a few trivial remnants.
1: Our high culture, however, is a fraud.
2: But it is mostly out of this, out of art, Kant and emotivism that we make

our work.
1: There's more to it than that.
2: That's not important: its decadent fraudulence is not much in doubt. What

is required of us is that our desire to reproduce (in whatever apparently

emergent form) the form of life which gives us our materials . . .
1: First-order materials . . .
2: ... be matched by our desire to refrain and hang our heads in shame. These

conditions of culture are not coercive.
1: We need a critique of the Baudelairian flaneur.

Direction:

(1) and (2) begin to coat the canvas with a buff-coloured acrylic emulsion using
a roller. The paint is in a shallow grill pan.

1: 'The canvas will now have a skin. We are committed now r to 'painting',
rather than to drawing: committed to being anally expulsive.'

2: Modern art is hysterical. Yet there are no masks. Only managerial in-
strumentalities. We sit among the products of an almost entirely transparent
hysteria. Transparent, yet powerful enough to be instrumental, to produce
and sustain 'aesthetics' and art.

1: It may be that our concern with undisclosed causal conditions (and undis-
closed causal assumptions), our concern with (hysterical (etc.) ) closures, goes
to a sort of imprisonment. What we may need to know is not how to find
better explanations, but how to get out of (by requiring, making a necessity
of) the 'language' of causes altogether. How to get ourselves and others to
make do with nothing (or less) built upon an obsession with genealogy. By
this I am suggesting that to have nothing is better than to have cheek pouches.
I mean that a nothing necessitated by adequate genealogical inquiry is a sort






VIIIa The Condition of History 1021

of penitent liberty. Liberation from 'the pale Konigsbergian light' may seem
to be its extinction.

2: But its extinction materially implying its use?

1: Perhaps it is true that liberation from the misuse of Kant's illuminations is
tantamount to their extinction. It is our emotivist culture and our Weberian
sociology that has 'liberated' us from Kant. But that liberation has been an
inadmissible enslavement to aesthetics - to unreflective management - wearing
clean Kantian clothes. The main aesthetic categories are the vestiges of a dead
language whose meanings have been transformed into instrumentalities.

Direction:

(1) and (2) now draw the nails and remove the strips of wood. The paint dries.
Fresh canvas is pulled from the large roll as the painted stuff is rolled onto a
smaller paper tube. The canvas now has the appearance of a scroll. The fresh
canvas is tacked down and painted with primer.

1: 'Another ocean of beauty.'

2: But when it's painted it looks more expensive. Our last two paintings are

a conscious production of the appearance of sickness. They are not mistakes.

They are in the margin of lies. They are that margin of lies which goes to

half-realised acts of spiritual penitence, to images (or self-images) of silence

and head hanging.
1: The 'Studio' series began in one world and it will end, if it ends, in another.

Indeed, it is already in another.
2: Isn't it rather that it began at the margins of one world and it is now at the

margins of another? The series began in a world discursively connected with

contemporary art (or with various identifiable models of contemporary art).
1: Out of this world we selected symbols. These numbered among our explicit

materials.
2: The discursive connection was mediated by a sense of grotesque fraudulence,

of genealogical absurdity.
1: We are now in a world dislocated from this. Yet we must presuppose,

continue to make a necessary condition of, our genealogical critique which

goes in part to contemporary art.
2: And then make nothing of what emerges.
1: Recognize that what emerges will be next to nothing. The 'new' world is

pretty frail.
2: 'My talent is waiting to explode on the canvas.'

1: The Managerial barbarism of contemporary aesthetic discourse is no indi-
cation that things will always be like this.
2: No. But a possible future aesthetics will not necessarily be not to get nothing

out of the exposure of the rottenness of the previous position. This is possible

even if that exposure is intrinsic to the later one.
1: Our 'discursive' connection with contemporary art soi disant in its various

worlds and manifestations frequently acted to limit our didactic aims.



1022 Ideas of the Postmodern

2: Misrepresented them.

1: And worse. Independently perhaps of this discursive relation, we were

tending to imagine some emergence, some constructive significance in the

generation of 'second-order discourses', causal critique and so forth. And this

notwithstanding a dressing of 'hiatus' and 'hiatus for us\
2: We haven't examined the significance of or the mechanism of our hiatus

very fully. The possibility that we do 'mean' that which has had its meaning

cancelled by us, that which is genetically dependent upon a second-order (or

n-order) demolition of the mechanism of its meaning, is a very delicate thing

indeed.
1: However, we must not be satisfied with an emotivist aesthetic of hiatus.
2: 'The scherzos, the veritable fugues on themes of resurrection in our last

two paintings are undeniable.'
1: 'Could it be argued that their failure to signify is redeemed by their

hapticity?'
2: We do want to be popular with the bourgeoisie don't we? A kiss is a kiss.

The sensitive are sensitive. But reflect on a kiss that has been identified

antecedently as a contraction of herpes.
1: A Studio in the dark seems to deny the possibility of detail. And this is

the possibility of vividness perhaps.
2: This lack of vividness in respect of first-order representational detail" will

have to be recouped in some way.
1: In some other index of detail.
2: We are not painting by mouth.

1: And we are not claiming that this painting is painted by mouth.
2: We are not denying it though.
1: Its graphical form or, rather, our basic chart or drawing is produced by

mouth.
2: When we were painting Index . . . I and II we pondered the question, 'What

are the consequences of an asserted "painted by mouth" claim's not being in

fact true?'
1: The falsehood of such a claim goes to a gentlemanly (or arty) distance from

hiatus. The claim would be the claim of genealogical puppeteers.
2: We would have made masks never to wear them.
1: There are some Dali paintings that show visages in clouds. There are other

paintings of clouds without physiognomies. People 'saw' faces in them.
2: Of Index: The Studio at 3 Wesley Place III (in the Dark) we make no

'painted by mouth' claim. There is the possibility that some onlooker will

suffer the Dali effect, viz., 'reading' the painting as painted by mouth.
1: And that would be projecting the (slight or large) hiatus experienced in

respect of those Studio pictures of which painted by mouth is a significant

retrodiction.
2: 'Reading-in' and 'seeing-in': are these real hermeneutical mistakes? Is 'read-

ing-in' or 'seeing-in', in the sense of 'projection onto' or 'transference', the

'not yet' of a hermeneutical 'no longer' or the 'no longer' of a hermeneutical

'not vet'?



VIIIa The Condition of History 1023

Direction:

The priming continues.

1: This will be a tedious week.

2: 'Yet having primed this canvas we have signalled our intention to engage

with material.'
1: 'With a material tradition.'
2: 'Though less materialist than sculpture.'
CHILD: Hello Fatty and Skinny.

Direction:

The priming is complete. The last section to be pinned (the left-hand quarter
of the painting) is divided into 10cm squares in pencil. The line-drawing (by
mouth) is taken from the wall and two strips, corresponding to the left-hand
quarter of the painting, are cut off.

2: Some of our 'materials' are to be found in the possible world (or worlds)

or fragments or remainders hiding in or between the relations of hiatus. This

world (etc.) is very likely to be, among other things, a world of foolishness

and moral disquiet.
1: A very nothing-like possible world.
2: It may be indeed that our aims (even our quotidian aesthetic in some guise)

goes to what to do 'in' the nothing left behind by hiatus. The motes hovering

above the gap.
1: And the gap is made of real possibilities. The conditions of hiatus are, in

some sense, demonstrable.
Clement Greenberg's voice off: Braque's tack suggests deep space in a token

way and destroys the surface in a token way.
1: If we 'add' this possibility of hiatus to the other possibilities we get a

different sense of hiatus. A different cardinality. But a cardinality which does

not reflect the ordinality of 'one more hiatus'.
2: Imagine Index: The Studio at 3 Wesley Place IV (Illuminated by an Exploding

Car).
1: 'I wish we did drawings the same size as the painting. A cartoon is a German

professor's map.'
2: T wonder what James Lee Byars is doing now. I wonder what Cindy

Sherman, Jorg Immendorff, Terry Atkinson, Mrs. Braggins and the Green

Party are doing now.'
1: 'Tim Clark is constantly on the look-out for people wondering what other

people are doing.'
2: Someone might say that we have 'lost' the art world because today's fatuities

are worse than yesterday's. But that isn't the reason. Neither do I think the

real reason is that 'contemporary art' suddenly overburdened us with anger

and humiliation.



1024 Ideas of the Postmodern

1: Or by using various masks or simulacra we generate hiatus. In spite of
second (etc.)-order discourse, tiny shards of 'real 1 anger, real expression
seemed to remain. Catless grins?

2: Are you sure 'in spite of is correct? You could say that these 'fragments'
exist in virtue of second-order-ish critique; that they are a philosophically
possible population only after such a critique is accomplished.

1: Perhaps these shards are left behind by the masks and not by the hiatus.

2: The masks are connected to hiatus by necessity.

1: I do not think that these next-to-nothings emerged as a consequence of the
necessity that our causal critique remain incomplete. The fact that our
investigation of the mechanism of closure - of misrepresentation - merely
serves to dramatise the power of the aesthetic management is no indication
that that investigation is indecisive.

2: At the same time, I think that the next-to-nothings emerge from a redou-
bling of the sense of hiatus. This redoubling is born of an inkling that the
ground of 'our' second-order (etc.) discourse is vain.

1: 'Penitence' is a very technical term.

Direction:

(1) and (2) transcribe the drawing by mouth onto the canvas in pencil. One of
them works faster than the other. So as to have some work to do, he/she keeps
cutting strips off the section being transcribed by his/her colleague.

1: 'A blunt pencil is truly alienated. A short one is not.'

2: 'What's it like to have the sureness of touch of a Picasso in his sexual
prime?'

1: 'What's it like to have the intensity of several Goyas?'

2: A critique of causal-type analysis or, rather, a sense of its vanity does not,
however, lead us to blather about sensitive alternatives to the modern world.
These alternatives are the fullest dramatisations and the dullest reflections of
emotivism.

1: Operatic brutalism is one of the most powerful instruments of this manage-
rial co-option of aesthetics.

2: The confusion of taste with mechanism - or rather the inflation of taste to
the status of mechanism - is symptomatic of emotivism.

1: The shards remain possible as products of this mess.

Direction:

The transcription is complete. (1) and (2) are now looking at the right-hand
quarter of the canvas.

1: 'We should roll back. It is methodologically important, even a transcendental
necessity, even a Reich des Sollens to start in the top left-hand corner.'



VIIIa The Condition of History 1025



Direction:



They roll back in a manner reconstructable from descriptions above. Paint is
mixed; dry powder is mixed in a food processor with acrylic emulsion. The
pigments are lamp black, heavy french black, mars black, graphite powder,
oriental blue, oriental green, mars violet. There are other colours in tubes. The
food processor explodes. They continue to mix the paint by hand. (1) decants
some paint into baby-food jars (lamp black, mars black and a graphite lamp
black mixture). He starts painting at the far top left. (2) takes the larger container
and starts to work on his right. There is a reproduction of a Goya on the wall.
The half-tone drawing has been taken down and lies propped up in front and
between the two artists.

1: We make causal, genetic-type enquiries. We also try to make necessities of
these. But these enquiries are not some kind of 'no longer'.

2: The 'formula' is made too little of by Nietzsche's literary interpreters. It is
just a consumer's insight that art resides somewhere between the 'rationalistic'
'no longer' and the (what?) 'irrationalistic' 'not yet'. The contents of a 'not
yet' will always include a maximally closed form of a 'no longer', and the
contents of a 'no longer' will always be, in part, a 'not yet'.

1: Indeed, it could be argued that a 'no longer' is always a 'not yet' from some
point of view.

2: But that isn't interesting. What is interesting is the idea that they are
functionally connected, isomorphous. More interesting than that is the idea
that they are genetically and logically interdependent.

1: Anger in the mask of 'rationality'; 'rationality' in the mask of anger . . .

2: Marxism's failure to include itself in its 'no longer' is one of the conditions
of its emptiness.

1: We are not prepared to consider a work of art as independent 'of the
character of its creator'. And in this sense we are not prepared to consider
the aesthetic as independent of the moral.

2: To this extent we are little different from the shrill disimbricators of
power-sex ideology and other polytechnic-lecturer's themes.

1: Where we differ is the mechanism of our penitence.

2: They are 'not yetting' with their 'no longer', and yet misrepresenting this
as 'no longer' tout court.

1: They assume a managerial mode.

3: I've written a bit more lecture. Can you stand to hear it?

1, 2, 3: . . . The expressive range of Pollock's art rests on very limited resources.
In that sense it is both classical and pessimistic. As painting goes it is also
very easy to reconstruct technically. The substantial lesson of Pollock's art
lies not in its 'optical qualities', its 'reduction of pictorial depth', its 'freeing
of line from the functions of description and definition', its invocation of the
'cosmos of hope', or in any of the other available forms of valediction. It lies
rather in the requirement of assiduousness: in the demand that one recognise
how little is left to work with . . .



1026 Ideas of the Postmodern

1: We can make only the minimum assumption that we will succeed in
reproducing this drawing.

2: Let's hope it is a minimum. Enlarged as a painting, this thing goes to the
canons of clever and slightly paradoxical modernist painting.

1: The sort of stuff that only operates if you accept the Theoretical strictures
on its production. Bureaucratic modernism with iterated complexity ... one
idea and a lot of intra-canonical variations.

2: 'By contrast, I view the section of the painting upon which I'm working as
uncoerced, as a paysage of passion. 1

1: Unfortunately, I've just made an incompetent Augustus John.

3: Can you stand a bit more?

1, 2, 3: . . . The point I wish to make is that all those whose work I have been
discussing can be seen as attempting to cope - albeit in different ways - with
the consequences and implications of Abstract Expressionism. They were
determined by nothing so much as its negative implications, by the closing
off of possibilities and by the difficulty of confronting that requirement of
assiduousness for which Pollock's work stands as an example. The line of
development through the fifties and sixties is branching and incoherent, and
there are a plethora of dead ends and little failures. There are no clear lines
of succession. For example, Johns does not initiate Minimal Art. Rather Johns,
Stella, Judd and Morris each articulate in different ways - often unconsciously
- an intuition of the historical and cultural conditions which determined the
production of art from the mid-fifties until the 1970s. An identifying char-
acteristic of these conditions was that claims for psychological or metaphysical
content in art seemed not to be sustainable without bathos . . .

Direction:

(1) and (2) continue. They complete an apparent stage in the representation of
Burial at Ornans, Donnez Voire Travail, etc. About one quarter of the painting
has been covered in lamp black, graphite black and oriental blue.

2: The blue is hideous but necessary. We have to be able to navigate.'

1: 'It's vital we avoid volunteering. We must be committed to the possibility

that we make decisions and not to the illusion that our smouldering talent

will out.'
2: I think this depends on our working in describable stages. We are left to

do what we can almost not bear. We can't stop and make emotivistic choices.

It is these we must avoid systematically.
1: We are bound to make them anyway.
2: It seems partly to be a problem of keeping the sense of the describability

of a given stage or process.
1: It is no doubt true that the concepts of aesthetics may be understood as a

ragbag of fragmented survivals from an older past than our own. This can

be a dangerous insight: a chance for those deepest entrenched in emotivist

culture to (mis)represent themselves as having transcended it. The identifi-



VIIIa The Condition of History 1027

cation of deep-laid 'residues' and so forth in certain favoured art works is no
more than the echo of the critic's own (emotivist) voice.

Direction:

(1) and (2) survey what they have done.



This is so demoralizing, so incompetent.

This is a bad case of Robespierre.

Worse. This is materially incompetent, witless and humiliating.

What is it like? Is it worse than Lenin at the Rostrum}

Worse.

'Courage is not required.'

It's got to come off. This is a month's work. 'What crystalline rigour!'



Direction:

Starting from the top left-hand corner, (1) and (2) spread Nttromors, an
ethylene-chloride-based paint stripper, on the painting. They scrape it off,
exposing bare canvas,

1: An erased, incompetent Augustus John. Somehow it doesn't have the frisson
of Erased de Kooning.

Direction:

(1) and (2) redraw large areas of this section of the painting. The paint is mixed
to a watery consistency and the image is filled in in the manner of 'painting
by numbers'. The lightest areas are painted oriental blue. This colour is applied
casually so as to overlap contiguous grey and black areas. The black so covered
looks cooler and darker as a consequence; the greys approach black.

1: The paradigm is Guernica.

2: It was necessary to generate some arbitrary pattern. Otherwise we will return
to floundering with the 'geometric' boundaries of things. The sense in which
the thing is modern must not depend entirely on the obscurity of things. It
must 'mention' modernity not solely in virtue of a kind of optical exhaustion
in shadow. This must remain a possibility though.

1: 'I think the fundamental sense in which my enjoyment of the breast is to
be matched in my enjoyment of the painting, creating the painting, will
depend on this.'

Direction:

(1) and (2) scrape and strip a section for a second time.

1: 'It is outrageous that I've had to scrape off the witches'-sabbath-of-dooms-
day-aspect to replace it with the paltriness of consistency. Removing the traces
of my passion.'



1028 Ideas of the Postmodern

1, 2, 3: What grounds contemporary aesthetics is catastrophically empty. Our
emotivist culture is the final occidental act. It is the ground of a groundless
aesthetics. The aesthete's grounds are instrumental and managerial. The
power of the aesthetic manager hides his emptiness. Misrepresentation of the
mechanism of his aesthetics imposes necessity on that mechanism; the mech-
anism makes necessity of the misrepresentation.

Those who long for a non-decadent aesthetics, a non-decadent art, do their
longing in images of their arbitrary power. The longings are themselves
decadent. This gives us something to do. But we are bound to use these resources
as their products and to make nothing of them. Those resources of which we
do not, perhaps, make nothing are little better than nothing themselves. There
is no angst in this remark. Only a sense of necessity and scarcity.



7 Donald Judd (1928-1994) from ' ... not about

master-pieces but why there are so few of them'

During the early 1960s Judd wrote art criticism in a characteristically forthright style.
In the long essay from which the present extract is taken, he assumes the authority of
a now established artist to argue that there has been a decline in the quality of new
art. He attributes this decline to ignorance of historical conditions and of the values of
art, and argues the need for 'virtually a whole civilization, new knowledge and attitudes'
to oppose commerce. He also diagnoses a widespread confusion of the issue of quality
with the issues of democracy on the one hand and fashion on the other. Originally
published as 'A long discussion not about master-pieces but why there are so few of
them' in two parts in Art in America, New York, September 1984, pp. 9-19, and October
1984, pp. 9-15. The present extracts are taken from Part I.



'Everything is against them.''
Gertrude Stein

The quality of new art has been declining for fifteen years. There are some
probable reasons for this, but none which finally explain the fundamental fact
of why. There have been almost no first-rate artists in this time. Neither do
similar reasons explain why there were so many in the late '40s and early '50s
and the late '50s and early '60s. Despite all that's wrong in this society it's the
responsibility of the new artists to occur. The explanation that the times and
the society are bad is pointless. Probably they have always been and the issue
is whether too bad or a little better. The reason for doing nothing is always
wrong. There is also the responsibility of the older artists to uphold a high
quality. At present they do this in their work, but not otherwise . . .
The presence of good artists is exceedingly given by themselves; it's the
ultimate, obdurate fact. Reform may allow new artists but not necessarily. It
has been shown many times that more money or a greater audience guarantee
nothing. Wide or narrow, the condition in which art is made is much more



VIIIa The Condition of History 1029

important. There is a limit to the use of art and art doesn't tolerate frivolity
and abuse.

The most general reasons for the present difficulty of art and for recurrent
difficulties are pretty obvious, even trite, but considering the meager knowledge
that I plan to complain of they must be stated. One of the main attitudes of
the present is that the past is merely a toy store, so some history is necessary.
Later I want to emphasize that most of the past is inaccessible to us.

In the last 200 years or so the society has changed from a rural one to an
industrial one, and the economic leadership from the top of the one to the top
of the other. At the same time the population has grown unimaginably. The
majority of the society, as the descendants of peasants, brand new people who
remember little, has had to be educated. There were not enough educated people
to do this; the group was originally very small. As they taught their much more
numerous successors, the level couldn't be maintained, until finally only bare
information was taught, if science, and academic nonsense, if the arts. In Texas
I once went with a teacher to a lecture by a woman well-known there for having
taught 'creative writing 1 in high school for a lifetime. Her idea of creative was
not even rudimentary, for example, decorate the sentence and never simply say
'it's raining.' Two hundred younger teachers listened to her impoverished
schema, understanding, by their questions, even less. Presumably the next day
they went to work and taught 4000 students less than that. This is the
fundamental knowledge of the society. And some of those students will go on
to become rich businessmen, a few the trustees of museums and universities,
or politicians. So similarly there is always a lower rising wave curious about art
who remember less. And now even artists.

Education is the ultimate problem in the United States, and in Europe too,
although better there. It's the ultimate problem of civilization and everything
depends on it, certainly politics and the wars. The Europeans were ignorant
and foolish enough to almost destroy each other over matters already obsolescent,
and so damaged the world's only high civilization. This left the world to two
large and backward nations bent on being equally ignorant and foolish, and more
conclusive. The United States was not so great in the last century, but seems
to have been better then than now, with much discussion of purposes and some
sense of communality. Now the literature seems like that of another country.

Ever since Bernini no first-rate artist has worked for an institution. Religion
as an institution was no longer credible to serious artists. It's to the credit of
artists that for them dying institutions invalidate themselves earlier than for
others. Many artists continued to believe in a personal variant of Christianity,
but religion was no longer an advance in the understanding of humanity and
of nature. By now religion is just another superstition. Before Bernini religion
was the nature of the world and of man, and for the most part, despite
corruption and suppression, its morality and cosmology opposed commerce and
mundane power. For a century there has been no counterforce to power and
commerce, nothing to say that the existence of the individual and of the world,
their relationship, that between individuals, and activities which signify these,
such as art, are not a matter of business and are not to be bought and sold.



1030 Ideas of the Postmodern

Religion was good riddance but art, architecture and music no longer had an
institutional support. They could only make and sell and so live within the
context of commerce. As the distance increased from the standards of the church
and of the nobility, and with the increasing ignorance, there was less and less
restraint upon the businessmen, the final one being that it's after all necessary
to understand and maintain the value of the commodity. Today art is only a
cut above being an ordinary commodity and close to being manipulated as any
compliant commodity should be. [. . .]

At best there's nothing wrong with commerce. And it's hard to overrate the
importance of economics. Business is often straightforward, and as a source of
income for artists, if matter-of-fact, it's best. Demand is a reality. Business is
much preferable to patronage by the central government's bureaucrats or by the
often appalling nouveau riche and their kids, rotten before they are ripe, as
Diderot said of the Russians improved by Peter. But buying and selling and
even raising or making essentials is just that. It's a necessary basis for civiliza-
tion, even a part, but it's not civilization itself. There's no real way to glorify
business just as it's hard to glorify eating and sleeping. Business doesn't deserve
the power and prestige surrounding it. Business is only business.

Commerce is nearly the only activity in this society. Even the central
government is an aspect of commerce, by selling weapons, an outrageous and
despicable business. Virtually a whole civilization, new knowledge and attitudes,
must be built to oppose commerce. This counterforce has to be new, can't be
one or all of the ever more debased religions, which are too ignorant to be
ethical, political or even 'spiritual.' The opposition can't be an institution but
must be lots of diverse and educated people arguing and objecting. These people
must have real knowledge and judgment and they must have an influence upon
the less educated majority. Art of a high quality should be part of the opposition
to commerce but art is close to being forced underground by it, as architecture
has been recently, and music and dance throughout this century. And also too
much of science, although there is more opposition in science than elsewhere.
For a century there have usually been two versions of each art, one real, but
poor and underground, and one fake, although rich and conspicuous. The latter
ingests the former as needed. [. . .]

Art used to have issues, as Barnett Newman called them. For fifteen years
the issues have grown fewer and weaker. Now we're all supposed to be 'doing
our own thing.' Art will become the occasional gesture of the isolated person.
It's considered undemocratic to say that someone's work is more developed or
more broad in thought or more advanced, as complex as that term may be, than
someone else's. It's not nice to say that my work is better than yours. This
vapid attitude is part of the same throughout the society. The one small idea
in this attitude is that art should be democratic. But politics alone should be
democratic. Art is intrinsically a matter of quality. A commitment to democracy
in politics is included in the synthesis that is very good art. One ploy in the
ongoing destruction of democracy in politics is to pass democracy along to weak
groups and activities that are irrelevant to the politicians. If a serious chance



VIIIa The Condition of History 1031

for democracy arises in the central government everyone is horrified. [ . . . ]
Anyway, in art and elsewhere everyone is not equal and it's hypocrisy and
confusion to pretend so. Let the governments allow the citizens to be equal as
citizens in the places where they live. Quality of thought and effort, except in the
role of citizens, is not part of this. It should be rewarded, not denigrated. [ . . . ]

[ . . . ] The last general point is that few understand how past and over the past
is. But also that the present is presently the past, and all that's good that arrives
there should be conserved assiduously. The people most fond of symbols from
the past are also the ones most heedless of its reality. The guy in Tucson with
the Spanish-Colonial TV set is the one who bulldozed the adobe houses in the
old part of town. This tourist's view of the past devalues issues and reality in
the present. It fits that conservatives in the United States are not real conser-
vatives. (Liberals are not liberals, either.) It's necessary to life to understand
the past and preserve it; it's life to do something now. [ . . . ]

Obviously we understand much, and profoundly, in past art and architecture
but it is a delusion to believe that we understand everything. It's not possible
to understand everything about art and architecture even if it's done now. The
full meaning of what's seen fades quickly. The intrigue of an old style partially
supplants the relevance of the present but much is lost. In art and architecture
it's impossible to use forms from the past. They become symbols, and not
profound ones either, but on the order of the colonial TV set. Form is a wobbly
word to use because form and content is a false division derived from another
false division, thought and feeling. Certainly form and content, whatever, are
made of generalizations but also they are made of particulars, obdurate and
intimate. The particulars tend to escape later understanding. The only instance
in which the past is more than usually relevant to the present is when the
continuity is very strong, bringing the past to the present. This may be the
case in the language and literature of Iceland. It might be so in the architecture
of Italy. But few artists and architects now have any experience of even the
recent past. Despite differences, we - Europeans, European Colonials, Japanese
and some others - grow up in the middle-class industrial society, all with the
same government education. The poor are just poor and the rich only have
more expensive symbols.

The most recent situations in art and architecture depend on the exploitation
of history, done by some who are ignorant and naive for a corresponding
audience, but worse, done by some who are cynical. If something new is to look
important it has to look like something that has become important, which takes
time. The work of Matisse and Newman, of most good artists since Bernini,
cannot at first have looked important in this extrinsic sense. Instant importance
is a lot easier to make than real importance and far easier to sell. David
Rabinowitch said about this air of importance that it's the essence of academ-
icism.

The audience only remembers that the art resembling what they are looking
at is reproduced in all the books. They don't realize that the work in the books



1032 Ideas of the Postmodern

was new and original, and cannot be a type. They don't understand that the
type has been produced afterwards by a few second-rate artists and many
mediocre ones, the whole declining steadily to banality, pedantry and insincerity.
* * *

Much is made now of the catchword 'post-modern,' which includes more every
day. This term has been made by changing the meaning of the word 'modern'
from 'now,' which is all it ever meant, to a meaning as a style, which the word
cannot mean, since no style can include such diversity. Wright, van der Rohe
and Corbusier are thrown together and tossed off as being 'modern.' This
'modern' means only earlier and by now opprobriously established, and 'post-
modern' means modern. I've thought of an even better label, 'post-contempor-
ary.' 'Post-modern' is being used to obscure the issue of quality by claiming a
presentness and a popularity supposedly superior to that of acknowledged art
and architecture, no matter how good they are and in fact regardless of their
pertinence, democracy and acceptance so far. This is cant. It's hypocrisy to
seem to criticize the work of the recent past, especially by ascribing spurious
purposes and meanings to it, while indiscriminately mining the greater past. It's
setting up a straw man to supersede to identify 'modern' with the 'international
style,' a commercial simplification of van der Rohe's work, made by the same
architects, Johnson for one, who now say that the style is cold and repetitious,
as they made it, and that it must be replaced by another, hopefully diverse and
entertaining. The elaboration of the term 'post-modern' is not due to real change
but is due to naked fashion and the need to cover it with words. [ . . . ]



8 Joseph Beuys (1921-1986), Jannis Kounellis (b. 1936),
Anselm Kiefer (b. 1945), Enzo Cucchi (b. 1950) from
'The Cultural-Historical Tragedy of the European
Continent'

The present discussion marks a continuation of that strand in modern artistic theory
which has sought from its outset to relate radical art to radical politics, yet without sub-
suming art in politics. This project has taken different forms, but utopianism has been
one of its persistent characteristics, and another has been its tendency to stress
consciousness and feeling as prerequisites for material change (rather than material
change as a prerequisite for change of consciousness). The discussions took place in
1985 under the auspices of Parkett Verlag, Zurich, and were moderated by Jean
Christophe Ammann. An extract was published in Flash Art, 128, Milan, May/June 1986,
pp. 36-9, from which the present text is taken.



ANSELM KIEFER: For me there have always been people who are ignorant,
others who are less ignorant, and others still who are very intelligent.

JOSEPH BEUYS: This is a question of individuality, a matter of personal fate.
There will always be various levels of ability. But in the future all abilities
will be malleable, the level will be elevated.



!



VIIIa The Condition of History 1033

JANNIS KOUNELLIS: Yes, but a monument like the Cologne Cathedral indicates
a centralization, encompasses a culture, and points the way for future devel-
opment. Without signs like this we would run the risk of becoming nomads.

BEUYS: The Cologne Cathedral is a bad sculpture. It would make a good train
station. Chartres is better. But what Kounellis says about the cathedral is a
nice image. The old cathedrals were built in a world that was still round,
but that in the meantime has been constricted by materialism. There was an
internal necessity to narrow it like that, since in that way human consciousness
became sharpened, especially in its analytic functions. Now we have to carry
out a synthesis with all our powers, and build a new cathedral.

KIEFER: It makes me feel terribly uncomfortable if what Beuys means is that
humanity would change if we change a concept. There have always been
different kinds of people.

BEUYS: That goes without saying. It's a matter of raising the level in every
domain. We agree that throughout history it's enough to see how people
furnished their apartments. They've never lived so degradingly. [. . .] At the
same time, the way one lives is an important and elementary expression of
one's artistic sense. The esthetic sense is disturbed nowadays like never before
in history. So let's build the cathedral!

KOUNELLIS: Right. This excess of nomadism and of rejecting culture creates
an absurd situation.

KIEFER: The declining level is obvious. But last time we asked ourselves why
the innocent, primitive native, as soon as he gets a plastic bowl, throws away
his own.

BEUYS: They've become susceptible because nowadays the old tribal cultures
are no longer valid. [. . .] It would be better if these people could develop
themselves. But, of course, they are subjugated to capitalism and usually die
out because of it. You can see this quite well with the Basque problem. The
Basques are really the abandoned vestige of some nomadic people. There are
thousands of theories that they came from Asia and, perhaps as punishment
by some tribal chief, were left behind. Now they are there, trying time and
again to preserve their old tribal culture. But they haven't developed their
own literature, everything proceeds according to oral tradition. Now they are,
with good reason, making very specific demands.

JEAN-CHRISTOPHE AMMANN: Why do you mention the example of the Basques?

BEUYS: Because the context of the European Economic Community, within
which the Basques find themselves, corresponds to the machinations in the
system of the Western monetary economy. That is, the Spanish government
doesn't give the Basques any autonomy, and therefore a problem arises - like
in Northern Ireland. In Spain I proposed that the Basques should be given
full autonomy. The Spanish claim that the Basques would then degenerate
because they have no indigenous culture. But then I said that they did indeed
have their own culture, just by virtue of the fact that they wanted self-deter-
mination. It's even possible that these people, just like us at this table, work
out a concept for their own economy which could be paradigmatic for many
people. If the Basques were given self-determination, it would certainly be



1034 Ideas of the Postmodern

much different. That would provide a good opportunity to develop something
paradigmatic, which we could view like a work of art. We could then possibly
sit down together with them and develop something paradigmatic for the
whole world.

ENZO CUCCHI: The Basques 1 method is interesting because they use terrorism
but I don't know where terrorism leads us to.

BEUYS: Terrorism doesn't lead to a solution of the question. It leads us to a
totally boring, conservative social system.

CUCCHI: That's not what I meant. I just wonder which feelings are inherent
in terrorism nowadays, what form it takes. Both the Basques and the Northern
Irish use this code. [. . .]

KOUNELLIS: Within Europe there are many peoples who want to be inde-
pendent, for example, the Sicilians, the Sardinians, the Corsicans, and others.

BEUYS: That's very positive.

KOUNELLIS: Yes, but it's also very positive to speak about the Cologne
Cathedral. Not only those who want to separate are positive.

BEUYS: The Chartres Cathedral is positive when one sees that such attempts
at independence lead to another system, so that the Corsicans, the Sardinians,
the Basques, the Irish, and the Scottish can build a cathedral at all. I'm
convinced that the Basques are doing it right. I'm not so sure about the
Scottish. You really have to begin with a small group and introduce a different
principle into an easily receptive community. The idea of the cathedral means
a different understanding of culture, justice, spirit, economy and so forth. If
the Spanish would give the Basques autonomy, I'd go there immediately and
the Basques would say: 'We need nothing more desperately than such talks,
since everything has to be erected from new foundations. We don't want to
give everything a new basis, the basis of art.' They want the body of society
to be like a work of art. But terrorism hinders these attempts, since it provides
the larger countries and powers with new arguments to keep implementing
police force, to become a military state.

Capitalism is happy to have terrorism. It's artificially bred by capitalism.
[ . . . ] Regarding the broadened concept of art, I'm searching for the dumbest
person. And when I've found the dumbest person on the lowest possible level,
then I've surely found the most intelligent one, the one potentially most
endowed. And that person is the bearer of creativity. The so-called intelligence
that people jam into their heads like a knife only produces a superficial
view, and this intelligence must be destroyed. Dullness has to take a hand,
because all the other powers exist in it like a wild volition, a fantastic
sensitivity and perhaps an entirely different perception. Maybe they already
exist in heaven.

KIEFER: That's your personal idea, Beuys.

BEUYS: No. It goes beyond me as a person. My personal self is absolutely
uninteresting. I'm just trying to describe power relations in the world, which
are like they are today, and tomorrow must be different. And I'm trying to make
that clear with examples. [ . . . ] We're not here talking together to improve our
relationship, which is good anyway. We're here to build the cathedral.



VIII a The Condition of History 1035

KOUNELLIS: The construction of the cathedral is the construction of a visible
language.

BEUYS: That's an important detail. But today everything is possible, and so
the cathedral isn't materialized. We've agreed to build a cathedral and to
arrive at a really human culture. But we haven't agreed upon how the
cathedral should look, or from what material it'll be made.

KOUNELLIS: Beuys has suffered severely, more than all of us. That's a feeling
I have, because he's suspicious about openly discussing fundamental things.

BEUYS: Openness is, of course, a somewhat obsolete concept. Many people
think they are quite progressive and 'with it' if they speak about so-called
openness. But openness has to be precisely defined. Otherwise, openness
means nothing more than that everything is possible. However, I claim nearly
nothing is possible. In order to have access to every single point of view, you
really need an astute sense of perception. But if one wants to arrive at a
consensus, openness must take on a totally determined form, a condensation,
and that's the opposite image of openness. Openness is also a term used in
propaganda. We've been seduced by this word. People spoke of openness, of
a pluralistic society, in other words, and claimed that in the end everything
is possible: and they just didn't want any particular ways and principles, as
these require a precisely worked-out form.

KOUNELLIS: But we're individuals who don't let ourselves be influenced.

BEUYS: Openness should be human, related to the individual anthropologically;
open for what the other means.

KOUNELLIS: We're talking about an openness in the interior of Europe, where
cultures are very close despite differences.

BEUYS: Present-day culture is, however, really not determined by the Gothic
dome, but rather by a leading economic system that has shoved art out to
the periphery or into nonexistence. And when the whole system goes bankrupt
because the economic culture is on a wrong footing, then art will once again
have a good chance to construct an authentic culture in every way, rather
than a stifled formation. I simply refuse to accept that this microphone on
the table in front of us is not supposed to belong to culture.

KOUNELLIS: As long as the microphone is on the table like that, it can't
belong to culture. But when Beuys puts it on felt, then it becomes a part of
culture, because Beuys has the power to transform the microphone into
culture.

BEUYS: But the power only benefits me, it leads back to my individual actions
and not to the cathedral.

KOUNELLIS: No, it benefits us all and that also has something to do with the
cathedral. [. . .]

BEUYS: [. . .] Regarding art as the only way to build the cathedral, I really
do need the spoken language.

KIEFER: Before an artist has died, one can't completely tell what he meant
with his work in its entire spectrum.

BEUYS: But I can certainly say what I mean.

KIEFER: What you have said, however, is only a small part of the real range.



1036 Ideas of the Postmodern

BEUYS: It's just not true that the artist says something only after his death.
But perhaps it's true that a dead artist is better than a living one.



9 Gerhard Richter (b. 1932) from 'Interview with
Benjamin Buchloh'

Born in what became East Germany, Richter left for the West in 1961. He studied at
the Academy of Fine Art in Dusseldorf in the early 1960s. He first attracted attention
in the mid-1960s with blurred paintings based on photographs. These were followed
by pictures of cities and landscapes which combined painterliness with the appearance
of artificiality. Richter also made paintings in monochrome grey and others based on
colour charts. During the 1980s he produced a number of paintings in a bold, apparently
gestural style which were actually the results of careful contrivance. His work has
consistently raised complex questions about the nature of expression in art. Buchloh is a
critic and art historian of German extraction working in America, where he has been associ-
ated with the social-historical revision of modern art history. Like the text by Art & Language
(VIIIa6), this discussion takes place self-consciously under the conditions theorized by
Bell, Habermas, Lyotard and Kristeva. Originally conducted in 1986, and printed as Interview
with Gerhard Richter' by Benjamin H. D. Buchloh, with translation by Stephen Duffy, in Roald Nasgaard
and I. Michael Danoff, Gerhard Richter: Paintings, catalogue of an exhibition at the
Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago and the Art Gallery of Toronto, Ontario, publish-
ed London and New York, 1988, pp. 19-29, from which the present extracts are taken.

On Iconography and Photography

B: Your painting from photos in the early 1960s does have an antiartistic
quality; it denies the autographical, the creative, the original. So to a certain
degree you do follow Duchamp and Warhol. Moreover, your painting negates
the importance of content in that it presents motifs chosen at random.

R: The motifs were never random; I had to make much too much of an effort
for that, just to be able to find photos I could use. . . . Perhaps it was good
if it seemed as if everything had been accidental and random.

B: What were the criteria for the selection of photos in your iconography?

R: They very definitely were concerned with content. Perhaps I denied that
earlier, when I maintained that it had nothing to do with content, that for
me it was only a matter of painting a photo and demonstrating indifference.

B: And now some critics are trying to ascribe to you this significance of
iconographic content . . . Airplane stands for death; Pyramids and Accident
stand for death. It seems to me somewhat forced to construct a continuity of
the death motif in your painting.

R: And you think that there I was seeking motifs that were supposed to be
just a little bit shocking, while in reality they were completely indifferent for
me? [ . . . ] Perhaps it's just a little exaggerated to speak of a death thematic
there. But I do think that the pictures have something to do with death and
with pain.



VIIIa The Condition of History 1037

B: But this content is not the determining, the motivating power behind the
selection.

R: I'm not exactly sure about that; it's hard for me to reconstruct what my
motivation was then. I only know that there are reasons related to content
which explain why I selected a particular photo and why I particularly wanted
to represent this or that event.

B: In spite of the fact that content can no longer be communicated by
iconographic portrayal? There again you've got a contradiction. Even though
you knew r that a death thematic, for example, could not be communicated by
the mere portrayal, you nevertheless tried it, knowing perfectly well that it
was actually impossible.

R: Well, in the first place it's not impossible at all. A picture of a dead dog
shows a dead dog. It only becomes difficult when you want to communicate
something beyond that, when the content is too complicated to be depicted
with a simple portrayal. But that doesn't mean that representation can't
accomplish anything.

B: Were you aware of the criteria that you used in the selection? How did you
go about selecting photos?

R: I looked for photos that showed my actuality, that related to me. And I
selected black-and-white photos because I noticed that they depicted that
more forcefully than color photos, more directly, with less artistry, and
therefore more believably. That's also the reason why I preferred those
amateur family photos, those banal objects and snapshots.

B: And the pictures of the Alps and the City Pictures?

R: They came about when I no longer wanted to do the figurative photo
pictures and wanted something different; when I no longer wanted an obvious
statement or limited, discernible narrative. So these dead cities and Alps
attracted me, rubble heaps in both cases, mute stuff. It was an attempt to
communicate a more universal kind of content.

B: But if it had really been this kind of content that mattered to you, how do
you explain the fact that at the same time you were introducing nonfigurative
pictures in your work? Color Charts, for example, or other abstract pictures
which arose in parallel with the figurative ones. This simultaneity confused
most of your critics. They saw you as a painter who knew all the tricks and
the techniques, who was a master of all the iconographic conventions that he
was simultaneously depreciating. It's that which makes your work particularly
attractive to some observers just now. Your work looks as though it were
presenting the entire universe of twentieth-century painting in a giant, cynical
retrospective.

R: That is certainly a misunderstanding. I see there neither tricks, nor cynicism,
nor craftiness. On the contrary, it strikes me as almost amateurish to see how
directly I went at everything, to see how easy it is to discern all that I was
thinking and trying to do there. So I also don't know exactly what you mean
now by the contradiction between figurative and abstract painting.
B: Let me take as an example Table, one of your first pictures. Table contains
both elements: a completely abstract, gestural, self-reflexive quality, on the



1038 Ideas of the Postmodern

one hand, and, on the other, the representational function. And that is really
one of the great dilemmas in the twentieth century, this seeming conflict, or
antagonism, between painting's representational function and its self-reflexion.
These two positions are brought very close together indeed in your work.
But aren't they being brought together in order to show the inadequacy and
bankruptcy of both?

R: Bankruptcy, no; inadequacy, always.

B: Inadequate by what standard? The expressive function?

R: By the standard of what we demand from painting.

B: Can this demand be formulated?

R: Painting should be accomplishing more.

B: So you would dispute the charge that has so often been made against you,
that you have cynically acquiesced to the ineffectuality of painting?

R: Yes. Because I know for a fact that painting is not ineffectual. I would only
like it to accomplish more.

B: In other words the simultaneity of the opposing strategies of representational
function and self-reflexion has nothing to do with a reciprocal transcendence
of them? It's rather an attempt to realize this demand upon painting with
different means?

R: Yes, roughly.

B: So you saw yourself at the beginning of the 1960s not as the heir to a
historically divided and fragmented situation, in which there was no pictorial
strategy that still had real validity . . . ?

R: And I see myself as the heir to an enormous, great, rich culture of painting,
and of art in general, which we have lost, but which nevertheless obligates
us. In such a situation it's difficult not to want to restore that culture, or,
what would be just as bad, simply to give up, to degenerate.

B: That naturally brings you to the edge of a political discussion, which you
perhaps wouldn't care for. But how would you account for this loss, if not
politically, socially, or historically? The way you speak now, it sounds almost
like Theodor Adorno's famous statement, 'After Auschwitz lyrical poetry is
no longer possible.' Is that a position that would apply to you?

R: No. Lyrical poetry does exist, even after Auschwitz.

B: But when you say that one can no longer paint this way. . . .

R: ... then I meant first of all a particular quality which we have lost.

B: Because of what?

R: Well, photography is surely an external factor that has contributed to the
fact that we are now unable to paint in a particular manner and that we can
no longer produce a certain artistic quality.

B: It is also possible to express that in a simple historical way and argue that
pictures have lost their descriptive and representational function, among other
reasons because photography does it so perfectly. Hence this task is simply
no longer given. The high artistic quality of old pictures, which you mention,
is based historically and materially in part upon this descriptive and repre-
sentational function.



'\



VHIa The Condition of History 1039

R: But this quality cannot be explained by means of the representational
function alone. This perfection of execution, of composition, or whatever, we
would have lost it even without photography. Literature and music are bogged
down in the same misery. People love Mozart and Glenn Gould because that's
exactly what new composers are no longer able to offer. But music hasn't
been replaced by anything comparable to photography.

B: Well, if this loss has not been caused by the development of the new
technology for reproduction; or by the experience of hitherto unsuspected
historical catastrophes, as is maintained in Adorno's remark about Auschwitz;
or by the destruction of bourgeois culture; or by any political qualities -
you've rejected all of these, provisionally at least, as explanations . . . ?

R: No, they have all contributed, naturally. But I'm most inclined to see the
fundamental issue as the 'loss of the center.'

B: In Sedlmayr's sense? Surely you're not serious? [Hans Sedlmayr, Art in
Crisis: The Lost Centre, trans. Brian Battershaw, London, 1957.]

R: I am. Because with this term he said something really true. But he drew
false conclusions from it. He wanted to restore the lost center. ... I don't
want to restore it at all.

B: No, but you must still be able to describe it. It's still a historical process.

R: All right. But it's a matter of very definite, new, real facts that have changed
our consciousness and our society, have overturned religion, and have thereby
also changed the function of the State. There are only a few necessary
conventions that still exist, regulate things, keep things practical. Otherwise
everything is gone.

B: Is painting one of these conventions?

R: No. The criteria for painting are conventions, and they are harmful because
they are determined ideologically. They hinder enlightenment. That's why I
think so highly of psychoanalysis, because it removes prejudices and makes
us mature, independent, so that we can act more truly, more humanly, without
God, without ideology.

B: It's also what you would demand for painting?

R: Yes.

B: On the one hand, then, you see this process as irreversible and least of all
reconstructible by cultural means. . . .

R: ... that would only delay it. . . .

B: ... and political means seem to you at least problematic or dubious, or not
accessible.

R: Nothing can be expected from politics because politics operates more with
belief than with enlightenment.

B: Then you see the role of art as more important than merely liquidating a
false bourgeois cultural inheritance? Although it is true to say that that is
one of its functions, is it not?

R: To liquidate? Yes, that too.

B: But at the same time it has another function, and that's what leads to the
contradiction. What is the other function, if it's not a political one?

R: Above all, it doesn't just destroy, it produces something, another picture.






1040 Ideas of the Postmodern

B: Of autonomy?

R: Yes.

B: How is the painted picture supposed to provide an example of this autonomy
today?

R: A picture is one important possibility, among others, which one can use. In
the worst possible case, it's only an offer to those who are interested in it.

B: But with respect to the demand to liquidate the bourgeois heritage and at
the same time to construct a new autonomy, isn't the limitation to the praxis
of painting, which you have imposed on yourself, a handicap? Shouldn't one
assume that there are other, more radical means that would further hasten the
liquidation process and contribute more directly to the emancipation process?

R: No, in this respect I'm extremely conservative. That seems to me like saying
that language is no longer useful because it's a bourgeois inheritance, or that
now we should print texts on cups or chair legs instead of in books. I'm still
bourgeois enough to eat with a knife and fork, and to paint with oil on canvas.

B: So all attempts to use aesthetic means to accelerate one side of this dialectic
seem to be unacceptable to you. Would you then also criticize Duchamp
retrospectively, since he gave up painting for exactly this reason?

R: I'm not sure that those were the reasons. In any case, you can never derive
from them the obligation to give up painting. It's lamentable to understand
Duchamp in this way and instead to engage in politics and criticism.

B: Lamentable in what way? With respect to the liquidation of bourgeois
culture or to its emancipatory potential?

R: Because it doesn't accomplish anything. It's neither artistic activity nor
political activity, it's dilettantism.

B: Let's try to make that concrete. Would you see it as a condition of your
current painting to find your way further along in the dilemma which you
have seen yourself facing from the beginning - that is, on the one hand, to
play out the real conditions of mass culture, which you see represented for
example in photos, and, on the other, to oppose this to the esoteric and elitist
conditions of the high culture which you are a part of as an artist? In this
sense you're working out of this dialectic and exposing yourself constantly to
this contradiction; and there is practically no solution which you can accept.
Is that still a condition? Or is that a condition that was valid only for the
1960s?

R: Neither then nor now can I see these conditions in this way.

B: But the Cezanne quotation speaks directly to this. When you say, 'For me
some photos are better than the best Cezanne,' that seems to me to express
precisely this contradiction.

R: Yes, but that doesn't mean that I could immediately change something
through painting. And it certainly doesn't mean that I could do so without
painting.

B: Why have you so expressly denied the real political demand in your own
art?

R: Because politics just isn't for me. Because art has an entirely different
function. Because I can only paint. Call it conservative if you want.



VHIa The Condition of History 1041

B: But perhaps precisely in the limitation to the medium of painting there is
not only a conservative position, but also a critical dimension, one that calls
into question the claim to political immediacy in the work of someone like
Beuys, for example.

R: Naturally I would want to see in my limitation to painting a critical stance
toward much that displeases me, and which concerns not only painting.

B: So you don't despair fundamentally of the validity of the demand that art
should realize a political critique?

R: Apparently. But the decisive thing is that I have to begin from my
possibilities, from the conditions that constitute my basis, my potential.

B: Which you would claim are unchangeable?

R: Largely unchangeable.

On the Monochrome Gray Paintings and Abstract
Paintings

B: The claim for pictorial meaning still exists. Then even your Abstract
Paintings should convey a content?

R: Yes.

B: They're not the negation of content, not simply the facticity of painting,
not an ironic paraphrase of contemporary expressionism?

R: No.

B: Not a perversion of gestural abstraction? Not ironic?

R: Never! What sorts of things are you asking? How is it that my pictures are
supposed to be without content? What content is it that the Abstract
Expressionists are supposed to have in contrast to me? [ . . . ] the only
difference is that different means are used to produce a different effect.

B: Not so. Because . . . ordered relationships just don't exist anymore, neither
in the color system nor in the compositional system.

R: I can't see it that way; I can't see that there's no longer any composition
or chromatic relationships. When I put one color form next to another, then
it automatically relates to the other.

B: Yes, but these are different forms structured in different ways, and according
to different laws of relationship, up to the point of recognition that even
absolute negation is a composition. But everything in your Abstract Paintings
aims to transcending traditional, relational orders, because an infinite variety
of structurally heterogeneous elements is visible as a possibility.

R: Yes, but I still have somehow to bring everything into the right relation.
A relation that becomes more and more difficult the further a picture has
progressed. At the beginning everything is still easy and indefinite, but
gradually relations emerge that register as appropriate ones: that's the opposite
of randomness.

B: Certainly. But that amounts to a different kind of perception, and thus to
a different form, possibly precisely the opposite of traditional compositional
and chromatic relations.



1042 Ideas of the Postmodern

R: Perhaps. In any case, my method or my expectation which, so to speak,
drives me to painting, is opposition.

B: What is it that you expect?

R: Just that something will emerge that is unknown to me, which I could not
plan, which is better, cleverer, than I am, something which is also more
universal. In fact, I've already tried that in a more direct way with the 1000
or 4000 Colors, in the expectation that a picture would emerge there.

B: What kind of picture?

R: One that represents our situation more accurately, more truthfully; that has
something anticipatory; something also that can be understood as a proposal,
yet more than that; not didactic, not logical, but very free, and effortless in
its appearance, despite all the complexity.

B: Your pictures do have all these qualities in the best cases. They seem
effortless, yet painted with verve, with indifference and virtuosity at the same
time. But to come back again to the question of content, if a picture is made
with an obvious emphasis on the way it was produced, how is it possible for
you to say that a smeared surface or one treated mechanically with the palette
knife doesn't represent pure process or pure materiality? If these qualities
weren't important for you, then you wouldn't apply the color that way. To
do so is to take away from the picture's color, composition, and structure
every possibility of producing transcendental meaning, beyond the pure
materiality of the picture as a picture. I believe that you have introduced a
kind of painting that is process-referential as one of its many possibilites, but
. . . you no longer insist on it as the only aspect. Rather, it's one characteristic
among others.

R: Then why do I trouble to make it so complicated?

B: Perhaps because it's important for you to recite all the aspects, like a
catalogue; because what really interests you is a rhetoric of painting, and a
simultaneous analysis of it.

R: If it were only a demonstration of material, how the jagged yellow surface
arises there against the blue-green background, then how is it possible to
generate a narrative or to evoke moods?

B: Mood? You think that your painting really evokes emotional experience?

R: Yes, and aesthetic pleasure as well.

B: That's a different matter. I see aesthetic pleasure too. But mood, not at all.

R: What is mood then?

B: Mood has an explicit emotional, spiritual, psychological quality

R: That's just what's there.

B: Only in the weakest parts, fortunately.

R: You don't really believe that just the dumb showing of brush strokes, of
the rhetoric of painting and its elements, could accomplish something, say
something, express some kind of yearning?

B: Yearning for what?

R: For lost qualities, for a better world; for the opposite of misery and
hopelessness.

B: The yearning to be able to adhere to the notion of culture as a contemplative



VIIIa The Condition of History 1043

spectacle and maintain credibility at the same time?
R: I could also say salvation. Or hope. The hope that I can still accomplish

something with painting.
B: But that's again so general: accomplish in what respect? Cognitively, emo-
tionally, psychologically, politically?
R: All at once - how do I know?
B: If you're going to maintain that, that art can have this function - other

artists would deny it entirely - then it's all the more paradoxical that you

insist at the same time that you can do so only through the means of painting.

Put differently: do you think that this discrepancy becomes concrete in your

pictures?
R: Yes, possibly.
B: Do you think that in the end these pictures are conservative, conservative

in the sense in which Marcel Broodthaers' art appears to be conservative?
R: In terms of the means, oil on canvas, even more conservative. I always

thought highly of Broodthaers because I knew him personally. But the pictures

themselves I never really understood. In terms of my intentions, I'm certainly

not conservative. And I know that painting per se does not have to be

conservative. That's why I can go on in the same way, only trying to do

better, if possible.
B: The question is how far one can push this contradiction. How long can one

keep this dialectic alive before it turns into an empty pose? How long can

one go on asserting this contradiction, without attempting to get beyond it?
R: I have no idea what contradiction you're talking about.
B: It's the contradiction of knowing full well that with the methods you're

using you can't achieve what you want, but being unwilling to change your

methods.
R: But that's not a contradiction. That's just the normal state of things. Call

it our normal misery if you want. It certainly couldn't be changed by choosing

different means or methods.
B: Because all methods are equivalent?
R: No, because they're all similarly inadequate. But primarily I have to ask

myself, what are my means and what can I accomplish with them.
B: But under certain historical conditions, painting had different functions, and

it did have the possibility of affecting historical reality.
R: When I think about contemporary political painting, I prefer Barnett

Newman. At least he did some magnificent paintings.
B: So it's said. Magnificent in what respect?
R: I can't describe it now, what moved me there. I believe that his paintings

are among the most important.
B: Perhaps that too is a mythology which would have to be investigated anew.

Precisely because it's so hard to describe, and because belief is inadequate in

the confrontation with contemporary paintings.
R: Belief is inescapable; it's part of us.
B: Do your pictures demand belief or analysis? What would be more important

to you?



1044 Ideas of the Postmodern

R: I would accept both. You they challenge to analysis, others to belief.

B: So it would be perfectly all right if someone fell on his knees in front of

one of your pictures and broke out in tears, as Rothko demanded for his

paintings?
R: Unfortunately, it's not possible for painting to have such an effect. In that

respect music is better off.



On the Rhetoric of Painting

B: What about the objectification of the painting process itself? When you no
longer paint the large pictures with a small brush, but rather with a house
painter's brush or another instrument like a rake, doesn't that introduce
anonymity and objectification into the painting process, just as permutation
and 'chance' objectify the color relations and the compositional order?

R: Not at all.

B: Doesn't the change in the technical means of pictorial production imply a
critical calling into question of the artistic process?

R: It changes the pictures only in one respect: they get louder; they can't be
overlooked so easily.

B: I was talking about the instruments, that is, that the instruments also
influence the perception of the picture. Thus the fact that a monochrome
picture was painted with paint rollers has a decisive influence upon the
perception of the picture. Similarly here, in the large pictures, where the
brush strokes suddenly have the character of wide strokes, they take on a
different dimension. I would describe it as a quasi-mechanical or anonymous
quality.

R: Not really in this case. A brush is still a brush. It doesn't matter whether
it's five millimeters wide or fifty centimeters wide.

B: So in the case of the two Yellow Brush Strokes, there's no new dimension
because of their being disproportionately large?

R: That's something else again. These two brush strokes only seem as if they
were drawn with a large brush. In reality they were painted using many small
brushes.

B: But here in the case of the two large pictures, a new dimension emerges
not only because of the size, but also because the techniques and the act of
painting have been brought to the limits of the possible. . . .

R: To the physical limits?

B: Yes, but also to the limits for perceiving the act as an act of painting.
Practically speaking, a different dimension opens up beyond that, one that
can no longer be seen as subjective.

R: They're just as subjective as the small ones; they're just more spectacular.

B: There's no question about their being spectacular, even in a smaller format.
. . . the scheme of your Abstract Paintings has a declamatory quality about it
. . . they always have a spectacular or a certain rhetorical quality. You show
the various possibilities as mere possibilities, but they simply exist alongside



VIIIa The Condition of History 1045

one another or opposed to one another, without having another function.
R: As if one were giving a meaningless speech?
B: Yes. . . .

R: ... a speech with pathos, which takes everyone in because it sounds good,
which has all the formalities of a speech, but which communicates nothing?
B: That description doesn't sound good. But one could also say that someone
is giving a pathetic speech with the intention of presenting analytically the
possibilities of speech, of pathos, and of rhetoric. In other words, you are
making the spectacle of painting visible in its rhetoric, without practicing it.
R: What sense would that have? That would be the last thing I'd want.
B: Then you don't see the Abstract Paintings as a kind of reflection on the
history of painting, as I've tried to suggest? And yet that's precisely how they
differ from all the other kinds of abstract and gestural painting which we
know. They don't just have a rhetorical quality. They also seem to be a kind
of meditation on what once was possible, but which, at precisely that moment,
is no longer useful. I can imagine that many observers think you're still
seriously practicing things that once were possible.
R: That would be more accurate for the Landscapes and for some of the Photo
Paintings. At times I've referred to them as cuckoos' eggs, because people
took them for something which they weren't at all. That was part of the
reason for their popular quality, which I fundamentally affirm. But that's
changed entirely; now it's a genuine appreciation.
B: That would also mean that the pictures are parodistic. But that's what's so

astonishing, because these pictures have no parodistic quality.
R: They have a normal seriousness. I can't put a name on it. I've always seen
it as something musical. There's a lot in the construction, in the structure,
that reminds me of music. It seems so self-evident to me, but I couldn't
possibly explain it.
B: That's one of the oldest cliches around. People always have resorted to

music in order to save the foundations of abstract painting.
R: Possibly. But I also mentioned music in order to raise another objection.
B: To the idea of a catalogue of the rhetorical possibilities of painting?
R: I see no sense in exhibiting painting's old, lost possibilities. I want to say

something. I'm interested in new possibilities.
B: But reflection on rhetoric as a highly determined system of expression is
indeed an extremely important method, especially in present-day literary
criticism. People have started to understand that it's really much more
important to attend to the linguistic conventions and the rhetorical laws that
literary statements obey; it used to be only the content of the statement that
people were concerned with.
R: Is it my private error then, if I always want to do something different from

what I've just produced?
B: That may not be an error so much as a private dilemma, a gap between
demand and capacity. But that's an important element in your work. If
you were nothing but a rhetorician, in the sense of an analytic investigation
of the rhetoric of painting, your work wouldn't be so interesting. That's



1046 Ideas of the Postmodern

something others can do. But if you refuse to see it at all as a rhetoric of
painting, how would you yourself describe the details of the pictorial ele-
ments? When one sees, for example, how spatial, linear, and chromatic
elements are placed next to one another in an artificial enumeration, and with
this declamatory quality; or how certain techniques of applying color are
presented as in a painting manual: some are layered with the knife, some are
thickly brushed, some are finely painted, some are softened, some are direct
traces, some are nebulous areas - there's something systematic, carefully
considered and prepared, as you yourself just said, in the enumeration, in the
contrasts and the combinations.

R: It works emotionally. It occasions moods, both as a whole and in the details.

B: That's just what is so difficult to decide, whether they do generate emotions
at all, and, if so, which. As I said, the pictures are remarkable in that they
never occasion associations.

R: They do occasion associations. To a certain extent they recall natural
experiences, even rainfall, if you will. Pictures can't help functioning that
way. That's where they derive their effect, from the fact that they never cease
to remind us of nature, from the fact that they are almost naturalistic. They
are in a way.

B: But then 'naturalistic' would have to be defined. Not naturalistic in relation
to nature?

R: Only to nature. We just don't have anything else.

B: The fact that nature seems to you to be the only analogy or model, the
only visible ordered, nonhierarchical structure, the fact that you can't imagine
a Utopian social structure that would correspond to this natural ideal, that's
the Romantic element in your thinking.

R: That's not Romantic. That's a matter of division of labor. Some people put
forward social models, others pictures; each group does the best it can.

B: That's not a direct answer to my question. Why is nature for you the only
Utopian dimension of experience free from domination? Why is it inconceiv-
able for you to consider or to discuss in social and political terms the idea
of an existence free from domination? Why is your only recourse that to the
metaphor of nature, like a Romantic?

R: No, like a painter. The reason I don't argue in 'socio-political terms' is that
I want to produce a picture and not an ideology. It's always its factuality,
and not its ideology, that makes a picture good.

B: That's precisely what I see in the fact that color is treated like a material
process. Color becomes an object that is presented and altered by these
instruments. It remains the same in all these diverse structures. It shows how
it was produced, what instruments were used. There's practically no external
reference that would motivate the appearance or the structure of the colors.
These phenomena are all self-referential. Does this interpretation still seem
too narrow to you?

R: Yes. Because the whole process does not exist for its own sake; it's only
justified when it uses all these beautiful methods and strategies to produce
something.



VHIa The Condition of History 1047

B: What could it produce besides belief in images?

R: A painting, and thus a model. And when I think now of your interpretation
of Mondrian, where his pictures can also be understood as models of society,
then I can also regard my abstractions as parables, as images of a possible
form of social relations. Seen in this way, what I'm attempting in each picture
is nothing other than this: to bring together, in a living and viable way, the
most different and the most contradictory elements in the greatest possible
freedom. Not paradise.



10 Gerhard Richter (b. 1932) Notes

These are entries from the artist's private journal, translated and published for the first
time on the occasion of an exhibition of his work at the Tate Gallery, London, 30 October
1991-12 January 1992, and reproduced in the catalogue, Gerhard Richter, London
(Tate Gallery), 1991, pp. 123-4, from which the present text is taken.



12.2.90

Accept that I can plan nothing.

Any consideration that I make about the 'construction' of a picture is false
and if the execution is successful then it is only because I partially destroy it
or because it works anyway, because it is not disturbing and looks as though it
is not planned.

Accepting this is often intolerable and also impossible, because as a thinking,
planning human being it humiliates me to find that I am powerless to that
extent, making me doubt my competence and any constructive ability. The only
consolation is that I can tell myself that despite all this I made the pictures
even when they take the law into their own hands, do what they like with me
although I don't want them to, and simply come into being somehow. Because
anyway I am the one who has to decide what they should ultimately look like
(the making of pictures consists of a large number of yes and no decisions and
a yes decision at the end). Seen like this the whole thing seems quite natural
to me though, or better nature-like, living, in comparison with the social sphere
as well.

30.5.90

The invention of the readymade seems to me to be the invention of reality, in
other words the radical discovery that reality in contrast with the view of the
world image is the only important thing. Since then painting no longer
represents reality but is itself reality (produced by itself). And sometime or
other it will again be a question of denying the value of this reality in order to
produce pictures of a better world (as before).



1048 Ideas of the Postmodern



4.9.90



The 'dictatorship of the proletariat' has long since become reality, especially
here in the Western democracies, and here in the most tolerable way. Mass
society is the better term, as the masses don't have a class enemy any more and
dictatorship transformed itself into material constraints. By its presence, and by
being as they are, the masses create a quasi-natural structure of conditions and
happenings that runs with very little planning, often chaotically and potentially
catastrophically. Hierarchical systems, including socialism, are being superseded
by a self-organizing 'liveliness' (without a plan, without an ideology, without
all the world designs and world pictures that never work).

24.10.90

It does not seem useful that we become fewer and fewer and come to an end
when we have learned so much. Over and over again, later generations have to
strive for decades to regain a standard of experience long since reached before.

The much despised 'artistic scene of today' is quite harmless and friendly when
we do not compare it with false claims: it has nothing to do with traditional
values that we uphold (or which elevate us), it has virtually nothing at all to
do with art. Thus the 'art scene' is not despicable, cynical or without spirit but
as a temporarily blossoming, busily proliferating scene it is only a variation on
a perpetual social game that fulfils needs for communication, in the same way
as sport, stamp collecting or breeding cats. Art happens despite this, rarely and
always unexpectedly, never because we make it happen.



VIIIB

The Critique of Originality



1 Jean Baudrillard (b. 1929) 'The Hyper-realism of
Simulation'

The development of Baudrillard's 'critique of the political economy of the sign' turned
in the early 1970s into a thesis that reality itself, as something separable from signs
of it, had vanished in the information-saturated, media-dominated contemporary world.
This condition Baudrillard dubbed 'hyper-realism'. Tellingly, his points of reference for
this thesis are predominantly drawn from the world of art: Surrealism, the nouveau
roman, Andy Warhol, Pop art and photography. The upshot is a conception of the
contemporary world as radically abstract, a 'place' from which reality has absented
itself and all is 'simulacrum'. This is, as Baudrillard himself confesses, an aestheticiza-
tion; but as such it is unapologetic. It is perhaps in the very extremity of this implausible
abstraction that the compelling power of Baudrillard's conception has lain. Originally
published as a section of L'Echange symbolique et la mort, Paris, 1976; translated by
Charles Levin as Symbolic Exchange and Death in J. Fekete (ed.), The Structural
Allegory, Minneapolis, 1984; this translation reprinted in Mark Poster (ed.), Jean Bau-
drillard: Selected Writings, Stanford, 1988, pp. 143-7, from which the present text is
taken.

[ . . . ] Reality itself founders in hyperrealism, the meticulous reduplication of
the real, preferably through another, reproductive medium, such as photography.
From medium to medium, the real is volatilized, becoming an allegory of death.
But it is also, in a sense, reinforced through its own destruction. It becomes
reality for its own sake, the fetishism of the lost object: no longer the object of
representation, but the ecstasy of denial and of its own ritual extermination: the
hyperreal.

Realism had already inaugurated this process. The rhetoric of the real signaled
its gravely altered status (its golden age was characterized by an innocence of
language in which it was not obliged to redouble what it said with a reality
effect). Surrealism remained within the purview of the realism it contested -
but also redoubled - through its rupture with the Imaginary. The hyperreal
represents a much more advanced stage insofar as it manages to efface even this
contradiction between the real and the imaginary. Unreality no longer resides
in the dream or fantasy, or in the beyond, but in the real's hallucinatory



1050 Ideas of the Postmodern

resemblance to itself. To escape the crisis of representation, reality loops around
itself in pure repetition, a tendency that was already apparent, before the days
of pop art and pictorial neorealism, in the nouveau roman. There, the project
was already to enclose the real in a vacuum, to extirpate all psychology and
subjectivity in order to render a pristine objectivity. In fact, this objectivity was
only that of the pure gaze - an objectivity at last liberated from the object,
which is no more than the blind relay of the look that scans it. It attempts a
kind of circular seduction in which one can easily mark the unconscious
undertaking to become invisible.

This is certainly the impression created by the neonovel: the rage for eliding
meaning in a blind and meticulous reality. Both syntax and semantics have
disappeared. There is no longer an apparition, but an arraignment of the object,
the eager examination of its scattered fragments: neither metaphor nor metony-
my, but a successive immanence beneath the police agency of the look. This
objective microscopies makes reality swim vertiginously, arousing the dizziness
of death within the confines of representation for its own sake. The old illusions
of relief, perspective, and spatial and psychological depth linked to the percep-
tion of the object give way to an optics functioning on the surface of things,
as if the gaze had become the molecular code of the object . . .

A possible definition of the real is: that for which it is possible to provide an
equivalent representation. This definition is contemporary with science, which
postulates a universal system of equivalences (classical representation was not
so much a matter of equivalence as of transcription, interpretation, commentary).
At the conclusion of this process of reproduction, the real becomes not only
that which can be reproduced, but that which is always already reproduced: the
hyperreal. But this does not mean that reality and art are in some sense
extinguished through total absorption in one another. Hyperrealism is something
like their mutual fulfillment and overflowing into one another through an
exchange at the level of simulation of their respective foundational privileges
and prejudices. Hyperrealism is only beyond representation because it functions
entirely within the realm of simulation. There, the whirligig of representation
goes mad, but with an implosive insanity which, far from being ex-centric, casts
longing eyes at the center, toward its own repetition en abtme. Like the
distancing effect within a dream, which tells one that one is dreaming, but only
in behalf of the censor, in order that we continue dreaming, hyperrealism is an
integral part of a coded reality, which it perpetuates without modifying.

In fact, we must interpret hyperrealism inversely: today, reality itself is
hyperrealistic. The secret of surrealism was that the most banal reality could
become surreal, but only at privileged moments, which still derived from art
and the imaginary. Now the whole of everyday political, social, historical,
economic reality is incorporated into the simulative dimension of hyperrealism;
we already live out the 'aesthetic' hallucination of reality. The old saying, 'reality
is stranger than fiction, 1 which belonged to the surrealist phase of the aestheticization
of life, has been surpassed. There is no longer a fiction that life can confront, even
in order to surpass it; reality has passed over into the play of reality, radically
disenchanted, the 'cool' cybernetic phase supplanting the 'hot' and phantasmatic . . 



VIIIb The Critique of Originality 1051

There once existed a specific class of objects that were allegorical, and even
a bit diabolical, such as mirrors, images, works of art (and concepts?); of course,
these too were simulacra, but they were transparent and manifest . . . they had
their own style and characteristic savoir faire. In these objects, pleasure consisted
more in discovering something 'natural' in what was artificial and counterfeit.
Today, the real and the imaginary are confounded in the same operational
totality, and aesthetic fascination is simply everywhere. It involves a kind of
subliminal perception, a kind of sixth sense for fakery, montage, scenarios, and
the overexposition of reality in the lighting of models. This is no longer a
productive space, but a kind of ciphering strip, a coding and decoding tape, a
tape recording magnetized with signs. It is an aesthetic reality, to be sure, but
no longer by virtue of art's premeditation and distance, but through a kind of
elevation to the second power, via the anticipation and the immanence of the
code. An air of nondeliberate parody clings to everything - a tactical simulation
- like an undecidable game to which is attached a specifically aesthetic pleasure,
the pleasure in reading (lecture) and in the rules of the game . . .

For a long time now art has prefigured this transformation of everyday life.
Very quickly, the work of art redoubled itself as a manipulation of the signs of
art: this oversignification, or as Levi-Strauss would call it, this 'academicism
of the signifier,' introduced art to the sign form. Thus art entered the phase of
its own indefinite reproduction; everything that redoubles in itself, even ordinary,
everyday reality, falls in the same stroke under the sign of art, and becomes
aesthetic. The same goes for production, of which one can say that today it is
commencing this aesthetic doubling at the point where, having expelled all
content and finality, it becomes, in a way, abstract and nonfigurative. It begins
to express the pure form of production; it takes itself, like art, as its own
teleological value.

Art and industry can thus exchange signs: art, in order to become a repro-
ductive machine (Andy Warhol), without ceasing to be art, since this machine
is only a sign; and production, in order to lose all social purpose and thus to
verify and exalt itself at last in the hyperbolic and aesthetic signs of prestige,
that are the great industrial combines, the 400-meter-high business blocks and
the statistical mysteries of the GNP ... In this vertigo of serial signs - shadow-
less, impossible to sublimate, immanent in their repetition - who can say where
the reality of what they simulate resides? Apparently, these signs repress nothing
. . . even the primary process is abolished. The cool universe of digitality absorbs
the worlds of metaphor and of metonymy, and the principle of simulation thus
triumphs over both the reality principle and the pleasure principle.



2 Craig Owens (1950-1990) from 4 The Allegorical
Impulse: Towards a Theory of Postmodernism'

With the sudden decline of canonical Modernism in the late 1960s an apparent diversity
of art practices emerged on to the international scene; a scene, it should be noted, in
which American dominance also came to be challenged for the first time in a generation.



1052 Ideas of the Postmodern

Since then various attempts have been made to divine an underlying impulse which can
be seen as cohering the apparently heterodox surface appearance of contemporary
art One of the most ambitious readings is Owens's. Following Walter Benjamin and Paul
De Man, he notes that Modernist critical theory occludes allegory as a mode of artistic
signification. He claims it is the apparent re-emergence of allegorical modes in the
period after Modernism which renders that art so different from, indeed incomprehen-
sible to, Modernist criteria of artistic quality. Just as provocatively Owens also claims
to detect allegorical moments in much Modernist practice itself: the implication being
that Modernist theory misrepresented its own. The result is a theory of Postmodernist
art as an art whose purpose is 'no longer to proclaim its autonomy, its self sufficiency,
its transcendence; rather it is to narrate its own contingency, insufficiency and lack of
transcendence'. Originally published as a two-part article in October, no. 12, Cam-
bridge, Mass., Spring 1980, pp. 67-86, and no. 13, Summer 1980, pp. 59-80.
Reprinted in Brian Wallis (ed.) Art After Modernism, New York and Boston, 1984, pp.
203-35. The present extracts are taken from the first part of the essay.

Every image of the past that is not recognized by the present as one of
its own concerns threatens to disappear irretrievably.

Walter Benjamin, 'Theses on the Philosophy of History'

[ . . . ] To impute an allegorical motive to contemporary art is to venture into
proscribed territory, for allegory has been condemned for nearly two centuries
as aesthetic aberration, the antithesis of art. In Aesthetic Croce refers to it as
'science, or art aping science'; Borges once called it an 'aesthetic error.' Although
he surely remains one of the most allegorical of contemporary writers, Borges
nevertheless regards allegory as an outmoded, exhausted device, a matter of
historical but certainly not critical interest. Allegories appear in fact to represent
for him the distance between the present and an irrecoverable past:

I know that at one time the allegorical art was considered quite charming . . . and
is now intolerable. We feel that, besides being intolerable, it is stupid and
frivolous. [ . . .]

This statement is doubly paradoxical, for not only does it contradict the
allegorical nature of Borges' own fiction, it also denies allegory what is most
proper to it: its capacity to rescue from historical oblivion that which threatens
to disappear. Allegory first emerged in response to a similar sense of estrange-
ment from tradition; throughout its history it has functioned in the gap between
a present and a past which, without allegorical reinterpretation, might have
remained foreclosed. A conviction of the remoteness of the past, and a desire
to redeem it for the present - these are its two most fundamental impulses.
They account for its role in psychoanalytic inquiry, as well as its significance
for Walter Benjamin, the only twentieth-century critic to treat the subject
without prejudice, philosophically. 2 Yet they fail to explain why allegory's
aesthetic potential should appear to have been exhausted long ago; nor do they
enable us to locate the historical breach at which allegory itself receded into the
depths of history.

Inquiry into the origins of the modern attitude toward allegory might appear
as 'stupid and frivolous' as its topic were it not for the fact that an unmistakably



VIIIb The Critique of Originality 1053

allegorical impulse has begun to reassert itself in various aspects of contemporary
culture: in the Benjamin revival, for example, or in Harold Bloom's The Anxiety
of Influence. Allegory is also manifest in the historical revivalism that today
characterizes architectural practice, and in the revisionist stance of much recent
art-historical discourse: T. J. Clark, for example, treating mid-nineteenth-
century painting as political 'allegory.' In what follows, I want to focus this
reemergence through its impact on both the practice and the criticism of the
visual arts. There are, as always, important precedents to be accounted for:
Duchamp identified both the 'instantaneous state of Rest' and the 'extra-rapid
exposure,' that is, the photographic aspects, 3 of the Large Glass as 'allegorical
appearance'; Allegory is also the title of one of Rauschenberg's most ambitious
combine paintings from the fifties. Consideration of such works must be
postponed, however, for their importance becomes apparent only after the
suppression of allegory by modern theory has been fully acknowledged.

In order to recognize allegory in its contemporary manifestations, we first
require a general idea of what in fact it is, or rather what it represents, since
allegory is an attitude as well as a technique, a perception as well as a procedure.
Let us say for the moment that allegory occurs whenever one text is doubled
by another; the Old Testament, for example, becomes allegorical when it is read
as a prefiguration of the New. This provisional description - which is not a
definition - accounts for both allegory's origin in commentary and exegesis, as
well as its continued affinity with them: as Northrop Frye indicates, the
allegorical work tends to prescribe the direction of its own commentary. It is
this metatextual aspect that is invoked whenever allegory is attacked as inter-
pretation merely appended post facto to a work, a rhetorical ornament or flourish.
Still, as Frye contends, 'genuine allegory is a structural element in literature;
it has to be there, and cannot be added by critical interpretation alone.' 4 In
allegorical structure, then, one text is read through another, however fragmentary,
intermittent, or chaotic their relationship may be; the paradigm for the allegori-
cal work is thus the palimpsest. [ . . . ]

Conceived in this way, allegory becomes the model of all commentary, all
critique, insofar as these are involved in rewriting a primary text in terms of
its figural meaning. I am interested, however, in what occurs when this
relationship takes place within works of art, when it describes their structure.
Allegorical imagery is appropriated imagery; the allegorist does not invent images
but confiscates them. He lays claim to the culturally significant, poses as its
interpreter. And in his hands the image becomes something other {alios = other
+ agoreuei = to speak). He does not restore an original meaning that may have
been lost or obscured; allegory is not hermeneutics. Rather, he adds another
meaning to the image. If he adds, however, he does so only to replace: the
allegorical meaning supplants an antecedent one; it is a supplement. This is
why allegory is condemned, but it is also the source of its theoretical signific-
ance.

The first link between allegory and contemporary art may now be made: with
the appropriation of images that occurs in the works of Troy Brauntuch, Sherrie
Levine, Robert Longo, and others - artists who generate images through the



1054 Ideas of the Postmodern

reproduction of other images. The appropriated image may be a film still, a
photograph, a drawing; it is often itself already a reproduction. However, the
manipulations to which these artists subject such images work to empty them
of their resonance, their significance, their authoritative claim to meaning. [ . . . ]
Brauntuch's images simultaneously proffer and defer a promise of meaning; they
both solicit and frustrate our desire that the image be directly transparent to
its signification. As a result, they appear strangely incomplete - fragments or
runes which must be deciphered.

Allegory is consistently attracted to the fragmentary, the imperfect, the
incomplete - an affinity which finds its most comprehensive expression in the
ruin, which Benjamin identified as the allegorical emblem par excellence. Here
the works of man are reabsorbed into the landscape; ruins thus stand for history
as an irreversible process of dissolution and decay, a progressive distancing from
origin. [. . .]

With the allegorical cult of the ruin, a second link between allegory and
contemporary art emerges: in site-specificity, the work which appears to have
merged physically into its setting, to be embedded in the place where we
encounter it. The site-specific work often aspires to a prehistoric monumentality;
Stonehenge and the Nazca lines are taken as prototypes. Its 'content 1 is
frequently mythical, as that of the Spiral Jetty, whose form was derived from
a local myth of a whirlpool at the bottom of the Great Salt Lake; in this way
Smithson exemplifies the tendency to engage in a reading of the site, in terms
not only of its topographical specifics but also of its psychological resonances.
Work and site thus stand in a dialectical relationship. (When the site-specific
work is conceived in terms of land reclamation, and installed in an abandoned
mine or quarry, then its 'defensively recuperative' motive becomes self-evident.)

Site-specific works are impermanent, installed in particular locations for a
limited duration, their impermanence providing the measure of their circum-
stantiality. Yet they are rarely dismantled but simply abandoned to nature;
Smithson consistently acknowledged as part of his works the forces which erode
and eventually reclaim them for nature. In this, the site-specific work becomes
an emblem of transience, the ephemerality of all phenomena; it is the memento
mori of the twentieth century. Because of its impermanence, moreover, the work
is frequently preserved only in photographs. This fact is crucial, for it suggests
the allegorical potential of photography. 'An appreciation of the transience of
things, and the concern to rescue them for eternity, is one of the strongest
impulses in allegory." And photography, we might add. As an allegorical art,
then, photography would represent our desire to fix the transitory, the ephem-
eral, in a stable and stabilizing image. In the photographs of Atget and Walker
Evans, insofar as they self-consciously preserve that which threatens to disap-
pear, that desire becomes the subject of the image. If their photographs are
allegorical, however, it is because what they offer is only a fragment, and thus
affirms its own arbitrariness and contingency.

We should therefore also be prepared to encounter an allegorical motive in
photomontage, for it is the 'common practice' of allegory 'to pile up fragments
ceaselessly, without any strict idea of a goal.' 6 This method of construction led



VHIb The Critique of Originality 1055

Angus Fletcher to liken allegorical structure to obsessional neurosis;' and the
obsessiveness of the works of Sol LeWitt, say, or Hanne Darboven suggests
that they too may fall within the compass of the allegorical. Here we encounter
yet a third link between allegory and contemporary art: in strategies of accu-
mulation, the paratactic work composed by the simple placement of 'one thing
after another' - Carl Andre's Lever or Trisha Brown's Primary Accumulation.
One paradigm for the allegorical work is the mathematical progression. [. . .]

Allegory concerns itself, then, with the projection - either spatial or temporal
or both - of structure as sequence; the result, however, is not dynamic, but
static, ritualistic, repetitive. It is thus the epitome of counter-narrative, for it
arrests narrative in place, substituting a principle of syntagmatic disjunction for
one of diegetic combination. In this way allegory superinduces a vertical or
paradigmatic reading of correspondences upon a horizontal or syntagmatic chain
of events. The work of Andre, Brown, LeWitt, Darboven, and others, involved
as it is with the externalization of logical procedure, its projection as a
spatiotemporal experience, also solicits treatment in terms of allegory.

This projection of structure as sequence recalls the fact that, in rhetoric,
allegory is traditionally defined as a single metaphor introduced in continuous
series. If this definition is recast in structuralist terms, then allegory is revealed
to be the projection of the metaphoric axis of language onto its metonymic
dimension. Roman Jakobson defined this projection of metaphor onto metonymy
as the 'poetic function,' and he went on to associate metaphor with poetry and
romanticism, and metonymy with prose and realism. Allegory, however, impli-
cates both metaphor and metonymy; it therefore tends to 'cut across and subtend
all such stylistic categorizations, being equally possible in either verse or prose,
and quite capable of transforming the most objective naturalism into the most
subjective expressionism, or the most determined realism into the most surre-
alistically ornamental baroque.' 8 This blatant disregard for aesthetic categories
is nowhere more apparent than in the reciprocity which allegory proposes
between the visual and the verbal: words are often treated as purely visual
phenomena, while visual images are offered as script to be deciphered. [ . . . ]

As much as this may recall the linguistic conceits of conceptual artists Robert
Barry and Lawrence Weiner, whose work is in fact conceived as large, clear
letters on the wall, what it in fact reveals is the essentially pictogrammatical
nature of the allegorical work. In allegory, the image is a hieroglyph; an allegory
is a rebus - writing composed of concrete images. Thus we should also seek
allegory in contemporary works which deliberately follow a discursive model:
Rauschenberg's Rebus, or Twombly's series after the allegorical poet Edmund
Spenser.

This confusion of the verbal and the visual is however but one aspect of
allegory's hopeless confusion of all aesthetic mediums and stylistic categories
(hopeless, that is, according to any partitioning of the aesthetic field on
essentialist grounds). The allegorical work is synthetic; it crosses aesthetic
boundaries. This confusion of genres, anticipated by Duchamp, reappears today
in hybridization, in eclectic works which ostentatiously combine previously
distinct art mediums.



1056 Ideas of the Postmodern

Appropriation, site-specificity, impermanence, accumulation, discursivity, hy-
bridization - these diverse strategies characterize much of the art of the present
and distinguish it from its modernist predecessors. They also form a whole
when seen in relation to allegory, suggesting that postmodernist art may in fact
be identified by a single, coherent impulse, and that criticism will remain
incapable of accounting for that impulse as long as it continues to think of
allegory as aesthetic error. We are therefore obliged to return to our initial
questions: When was allegory first proscribed, and for what reasons?

The critical suppression of allegory is one legacy of romantic art theory that
was inherited uncritically by modernism. [. . .]

In the visual arts, it was in large measure allegory's association with history
painting that prepared for its demise. From the Revolution on, it had been
enlisted in the service of historicism to produce image upon image of the present
in terms of the classical past. This relationship was expressed not only super-
ficially, in details of costume and physiognomy, but also structurally through a
radical condensation of narrative into a single, emblematic instant - significantly,
Barthes calls it a hieroglyph - in which the past, present, and future, that is,
the historical meaning, of the depicted action might be read. This is of course
the doctrine of the most pregnant moment, and it dominated artistic practice
during the first half of the nineteenth century. Syntagmatic or narrative
associations were compressed in order to compel a vertical reading of (allegorical)
correspondences. Events were thus lifted out of a continuum; as a result, history
could be recovered only through what Benjamin has called 'a tiger's leap into
the past':

Thus to Robespierre ancient Rome was a past charged with the time of the now
which he blasted out of the continuum of history. The French Revolution viewed
itself as Rome reincarnate. It evoked ancient Rome the way fashion evokes
costumes of the past. Fashion has a flair for the topical, no matter where it stirs
in the thickets of long ago; it is a tiger's leap into the past. 9

Although for Baudelaire this allegorical interpenetration of modernity and
classical antiquity possessed no small theoretical significance, the attitude of the
avant-garde which emerged at mid-century into an atmosphere rife with histori-
cism was succinctly expressed by Proudhon, writing of David's Leomdas at
Thermopylae:

Shall one say . . . that it is neither Leonidas and the Spartans, nor the Greeks and
Persians who one should see in this great composition; that it is the enthusiasm
of '92 which the painter had in view and Republican France saved from the
Coalition? But why this allegory? What need to pass through Thermopylae and
go backward twenty-three centuries to reach the heart of Frenchmen? Had we no
heroes, no victories of our own? 10

So that by the time Courbet attempted to rescue allegory for modernity, the
line which separated them had been clearly drawn, and allegory, conceived as
antithetical to the modernist credo // faut etre de son temps, was condemned,
along with history painting, to a marginal, purely historical existence.



VIIIb The Critique of Originality 1057

Baudelaire, however, with whom that motto is most closely associated, never
condemned allegory; in his first published work, the Salon of 1845, he defended
it against the 'pundits of the press': 'How could one hope ... to make them
understand that allegory is one of the noblest branches of art?' 11 The poet's
endorsement of allegory is only apparently paradoxical, for it was the relationship
of antiquity to modernity that provided the basis for his theory of modern art,
and allegory that provided its form, f . . . ] If the modern artist was exhorted
to concentrate on the ephemeral, however, it was because it was ephemeral, that
is, it threatened to disappear without a trace. Baudelaire conceived modern art,
at least in part, as the rescuing of modernity for eternity. [. . .]

Benjamin's primary insight - 'Baudelaire's genius, which drew its nourishment
from melancholy, was an allegorical one' 12 - effectively situates an allegorical
impulse at the origin of modernism in the arts and thus suggests the previously
foreclosed possibility of an alternate reading of modernist works, a reading in
which their allegorical dimension would be fully acknowledged. Manet's man-
ipulation of historical sources, for example, is inconceivable without allegory;
was it not a supremely allegorical gesture to reproduce in 1871 the Dead Toreador
as a wounded Communard, or to transpose the firing squad from the Execution
of Maximilian to the Paris barricades? And does not collage, or the manipulation
and consequent transformation of highly significant fragments, also exploit the
atomizing, disjunctive principle which lies at the heart of allegory? These
examples suggest that, in practice at least, modernism and allegory are not
antithetical, that it is in theory alone that the allegorical impulse has been
repressed. It is thus to theory that we must turn if we are to grasp the full
implications of allegory's recent return.

Near the beginning of 'The Origin of the Work of Art,' Heidegger introduces
two terms which define the 'conceptual frame' within which the work of art is
conventionally located by aesthetic thought:

The art work is, to be sure, a thing that is made, but it says something other
than the mere thing itself is, alio agoreuei. The work makes public something
other than itself; it manifests something other; it is an allegory. In the work of
art something other is brought together with the thing that is made. To bring
together is, in Greek, sumballein. The work is a symbol. 13

By imputing an allegorical dimension to every work of art, the philosopher
appears to repeat the error, regularly lamented by commentators, of generalizing
the term allegory to such an extent that it becomes meaningless. Yet in this
passage Heidegger is reciting the litanies of philosophical aesthetics only in order
to prepare for their dissolution. The point is ironic, and it should be remembered
that irony itself is regularly enlisted as a variant of the allegorical; that words can
be used to signify their opposites is in itself a fundamentally allegorical perception.

Allegory and symbol - like all conceptual pairs, the two are far from evenly
matched. In modern aesthetics, allegory is regularly subordinated to the symbol,
which represents the supposedly indissoluble unity of form and substance which
characterizes the work of art as pure presence. Although this definition of the



1058 Ideas of the Postmodern

art work as informed matter is, we know, as old as aesthetics itself, it was
revived with a sense of renewed urgency by romantic art theory, where it
provided the basis for the philosophical condemnation of allegory. According to
Coleridge, 'The Symbolical cannot, perhaps, be better defined in distinction
from the Allegorical, than that it is always itself a part o/that, of the whole of
which it is the representative.' 14 The symbol is a synecdoche, a part representing
the whole. [. . .]

Coleridge's is thus an expressive theory of the symbol, the presentational
union of 'inner essence' and outward expression, which are in fact revealed to
be identical. For essence is nothing but that element of the whole which has
been hypostasized as its essence. The theory of expression thus proceeds in a
circle: while designed to explain the effectivity of the whole on its constituent
elements, it is nevertheless those elements themselves which react upon the
whole, permitting us to conceive the latter in terms of its 'essence.' In Coleridge,
then, the symbol is precisely that part of the whole to which it may be reduced.
The symbol does not represent essence; it is essence.

On the basis of this identification, the symbol becomes the very emblem of
artistic intuition: 'Of utmost importance to our present subject is this point, that
the latter (the allegory) cannot be other than spoken consciously; whereas in
the former (the symbol) it is very possible that the general truth represented
may be working unconsciously in the writer's mind during the construction of
the symbol.' 13 The symbol is thus a motivated sign; in fact, it represents
linguistic motivation as such. For this reason Saussure substituted the term sign
for symbol, for the latter is 'never wholly arbitrary; it is not empty, for there
is the rudiment of a natural bond between the signifier and the signified.' 16 If
the symbol is a motivated sign, then allegory, conceived as its antithesis, will
be identified as the domain of the arbitrary, the conventional, the unmotivated.

This association of the symbol with aesthetic intuition, and allegory with con-
vention, was inherited uncritically by modern aesthetics; thus Croce in Aesthetic:

Now if the symbol be conceived as inseparable from the artistic intuition, it is a
synonym for the intuition itself, which always has an ideal character. There is no
double bottom to art, but one only; in art all is symbolical because all is ideal.
But if the symbol be conceived as separable - if the symbol can be on one side,
and on the other the thing symbolized, we fall back into the intellectualist error:
the so-called symbol is the exposition of an abstract concept, an allegory; it is
science, or art aping science. But we must also be just towards the allegorical.
Sometimes it is altogether harmless. Given the Gerusalemme liberata, the allegory
was imagined afterwards; given the Adone of Marino, the poet of the lascivious
afterwards insinuated that it was written to show how 'immoderate indulgence
ends in pain'; given a statue of a beautiful woman, the sculptor can attach a label
to the statue saying that it represents Clemency or Goodness. This allegory that
arrives attached to a finished work post festum does not change the work of art.
What is it then? It is an expression externally added to another expression. 1 '

In the name of 'justice,' then, and in order to preserve the intuitive character
of every work of art, including the allegorical, allegory is conceived as a
supplement, 'an expression externally added to another expression.' Here we



2



VIHb The Critique of Originality 1059

recognize that permanent strategy of Western art theory which excludes from
the work everything which challenges its determination as the unity of 'form'
and 'content.' Conceived as something added or superadded to the work after
the fact, allegory will consequently be detachable from it. In this way modernism
can recuperate allegorical works for itself, on the condition that what makes
them allegorical be overlooked or ignored. Allegorical meaning does indeed
appear supplementary; we can appreciate Bellini's Allegory of Fortune, for
example, or read Pilgrim's Progress as Coleridge recommended, without regard
for their iconographic significance. Rosemond Tuve describes the viewer's
'experience of a genre-picture - or so he had thought it - turning into . . . [an]
allegory before his eyes, by something he learns (usually about the history and
thence the deeper significance of the image).' 18 Allegory is extravagant, an
expenditure of surplus value; it is always in excess. Croce found it 'monstrous'
precisely because it encodes two contents within one form. Still, the allegorical
supplement is not only an addition, but also a replacement. It takes the place
of an earlier meaning, which is thereby either effaced or obscured. Because
allegory usurps its object it comports within itself a danger, the possibility of
perversion: that what is 'merely appended' to the work of art be mistaken for
its 'essence.' Hence the vehemence with which modern aesthetics - formalist
aesthetics in particular - rails against the allegorical supplement, for it challenges
the security of the foundations upon which aesthetics is erected. [. . .]



Jorge Luis Borges. 'From Allegories to Novels, 1 in Other Inquisitions, 1937-1952. trans.

Ruth L. C. Simms, Austin, Texas 1964, pp. 155-6.

On allegory and psychoanalysis, see Joel Fineman, 'The Structure of Allegorical Desire/ October,

no. 12, Spring 1980, pp. 47-66. Benjamin's observations on allegory are to be found in the

concluding chapter of The Origin of German Tragic Drama, trans. John Osborne, (London, 1977).

See Rosalind Krauss, 'Notes on the Index: Seventies Art in America,' October, no. 3 Spring

1977, pp. 68-81.

Northrop Frye, Anatomy of Criticism, Princeton, NJ, 1957, p. 54.

Benjamin op. cit., p. 223

ibid, p. 178.

Angus Fletcher, Allegory: The Theory of a Symbolic Mode, Ithaca, N. Y., 1964, pp. 279-303.

Fineman, 'Allegorical Desire,' p. 51.

Walter Benjamin, 'Theses on the Philosophy of History,' in Illuminations, trans. Harry Zohn,

New York, 1969, p. 155.

Quoted in George Boas, 'Courbet and His Critics,' in Courbet in Perspective, ed. Petra ten-Doess-

chate Chu, (Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 1977, p. 48.

Charles Baudelaire, 'Salon of 1845' in Art in Paris 1845-1862, ed. and trans. Jonathan Mayne,

New York, 1965, p. 14.

Walter Benjamin, 'Paris - the Capital of the Nineteenth Century, 1 trans. Quintin Hoare, in

Charles Baudelaire, p. 170.

Martin Heidegger, 'The Origin of the Work of Art, 1 Poetry, Language, Thought, trans. Albert

Hofstadter, New York, pp. 19-20.

Samuel Taylor Coleridge. Coleridge's Miscellaneous Criticism, ed. Thomas Middleton Raysor,

Cambridge, Mass, 1936 p. 99 (italics added).

Coleridge, Miscellaneous Criticism, p. 99. This passage should be compared with Goethe's famous

condemnation of allegory: 'It makes a great difference whether the poet starts with a universal

idea and then looks for suitable particulars, or beholds the universal in the particular. The former

method produces allegory, where the particular has status merely as an instance, an example of

the universal. The latter, by contrast, is what reveals poetry in its true nature: it speaks forth



1060 Ideas of the Postmodern

a particular without independently thinking of or referring to a universal, but in grasping the
particular in its living character it implxcxty apprehends the universal along with it.' Quoted in
Philip Wheelwright, The Burning Fountain Bloomington, Indiana, 1968, p. 89 (italics added).

16 Ferdinand de Saussure, Course in General Linguistics, trans. Wade Baskin, New York, 1966, p. 68.

Xi Benedetto Croce, Aesthetic, trans. Douglas Ainslie, New York, 1966, pp. 34-35.

Rosemond Tuve, Allegorical Imagery: Some Medieval Books and their Posterity, Princeton, N J
1966, p. 26.



3 Rosalind Krauss (b. 1941) from 'The Originality
of the Avant-Garde'

In the early 1970s Krauss had moved away from a Greenbergian conception of
Modernism in art to a view embracing what she termed a larger modernism*. By the
end of the decade, much influenced by contemporary French theory, she was articulat-
ing a fully-fledged view of 'Postmodernism' as the condition under which art and criticism
now operated. One of the foundation stones of the edifice of Modernism had been the
impulse to originality. Structuralism, and later influential conceptions linked to Poststruc-
turalism, such as Baudrillard's 'simulacrum', now gave rise to profound scepticism about
this; indeed to viewing the originality-claim in tandem with its partner, the protean,
creative Author, as an ideological symptom, rather than an unchallengeable axiom.
Originally published in October, no. 18, Cambridge, Mass., Fall 1981. Reprinted in
Krauss, The Originality of the Avant-Garde and Other Modernist Myths, Cambridge,
Mass. and London, 1986, pp. 151-70, from which the present extracts are taken.

[ . . . ] The avant-garde artist has worn many guises over the first hundred
years of his existence: revolutionary, dandy, anarchist, aesthete, technologist,
mystic. He has also preached a variety of creeds. One thing only seems to hold
fairly constant in the vanguardist discourse and that is the theme of originality.
By originality, here, I mean more than just the kind of revolt against tradition
that echoes in Ezra Pound's 'Make it new!' or sounds in the futurists' promise
to destroy the museums that cover Italy as though 'with countless cemeteries.'
More than a rejection or dissolution of the past, avant-garde originality is
conceived as a literal origin, a beginning from ground zero, a birth. Marinetti,
thrown from his automobile one evening in 1909 into a factory ditch filled with
water, emerges as if from amniotic fluid to be born - without ancestors - a
futurist. This parable of absolute self-creation that begins the first Futurist
Manifesto functions as a model for what is meant by originality among the early
twentieth-century avant-garde. For originality becomes an organicist metaphor
referring not so much to formal invention as to sources of life. The self as
origin is safe from contamination by tradition because it possesses a kind of
originary naivete. Hence Brancusi's dictum, 'When we are no longer children,
we are already dead.' Or again, the self as origin has the potential for continual
acts of regeneration, a perpetuation of self-birth. Hence Malevich's pronounce-
ment. 'Only he is alive who rejects his convictions of yesterday.' The self as
origin is the way an absolute distinction can be made between a present
experienced de novo and a tradition-laden past. The claims of the avant-garde
are precisely these claims to originality.



VIIIb The Critique of Originality 1061

Now, if the very notion of the avant-garde can be seen as a function of the
discourse of originality, the actual practice of vanguard art tends to reveal that
'originality' is a working assumption that itself emerges from a ground of
repetition and recurrence. One figure, drawn from avant-garde practice in the
visual arts, provides an example. This figure is the grid.

Aside from its near ubiquity in the work of those artists who thought of
themselves as avant-garde - their numbers include Malevich as well as Mon-
drian, Leger as well as Picasso, Schwitters, Cornell, Reinhardt and Johns as
well as Andre, LeWitt, Hesse, and Ryman - the grid possesses several structural
properties which make it inherently susceptible to vanguard appropriation. One
of these is the grid's imperviousness to language. 'Silence, exile, and cunning,'
were Stephen Dedalus's passwords: commands that in Paul Goodman's view
express the self-imposed code of the avant-garde artist. The grid promotes this
silence, expressing it moreover as a refusal of speech. The absolute stasis of the
grid, its lack of hierarchy, of center, of inflection, emphasizes not only its
anti-referential character, but - more importantly - its hostility to narrative.
This structure, impervious both to time and to incident, will not permit the
projection of language into the domain of the visual, and the result is silence.

This silence is not due simply to the extreme effectiveness of the grid as a
barricade against speech, but to the protectiveness of its mesh against all
intrusions from outside. No echoes of footsteps in empty rooms, no scream of
birds across open skies, no rush of distant water - for the grid has collapsed
the spatiality of nature onto the bounded surface of a purely cultural object.
With its proscription of nature as well as of speech, the result is still more
silence. And in this new-found quiet, what many artists thought they could hear
was the beginning, the origins of Art.

For those for whom art begins in a kind of originary purity, the grid was
emblematic of the sheer disinterestedness of the work of art, its absolute
purposelessness, from which it derived the promise of its autonomy. We hear
this sense of the originary essence of art when Schwitters insists, 'Art is a
primordial concept, exalted as the godhead, inexplicable as life, indefinable and
without purpose.' And the grid facilitated this sense of being born into the
newly evacuated space of an aesthetic purity and freedom.

While for those for whom the origins of art are not to be found in the idea
of pure disinterest so much as in an empirically grounded unity, the grid's
power lies in its capacity to figure forth the material ground of the pictorial
object, simultaneously inscribing and depicting it, so that the image of the
pictorial surface can be seen to be born out of the organization of pictorial
matter. For these artists, the grid-scored surface is the image of an absolute
beginning.

Perhaps it is because of this sense of a beginning, a fresh start, a ground
zero, that artist after artist has taken up the grid as the medium within which
to work, always taking it up as though he were just discovering it, as though
the origin he had found by peeling back layer after layer of representation to
come at last to this schematized reduction, this graph-paper ground, were his
origin, and his finding it an act of originality. Waves of abstract artists 'discover'



1062 Ideas of the Postmodern

the grid; part of its structure one could say is that in its revelatory character
it is always a new, a unique discovery.

And just as the grid is a stereotype that is constantly being paradoxically
rediscovered, it is, as a further paradox, a prison in which the caged aritst feels
at liberty. For what is striking about the grid is that while it is most effective
as a badge of freedom, it is extremely restrictive in the actual exercise of
freedom. Without doubt the most formulaic construction that could possibly be
mapped on a plane surface, the grid is also highly inflexible. Thus just as no
one could claim to have invented it, so once one is involved in deploying it,
the grid is extremely difficult to use in the service of invention. And thus when
we examine the careers of those artists who have been most committed to the
grid, we could say that from the time they submit themselves to this structure
their work virtually ceases to develop and becomes involved, instead, in repe-
tition. Exemplary artists in this respect are Mondrian, Albers, Reinhardt, and
Agnes Martin.

But in saying that the grid condemns these artists not to originality but to
repetition, I am not suggesting a negative description of their work. I am trying
instead to focus on a pair of terms - originality and repetition - and to look at
their coupling unprejudicially; for within the instance we are examining, these
two terms seem bound together in a kind of aesthetic economy, interdependent
and mutually sustaining, although the one - originality - is the valorized term
and the other - repetition or copy or reduplication - is discredited.

We have already seen that the avant-grade artist above all claims originality
as his right - his birthright, so to speak. With his own self as the origin of his
work, that production will have the same uniqueness as he; the condition of his
own singularity will guarantee the originality of what he makes. Having given
himself this warrant, he goes on, in the example we are looking at, to enact his
originality in the creation of grids. Yet as we have seen, not only is he - artist
x, y, or z - not the inventor of the grid, but no one can claim this patent: the
copyright expired sometime in antiquity and for many centuries this figure has
been in the public domain.

Structurally, logically, axiomatically, the grid can only be repeated. And, with
an act of repetition or replication as the 'original' occasion of its usage within
the experience of a given artist, the extended life of the grid in the unfolding
progression of his work will be one of still more repetition, as the artist engages
in repeated acts of self-imitation. That so many generations of twentieth-century
artists should have maneuvered themselves into this particular position of
paradox - where they are condemned to repeating, as if by compulsion, the
logically fraudulent original - is truly compelling.

But it is no more compelling than that other, complementary fiction: the
illusion not of the originality of the artist, but of the originary status of the
pictorial surface. This origin is what the genius of the grid is supposed to
manifest to us as viewers: an indisputable zero-ground beyond which there is
no further model, or referent, or text. Except that this experience of originari-
ness, felt by generations of artists, critics, and viewers is itself false, a fiction.
The canvas surface and the grid that scores it do not fuse into that absolute



VIIIb The Critique of Originality 1063

unity necessary to the notion of an origin. For the grid follows the canvas surface,
doubles it. It is a representation of the surface, mapped, it is true, onto the
same surface it represents, but even so, the grid remains a figure, picturing
various aspects of the 'originary' object: through its mesh it creates an image
of the woven infrastructure of the canvas; through its network of coordinates
it organizes a metaphor for the plane geometry of the field: through its repetition
it configures the spread of lateral continuity. The grid thus does not reveal the
surface, laying it bare at last; rather it veils it through a repetition.

As I have said, this repetition performed by the grid must follow, or come
after, the actual, empirical surface of a given painting. The representational text
of the grid however also precedes the surface, comes before it, preventing even
that literal surface from being anything like an origin. For behind it, logically
prior to it, are all those visual texts through which the bounded plane was
collectively organized as a pictorial field. The grid summarizes all these texts:
the gridded overlays on cartoons, for example, used for the mechanical transfer
from drawing to fresco; or the perspective lattice meant to contain the perceptual
transfer from three dimensions to two; or the matrix on which to chart harmonic
relationships, like proportion; or the millions of acts of enframing by which the
picture was reaffirmed as a regular quadrilateral. All these are the texts which
the 'original' ground plane of a Mondrian, for example, repeats - and, by
repeating, represents. Thus the very ground that the grid is thought to reveal
is already riven from within by a process of repetition and representation; it is
always already divided and multiple.

What I have been calling the fiction of the originary status of the picture
surface is what art criticism proudly names the opacity of the modernist picture
plane, only in so terming it, the critic does not think of this opacity as fictitious.
Within the discursive space of modernist art, the putative opacity of the pictorial
field must be maintained as a fundamental concept. For it is the bedrock on
which a whole structure of related terms can be built. All those terms -
singularity, authenticity, uniqueness, originality, original - depend on the orig-
inary moment of which this surface is both the empirical and the semiological
instance. If modernism's domain of pleasure is the space of auto-referentiality,
this pleasure dome is erected on the semiological possibility of the pictorial sign
as nonrepresentational and nontransparent, so that the signified becomes the
redundant condition of a reified signifier. But from our perspective, the one
from which we see that the signifier cannot be reified; that its objecthood, its
quiddity, is only a fiction; that every signifier is itself the transparent signified
of an already-given decision to carve it out as the vehicle of a sign - from this
perspective there is no opacity, but only a transparency that opens onto a
dizzying fall into a bottomless system of reduplication.

This is the perspective from which the grid that signifies the pictorial surface,
by representing it, only succeeds in locating the signifier of another, prior system
of grids, which have beyond them, yet another, even earlier system. This is the
perspective in which the modernist grid is . . . logically multiple: a system of
reproductions without an original. This is the perspective from which the real
condition of one of the major vehicles of modernist aesthetic practice is seen



1064 Ideas of the Postmodern

to derive not from the valorized term of that couple which I invoked earlier -
the doublet, originality repetition - but from the discredited half of the pair, the
one that opposes the multiple to the singular, the reproducible to the unique
the fraudulent to the authentic, the copy to the original. But this is the negative
half of the set of terms that the critical practice of modernism seeks to repress
has repressed.

From this perspective we can see that modernism and the avant-garde are
functions of what we could call the discourse of originality, and that that
discourse serves much wider interests - and is thus fueled by more diverse
institutions - than the restricted circle of professional art-making. The theme
of originality, encompassing as it does the notions of authenticity, originals, and
origins, is the shared discursive practice of the museum, the historian, and the
maker of art. [ . . . ]
* * *

What would it look like not to repress the concept of the copy? What would it
look like to produce a work that acted out the discourse of reproductions without
originals, that discourse which could only operate in Mondrian's work as the
inevitable subversion of his purpose, the residue of representationality that he
could not sufficiently purge from the domain of his painting? The answer to
this, or at least one answer, is that it would look like a certain kind of play
with the notions of photographic reproduction that begins in the silkscreen canvases
of Robert Rauschenberg and has recently flowered in the work of a group of
younger artists whose production has been identified by the critical term pictures.
I will focus on the example of Sherrie Levine, because it seems most radically
to question the concept of origin and with it the notion of originality.

Levine's medium is the pirated print, as in the series of photographs she
made by taking images by Edward Weston of his young son Neil and simply
rephotographing them, in violation of Weston's copyright. But as has been
pointed out about Weston's 'originals,' these are already taken from models
provided by others; they are given in that long series of Greek kouroi by which
the nude male torso has long ago been processed and multiplied within our
culture. Levine's act of theft, which takes place, so to speak, in front of the
surface of Weston's print, opens the print from behind to the series of models
from which it, in turn, has stolen, of which it is itself the reproduction. The
discourse of the copy, within which Levine's act must be located has, of course,
been developed by a variety of writers, among them Roland Barthes. I am
thinking of his characterization, in S/Z, of the realist as certainly not a copyist
from nature, but rather a 'pasticher,' or someone who makes copies of copies.
As Barthes says:

To depict is to . . . refer not from a language to a referent, but from one code to
another. Thus realism consists not in copying the real but in copying a (depicted)
copy. . . . Through secondary mimesis [realism] copies what is already a copy.

In another series by Levine in which the lush, colored landscapes of Eliot
Porter are reproduced, we again move through the 'original' print, back to the
origin in nature and - as in the model of the picturesque - through another



VIIIb The Critique of Originality 1065

trap door at the back wall of 'nature' into the purely textual construction of
the sublime and its history of degeneration into ever more lurid copies.

Now, insofar as Levine's work explicitly deconstructs the modernist notion
of origin, her effort cannot be seen as an extension of modernism. It is, like the
discourse of the copy, postmodernist. Which means that it cannot be seen as
avant-garde either.

Because of the critical attack it launches on the tradition that precedes it, we
might want to see the move made in Levine's work as yet another step in the
forward march of the avant-garde. But this would be mistaken. In deconstructing
the sister notions of origin and originality, postmodernism establishes a schism
between itself and the conceptual domain of the avant-garde, looking back at it
from across a gulf that in turn establishes a historical divide. The historical
period that the avant-garde shared with modernism is over. That seems an
obvious fact. What makes it more than a journalistic one is a conception of the
discourse that has brought it to a close. This is a complex of cultural practices,
among them a demythologizing criticism and a truly postmodernist art, both of
them acting now to void the basic propositions of modernism, to liquidate them
by exposing their fictitious condition. It is thus from a strange new perspective
that we look back on the modernist origin and watch it splintering into endless
replication.

1 Roland Barthes, S/Z, trans. Richard Ritter, New York, 1974, p. 55.



4 Hal Foster (b. 1955) from 'Subversive Signs'

A contributor to the journal Art in America in the early 1980s, Foster became one of
the most prominent of a new generation of American critics active in the wake of
Modernism. In particular he edited the collection of essays published in America in
1983 as The Anti-Aesthetic, and in Britain in 1985 as Post Modern Culture. In his
introduction to that book Foster identified two types of Postmodernism: a Postmodern-
ism of complicity in contemporary capitalism, and a Postmodernism of resistance to
it. It is with the latter that he has identified his own critical practice. The present essay
was included in his collection Recodings: Art, Spectacle, Cultural Politics, Seattle, 1985;
the present extract is taken from pp. 99-100 of that edition. An earlier version had
appeared in Art in America, November 1982, pp. 88-93.

A writer - by which I mean not the possessor of a function or the servant

of an art, but the subject of a praxis - must have the persistence of the

watcher who stands at the crossroads of all other discourses {trivilias is

the etymological attribute of the prostitute who waits at the intersection

of three roads).

Roland Barthes, 'Lefon 7

The most provocative American art of the present is situated at such a crossing
- of institutions of art and political economy, of representations of sexual
identity and social life. More, it assumes its purpose to be so sited, to lay in



1066 Ideas of the Postmodern

wait for these discourses so as to riddle and expose them or to seduce and lead
them astray. Its primary concern is not with the traditional or modernist
proprieties of art - with refinement of style or innovation of form, aesthetic
sublimity or ontological reflection on art as such. And though it is aligned with
the critique of the institution of art based on the presentational strategies of
the Duchampian readymade, it is not involved, as its minimalist antecedents
were, with an epistemological investigation of the object or a phenomenological
inquiry into subjective response. In short, this work does not bracket art for
formal or perceptual experiment but rather seeks out its affiliations with other
practices (in the culture industry and elsewhere); it also tends to conceive of
its subject differently.

The artists active in this work (Martha Rosier, Sherrie Levine, Dara Birn-
baum, Barbara Kruger, Louise Lawler, Allan McCollum, Jenny Holzer, Krzysz-
tof Wodiczko . . . ) use many different forms of production and modes of address
(photo-text collage, constructed or projected photographs, videotapes, critical
texts, appropriated, arranged or surrogate art works, etc.), and yet they are alike
in this: each treats the public space, social representation or artistic language in
which he or she intervenes as both a target and a weapon. This shift in practice
entails a shift in position: the artist becomes a manipulator of signs more than
a producer of art objects, and the viewer an active reader of messages rather
than a passive contemplator of the aesthetic or consumer of the spectacular. This
shift is not new - indeed, the recapitulation in this work of the 'allegorial
procedures' of the readymade, (dadaist) photomontage and (pop) appropriation
is significant - yet it remains strategic if only because even today few are able
to accept the status of art as a social sign entangled with other signs in systems
productive of value, power and prestige.

The situational aesthetics of this art - its special attention to site, address and
audience - is prepared by the varied institutional critique of such artists as
Daniel Buren, Michael Asher, Dan Graham, Hans Haacke, Marcel Broodthaers,
Lawrence Weiner, John Baldessari and Joseph Kosuth. Yet if Kruger, Holzer
et al. inherit the conceptual critique of the given parameters of art production
and reception, they do so not uncritically. For just as the conceptual artists
extended the minimalist analysis of the art object, so too these later artists have
opened up the conceptual critique of the art institution in order to intervene
in ideological representations and languages of everyday life. [. . .]



5 Sherrie Levine (b. 1947) Statement

Levine's early work was formed under the legacy of American West-Coast Conceptual
Art, and by the now ubiquitous experience of learning about art primarily through
photographic reproductions. That work consisted of the appropriation of images by
canonical male artists, often in the form of photographs taken from plates in art books
devoted to the Modernist tradition. In this way she raised issues of plagiarism and property
rights, which lurk in the margins of art's exchange value. Levine's present Statement itself



VHIb The Critique of Originality 1067

mimics her strategy of appropriation. Commencing with a citation from the Expressionist
painter Franz Marc (some of whose animal pictures she had also photographically approp-
riated), she ends her Statement with a variation on the oft-quoted conclusion from Roland
Barthes' seminal essay, The Death of the Author': The birth of the reader must be at the cost
of the death of the author.' Levine's statement was first published in the magazine Style,
Vancouver, March 1982, p. 48, which formed the catalogue of the exhibition 'Manner-
ism; a Theory of Culture,' Vancouver Art Gallery, March-April 1982.

The world is filled to suffocating. Man has placed his token on every stone.
Every word, every image, is leased and mortgaged. We know that a picture is
but a space in which a variety of images, none of them original, blend and
clash. A picture is a tissue of quotations drawn from the innumerable centers
of culture. Similar to those eternal copyists Bouvard and Pechuchet, we indicate
the profound ridiculousness that is precisely the truth of painting. We can only
imitate a gesture that is always anterior, never original. Succeeding the painter,
the plagiarist no longer bears within him passions, humours, feelings, impres-
sions, but rather this immense encyclopedia from which he draws. The viewer
is the tablet on which all the quotations that make up a painting are inscribed
without any of them being lost. A painting's meaning lies not in its origin, but
in its destination. The birth of the viewer must be at the cost of the painter.



6 Art & Language (Michael Baldwin b. 1945, Mel
Ramsden b. 1944, Charles Harrison b. 1942)
'Letter to a Canadian Curator'

This letter concerns the conditions of production of Art & Language's Portraits of V. I.
Lenin in the Style of Jackson Pollock of 1979-80. In the search for methodological
materials with which to describe these conditions, reference is made to an essay by
T. J. Clark, 'Preliminaries to a Possible Treatment of Olympia in 1865' (Screen, vol. 21,
no. 1, London, Spring 1980, pp. 18-41), and to the discussion of 'Hysteria as
Communication' in Thomas Szasz, The Myth of Mental Illness (London and New York,
1961, pp. 133-43). The letter was written in January 1982 to accompany a showing
of paintings from the 'Lenin/Pollock' series in the exhibition 'Mannerism; a Theory of
Culture' at the Vancouver Art Gallery, 27 March-25 April 1982, and was originally
addressed to Jo-Anne Birnie Danzker, curator of the exhibition. It was first published
under the heading 'Correspondence' in Style, Vancouver, March 1982, pp. 11-12;
reprinted as 'Letter to a Canadian Curator' in Art-Language, vol. 5, no. 1, Banbury,
October 1982, pp. 32-5, from which the present text is taken.

[. . ] Mannerism is a propitious theme. Indeed, it seems to us sometimes that
we are working at (and with) the margins of an extravagant Mannerist pan-
tomime. It is tempting, perhaps too tempting, to look for analogies with late
Renaissance Mannerism. E. H. Gombrich has pointed out in his essay 'The
Renaissance Conception of Artistic Progress and its Consequences' that 'man-
nerism comes to its climax at the moment when the inherent ambiguities of the



!



1068 Ideas of the Postmodern

renaissance idea of artistic progress become apparent'. Looking at the historio-
graphically stable Modernism of the Sixties and early Seventies, the apparent
mannerism of today seems causally dependent upon the contradictions in
'mainstream' Modernism. Punk-art, artistic Rocking, 'bad painting', right-wing
enthusiasm for 50s' epigones create hiatuses for differentiation and identification.
These are frequently vague and fugitive. There is little in the way of stability
in interests and conventions to enable a clear differentiation of the symptoms of
decadence and ruin from critical activity in respect of decadence and ruin. We
are all stalked by decadence. It is the cultural material we have to work with.

There has been a lot of naively revisionist 'instability' noticeable in the
art-world recently. New Wave 'Americans', young 'Italians' and Born Again
'German' Neo-expressionists have moved in to occupy a territory formerly held
by the cosmopolitan and progressively secure artists of the Sixties and Seventies.
Many of the latter have rightly pointed to the Natopolitan interests of 'new 1
Euro-art and to the axis of dealer interests lying behind this art. What has not
been noted is that its discourses are hysterical.

Hysteria is a psychiatric syndrome. People are reduced to it when the idioms
of conversation fail. In art's first world, conversation has failed in a collapse of
differential semantics. A sense of hysteria can also be traced to the apparently
relentless appetite of the art-world's bureaucracy. It is staffed by individuals
who know that the prestige and power of their profession can be inflated
according to their defining with ever increasing zeal more and more products
as falling within their domain of legitimation. In international relations, this is
called Imperialism. As critics, curators and middle-men of every variety neglect
method, explanation and causal determinations to promote and manage their
client discoveries, as discourse vanishes beneath administrative perks and privi-
leges, as the little inventories of cultural tourism proliferate the necessities of
parapractical obloquy emerge and that which is serious or historically vivid must
manifest itself in a masque or travesty of the indolent and fraudulent - in double
meaning, displacement, irony, mendacity, absurdity - in a debacle of fugitive
and often demented themes.

It may be that we are indeed engaged in a kind of mannerism, in 'works that
seem to tremble on the brink of one commitment or another' and which present
formidable difficulties in respect of historical codification and classification. If
there is a psychologically unifying thread throughout this work it appears to be
locatable in concepts like hinting, parody, travesty, alluding, bluffing, forgery,
double-talk etc. These are not conducive to stability within the rationalising
apparatus of curatorial control. Tim Clark, in his article on Manet's 'Olympia',
. . . stumbles across some of these problems of differentiation and identification.
Speaking of 'Olympia' he says 'it is an open question whether what we are
studying here is an instance of subversive refusal of established codes or of
simple ineffectiveness'. The resolution of this 'open question' will always be
compromised, partial. It ends, in fact, in a hiatus. The difference between
expressionist fervour and mere incompetence, insularity and particularity, inef-
fectiveness and subversion is a difference resolvable in circumstances of concrete
contingency, not in the security of a proprietorial and managerial overview.



VIIIb The Critique of Originality 1069

Within the hiatus of undecidability may lie a half-life for contemporary cultural
production.

Without wishing to overcook an analogy, it is of interest that Thomas Szasz
has suggested that it is difficult to distinguish between 'genuine' hysteria and
malingering. For the psychiatrist, the nub of this difficulty is the failure to
distinguish between the ambiguous message as object or representation. Between
'hysteria', 'impersonation of hysteria', 'explicit' or 'inexplicit' malingering there
lies a vexed hiatus of differentiation and undecidability. Such problems may be
isomorphs of the problems of differentiation encountered in distinguishing 'a
subversive refusal of established codes' and 'simple ineffectiveness', ineptitude
or incompetence. Hysterical behaviour is observable in both the oppressed and
fearful and in frauds and liars. The point is that to make the necessary
differentiations and to act upon them, the actions and differentiations are of a
qualitively different character according to whether you are in a contingent or
dependent position or at an Archimedian point of overview - an independent
position. And who is to elect him- or herself art's psychiatrist?

It seems to be of some significance to sort out the dependency relationships
in hysterical behaviour. It is a pantomime coercively directed at particular
individuals, not at an abstract 'audience'. It 'modifies' the power relationships
between people. The ambiguity and multiple meaning of hysteria generates a
hiatus of uncertainty in which genuine mistakes can be made. Again, it is in
such a hiatus that the furtive and ghettoized half-lives of the art-world reside.
But who is to elect him- or herself art's psychiatrist?

Benjamin's 'The Origins of German Trauerspiels' and 'On Some Motifs in
Baudelaire' relate the allegories of the Baroque to those of Romanticism and
the 20th Century - e.g., to Surrealism. Like the allegories of the Baroque, 20th
Century cultural production takes place during a period of decline, decay and
disfiguration. One of Benjamin's (or Brecht's?) principles of form was to collect
and reproduce 'the contradictions of the present' without resolution. Speaking
of Baudelaire, Benjamin describes strange and unusual correspondences emerg-
ing as unintended consequences of speech, of work, of wandering (the flanerie
of the flaneur). The result of flanerie is an allegorical art that reveals the
physiognomy of the present as 'ruin' and juxtaposes to the ruins of the
bourgeoisie, elements of dream, memory and fantasy stimulated by shock but
revealing or anticipating a different collective character of experience.

Suppose we substitute the particular relations or systems of necessary mis-
representation for Benjamin's presumably 'dialectical' contradictions? One of the
ways in which we might generate a possible critique or redescription of those
misrepresentations is to try to put them into such a critically informative
relationship to one another that one is forced to attempt to reconstruct the
genetic circumstances whereby such misrepresentations have come to be gener-
ated. This may be akin to what has somewhat sleekly been dubbed 'a montage
of discourses'. In the Portraits of V.L Lenin in the Style of Jackson Pollock the
conditions which produced the Social Realist orthodoxy and the orthodoxy of
US Modernism are conjuncturally significant. The representations (or misrep-
resentations) of the Eastern Bloc and the representations (or misrepresentations)



1070 Ideas of the Postmodern

of Natopolitan 'freedom' are not, simultaneously, thinkable. Their amalgamation
into a quasi identity, their mutual exclusivity and lack of boundaries generates
an uneasy peace, a detente of mutual reproach and intimacy. [. . .]



7 Barbara Kruger (b. 1945) ' "Taking" Pictures'

Kruger's early career was as art director on women's magazines published by Conde
Nast. Beginning in the early 1980s, she put this experience to use in a series of works
reminiscent of advertisements and billboards. Her typical work of this time involved the
combination of a monochrome photographic image with a brief declarative statement
in large type. This combination of text and image would usually allude to some tendency
to oppression or hypocrisy in the contemporary world. The tendencies her work
specifically addresses are those based in relations of gender. The binary opposition
'We/You' has been an explicit or implicit function in all her montages, the We' referring
to women in general, the 'You' to the male spectator. The present statement was
published in Screen, vol. 23, no. 2, London, July-August 1982, p. 90.

There can be said to exist today a kind of oppositional situation in the arts
(principally on a theoretical level only, as the marketplace tends to customize
all breeds of activity); the laboratorial or studio versus certain productive or
more clearly, reproductive procedures. As parody frees ceremony from ritual,
so its 'making alike' allows for a disengaged (or supposedly) distanced reading.

This strategy is employed by a number of artists working today. Their
production, contextualized within the art subculture, frequently consists of an
appropriation or 'taking' of a picture, the value of which might already be safely
ensconced within the proven marketability of media imagery. Using, and or
informed by fashion and journalistic photography, advertising, film, television,
and even other artworks (photos, painting and scupture), their quotations suggest
a consideration of a work's 'original' use and exchange values, thus straining
the appearance of naturalism. Their alterations might consist of cropping,
reposing, captioning, and redoing, and proceed to question ideas of competence,
originality, authorship and property.

On a parodic level, this work can pose a deviation from the repetition of
stereotype, contradicting the surety of our initial readings. However, the implicit
critique within the work might easily be subsumed by the power granted its
'original' thus serving to further elevate cliche. This might prove interesting in
the use of repetition as a deconstructive device, but this elevation of cliche
might merely shift the ornamental to the religious. And as an adoration the
work can read as either another buzz in the image repertoire of popular culture
or as simply a kitschy divinity. However, the negativity of this work, located
in its humour, can merely serve to congratulate its viewers on their contemp-
tuous acuity. Perhaps the problem is one of implicitness, that what is needed
is, again, an alternation, not only called 'from primary to secondary', but from
implicit to explicit, from inference to declaration.



VIIIb The Critique of Originality 1071
8 Peter Halley (b. 1953) 'Nature and Culture'

During the 1980s, Halley produced 'abstract' paintings in a self-consciously postmodern
manner: which is to say, for example, that in their formats they resemble the tradition
of Modernist geometric abstraction, while with such materials as textured interior
decorating paint and/or Day-Glo colours, they tend to mock the high seriousness of
that tradition. At the same time the 'abstract' configurations of Halley's work are instinct
with the possibility of a reference to such iconic forms of the modern as circuits,
conduits and cells - and thus to the panoply of communicative and repressive agencies
in the modern world. In its preoccupation with the power of signs and of simulation
Halley's thought bears the marks of French Poststructuralist theory. His art is both alert
to and plays upon the myths of art in a culture whose principal contribution to art, as
he sees it, has been its commodification. Originally published in Arts Magazine, New
York, September 1983. Reprinted in Halley, Collected Essays 1981-87, Zurich, 1988.
The present extracts are taken from pp. 63-73 of that edition.

Just a decade ago, having 'soul' was said to be the cure for the alienation with
which consciousness in the industrialized world was plagued. In the mechanized,
repressed, bourgeois world, it was argued, people had been stripped of their
vitality, spontaneity, and emotionality. Thus, an utterance that had 'soul,' that
was endowed with spirituality, could be said to play a role in returning
humankind to its oneness with nature, to its 'essence.'

Today, however, thinking about these issues has changed, at least in the art
world. Ideas like 'soul' and spirituality, are viewed by many as a means by
which bourgeois culture has consolidated its position by denying its historicity.
To say that a work of art is spiritual is to attribute to it universal, timeless
value. It also suggests that the society which encourages and validates works
with such attributes is itself timelessly and universally valid.

This radical and sudden transformation of opinion itself provokes examination.
Such transformed judgments are the result of a tidal wave of intellectual change
that has washed over the art world in the present decade. An art practice that
had been dominant since the Second World War has been completely swept
away and replaced by another.

The practice of art from World War II to the end of the last decade was
dominated by ideas derived from phenomenology, existentialism, and Jungian
transcendentalism. The post-war period attributed to modernism a vanguard,
heroic role, not in the political sense, but in the sense that it claimed that art
was capable of reuniting humans with some lost essence and that art was able,
as well, to release hidden, heretofore unaccomplished potentialities in the human
being.
* * *

[ . . . ] The art of this period is overwhelmingly concerned with the situation
of the individual as a perceiving and deciding entity. But before one can dismiss
the production of this epoch as merely a typical manifestation of late industrial-
ism concerned with preserving the mythic importance of the individual and of
some absolute nature upon which the individual can act, one must remember



1072 Ideas of the Postmodern

that this era was formed and determined by another historical event, an event
whose influence must be considered separately from the smooth progression of
the stages of the development of capital.

If the art of this period can be seen as positing a relationship between the
individual and nature, it is perhaps because World War II constituted an event
that acted upon those who experienced it as nature. This mammoth event,
although certainly caused by social forces, eventually evolved, for a considerable
portion of the world's people, into a phenomenon not very different from a
devastating flood or fire. World War II constituted a 'natural disaster' insofar
as it tore asunder the seamless web of signs that constitutes modern civilization.
It left countless persons in a situation in which they were faced not with the
codes that their societies had invented for them but rather with an unintended
hole in the 'empire of signs.'

One has only to look at the tenets of Sartrean existentialism, which advocates
so many of the same values as Abstract Expressionism, to realize the extent to
which the experience of the Second World War influenced the era. For Sartre,
as for the Abstract Expressionists, responsibility, action, 'good faith,' and the
problem of inventing meaning and morality were the basic issues. It is as if to
say that in the codeless world that war on such a scale had created, a world in
which the usual laws of market and class - the mechanics of the bourgeois
universe as it should be - were in abeyance, philosophy and art should be simply
about the possible actions and decisions that a human being who has been
stripped of his social role can undertake.

Why then, at the end of the '70s, did this transcendentalist, phenomenologi-
cally-oriented approach which had been dominant for thirty years abruptly
disappear to be replaced by a new practice that looks exclusively to the mass
media for its repertory of images, that rejects the phenomenology of art-making
as pretentious and mandarin, that interprets language as a closed set without
reference to extra-human reality? Why did a new practice emerge, that sub-
stitutes for phenomenological study a fascination with sociological and political
reality, that rejects the positivism of both the physical and social sciences, and
replaces the cult of originality with myriad variations on the theme of repetition?

And how and why, around 1980, did a group of French texts loosely referred
to as post-structuralist or structuralist, which includes works written from ten
to twenty years earlier by Roland Barthes, Michel Foucault, Jacques Derrida,
and Jean Baudrillard, suddenly gain favor in the intellectual climate of the art
world, influencing both artists and theorists and at the same time heralding and
effecting the sudden vanquishing of nature from this world of culture?

To start with, it is impossible not to recognize that the generation of artists
responsible for this upheaval is the first to be born after World War II and
that, conversely, the significant figures whose work was formed by the experi-
ence of the war have gradually disappeared. Consequently, the existentialist
values of the World War II generation have faded away, while the younger
generation which (in the Western world, at least) has never experienced such a
situation, in which all the rules are found inapplicable, has become fixated on
rules, that is, on language. [ . . . ]



VIIIb The Critique of Originality 1073

Or perhaps, unless one would seek an explanation in a formalist theory that
connects the development of intellectual trends to the necessary lag in the
translation of crucial texts, or that explains artistic change by the inevitable
entropy of intellectual movements, one must return to a discussion of socio-
economic factors which links cultural change to events in the development of
industrial society and of capitalism. From this point of view, structuralism and
the new art both reflect a transition from an industrial to a post-industrial
society; from a society of expanding markets to a society of stagnant growth in
which wealth is more redistributed than created; from a culture in which
production, innovation, and individualism are mythologized in the name of
creativity to a society that stresses the manipulation of what already exists, be
it capital or cultural signs. This is the culture that structuralism describes or
which can at the same time be said to create structuralism. The conditions of
such a post-industrial society have existed in Europe since the end of World
War II, when the first structuralist texts appeared there. In the United States,
the conditions of post-industrialism have only appeared in the last few years,
in the wake of Vietnam (with the curb it imposed on American colonial
ambitions), and of the oil crises of the '70s, which effectively brought to an
end the growth of the American economy. Along with the arrival of post-
industrial conditions, a new structuralist-oriented art practice has appeared in
the United States.

The advent of post-industrialism has also seemed to make obsolete the very
concept of nature, giving rise to a critique of the reign of nature in art. If the
industrial period represents the era in which nature was viewed as real, society
can today be seen as entering an era in which bourgeois culture is severing its
bond with this nature and completing the process by which it has established
its own mode of thought, its own consciousness, as referent. Increasingly, the
important 'others' of the industrial period have been eliminated - wilderness is
bracketed by law, while tribal and folk modes of social organization have been
almost completely assimilated (there remains only the difficult question of the
unconscious), f . . . ]

Bourgeois culture is increasingly seizing the opportunity to 'simulate' (in
Baudrillard's terminology) the crucial powers that were assigned to nature's
dominion - the power of thought, repeated in the computer, which 'realizes'
bourgeois dualism; the ability to create life, accomplished chemically and
mechanically; and the ability to create space itself in the binary circuitry of
computer-animation devices. Thus the circle of bourgeois thought is finally
completed; the bourgeois world is made to refer back only to itself. Recently
even the human heart, perhaps the most natural of objects in the old order, has
been reconstituted according to the thought processes of bourgeois consciousness.

Advertising's recent appropriation of the vocabularies of nature and post-war
modernism makes apparent the extent of this change, which is a triumph of the
market over nature. That beer, detergent, and makeup are now called 'natural'
is significant. Today the name 'Nature Valley' refers to a kind of breakfast
cereal; cigarettes have been given such transcendentalist labels as 'True,' 'Light,'
and 'Now.'



1074 Ideas of the Postmodern

Yet a number of troubling questions are provoked by recent structuralist art
practice. First, there is the question of how artists can address the world of the
simulacrum. If indeed the post-industrialist world is characterized by signs that
simulate rather than represent, how can an artist communicate this situation?
Is it possible to represent a simulation? If not, it only remains for the artist to
engage in the practice of simulation himself or herself. But by so doing, an
uncertain situation is set up. The practice of simulation by the artist can be
seen as an endorsement of the culture of simulacra. But one wonders if such
an endorsement is desirable if, as Marxist critics believe, post-industrial culture
constitutes a further level of social alienation. Artists who subscribe to a serious
structuralist practice still seem to be in the process of answering this question.
But, as Hal Foster has pointed out, the work of the so-called neo-expressionist
artists clearly validates the new social conditions by its simulation of the
modernist notion of the masterpiece.

Fredric Jameson has observed that cultural analysis is today dominated by
two separate trends. On one hand, there is the theory of the simulacrum, as
developed by Baudrillard. On the other, there is the work of Michel Foucault,
which sees contemporary culture not as a shimmering surface of autonomous
signs, but as a place in which the technologies of surveillance, normalization,
and categorization have ever broadening control over social life. In contrast to
Baudrillard's vision of the detached signifier, Foucault finds hidden behind the
various signifiers of contemporary society the veiled signified of power, in the
form of the consolidation of class position. One questions why artists and art
theorists today have been attracted so exclusively to Baudrillard's rather than
to Foucault's interpretation of social relationships. One wonders if perhaps
Baudrillard's brilliant world of surfaces is not more seductive than Foucault's
bleak excavation of the spaces of regimentation. And one wonders if artist and
audience, seduced by this shimmering world have not been deflected away from
the investigation of crucial issues about society's structure.



9 Fredric Jameson (b. 1934) 'The Deconstruction of
Expression'

In 1982 Jameson delivered his pioneering study Postmodernism and Consumer Society'
as a talk at the Whitney Museum of American Art in New York. He subsequently
developed this paper into the longer essay 'Post-Modernism: or the Cultural Logic of
Late Capitalism', from which the present extract is taken. His name has become
increasingly identified with the theorization of the postmodern, and this wide-ranging
essay is arguably his major statement on the issue. In seven sections it deals with
architecture, art, literature, commodities and the relationship of culture to the late-capi-
talist economy. Its central claim is that in the conditions of that stage of capitalism the
Modernist tradition simply cannot retain its critical raison d'etre: it has been absorbed
as the official culture. Postmodernism' is not therefore a merely stylistic departure. In
Jameson's periodizing hypothesis Modernism is construed as a long wave extending



VIIIb The Critique of Originality 1075

from the late nineteenth century to some time after the Second World War, which is
now a spent force. Postmodernism is seen as the succeeding 'cultural dominant', and
it is the essay's main task to delineate its properties as such. The present excerpt
constitutes the essay's first section, restricted to discussion of art. Here Jameson
contrasts the canonical expressive Modernism of van Gogh and Munch with the puta-
tively postmodern work of Andy Warhol. The essay was first published in New Left
Review, 146, July/August 1984, pp. 53-92.



'Peasant Shoes'

We will begin with one of the canonical works of high modernism in visual art,
van Gogh's well-known painting of the peasant shoes, an example which as you
can imagine has not been innocently or randomly chosen. I want to propose
two ways of reading this painting, both of which in some fashion reconstruct
the reception of the work in a two-stage or double-level process.

I first want to suggest that if this copiously reproduced image is not to sink
to the level of sheer decoration, it requires us to reconstruct some initial situation
out of which the finished work emerges. Unless that situation - which has
vanished into the past - is somehow mentally restored, the painting will remain
an inert object, a reified end-product, and be unable to be grasped as a symbolic
act in its own right, as praxis and as production.

This last term suggests that one way of reconstructing the initial situation to
which the work is somehow a response is by stressing the raw materials, the
initial content, which it confronts and which it reworks, transforms, and
appropriates. In van Gogh, that content, those initial raw materials, are, I will
suggest, to be grasped simply as the whole object world of agricultural misery,
of stark rural poverty, and the whole rudimentary human world of backbreaking
peasant toil, a world reduced to its most brutal and menaced, primitive and
marginalized state.

Fruit trees in this world are ancient and exhausted sticks coming out of poor
soil; the people of the village are worn down to their skulls, caricatures of some
ultimate grotesque typology of basic human feature types. How is it then that
in van Gogh such things as apple trees explode into a hallucinatory surface of
colour, while his village stereotypes are suddenly and garishly overlaid with hues
of red and green? I will briefly suggest, in this first interpretative option, that
the willed and violent transformation of a drab peasant object world into the
most glorious materialization of pure colour in oil paint is to be seen as a
Utopian gesture: as an act of compensation which ends up producing a whole
new Utopian realm of the senses, or at least of that supreme sense - sight, the
visual, the eye - which it now reconstitutes for us as a semi-autonomous space
in its own right - part of some new division of labour in the body of capital,
some new fragmentation of the emergent sensorium which replicates the spe-
cializations and divisions of capitalist life at the same time that it seeks in
precisely such fragmentation a desperate Utopian compensation for them.

There is, to be sure, a second reading of van Gogh which can hardly be
ignored when we gaze at this particular painting, and that is Heidegger's central
analysis in Der Ursprung des Kunstwerkes, which is organized around the idea



1076 Ideas of the Postmodern

that the work of art emerges within the gap between Earth and World, or what
I would prefer to translate as the meaningless materiality of the body and nature
and the meaning-endowment of history and of the social. We will return to that
particular gap or rift later on; suffice it here to recall some of the famous
phrases, which model the process whereby these henceforth illustrious peasant
shoes slowly recreate about themselves the whole missing object-world which
was once their lived context. 'In them,' says Heidegger, 'there vibrates the silent
call of the earth, its quiet gift of ripening corn and its enigmatic self-refusal in
the fallow desolation of the wintry field.' 'This equipment,' he goes on, 'belongs
to the earth and it is protected in the world of the peasant woman . . . Van
Gogh's painting is the disclosure of what the equipment, the pair of peasant
shoes, is in truth . . . This entity emerges into the unconcealment of its being',
by way of the mediation of the work of art, which draws the whole absent world
and earth into revelation around itself, along with the heavy tread of the peasant
woman, the loneliness of the field path, the hut in the clearing, the worn and
broken instruments of labour in the furrows and at the hearth. Heidegger's
account needs to be completed by insistence on the renewed materiality of the
work, on the transformation of one form of materiality - the earth itself and
its paths and physical objects - into that other materiality of oil paint affirmed
and foregrounded in its own right and for its own visual pleasures; but has
nonetheless a satisfying plausibility.

'Diamond Dust Shoes'

At any rate, both of these readings may be described as hermeneutical, in the
sense in which the work in its inert, objectal form, is taken as a clue or a
symptom for some vaster reality which replaces it as its ultimate truth. Now
we need to look at some shoes of a different kind, and it is pleasant to be able
to draw for such an image on the recent work of the central figure in
contemporary visual art. Andy Warhol's Diamond Dust Shoes evidently no longer
speaks to us with any of the immediacy of van Gogh's footgear: indeed, I am
tempted to say that it does not really speak to us at all. Nothing in this painting
organizes even a minimal place for the viewer, who confronts it at the turning
of a museum corridor or gallery with all the contingency of some inexplicable
natural object. On the level of the content, we have to do with what are now
far more clearly fetishes, both in the Freudian and in the Marxian sense (Derrida
remarks, somewhere, about the Heideggerian Paar Bauernschube, that the van
Gogh footgear are a heterosexual pair, which allows neither for perversion nor
for fetishization). Here, however, we have a random collection of dead objects,
hanging together on the canvas like so many turnips, as shorn of their earlier
life-world as the pile of shoes left over from Auschwitz, or the remainders and
tokens of some incomprehensible and tragic fire in a packed dancehall. There
is therefore in Warhol no way to complete the hermeneutic gesture, and to
restore to these oddments that whole larger lived context of the dance hall or
the ball, the world of jetset fashion or of glamour magazines. Yet this is even
more paradoxical in the light of biographical information: Warhol began his



VIIIb The Critique of Originality 1077

artistic career as a commercial illustrator for shoe fashions and a designer of
display windows in which various pumps and slippers figured prominently.
Indeed, one is tempted to raise here - far too prematurely - one of the central
issues about postmodernism itself and its possible political dimensions: Andy
Warhol's work in fact turns centrally around commodification, and the great
billboard images of the Coca-cola bottle or the Campbell's Soup Can, which
explicitly foreground the commodity fetishism of a transition to late capital,
ought to be powerful and critical political statements. If they are not that, then
one would surely want to know why, and one would want to begin to wonder
a little more seriously about the possibilities of political or critical art in the
postmodern period of late capital.

But there are some other significant differences between the high modernist
and the postmodernist moment, between the shoes of van Gogh and the shoes
of Andy Warhol, on which we must now very briefly dwell. The first and most
evident is the emergence of a new kind of flatness or depthlessness, a new
kind of superficiality in the most literal sense - perhaps the supreme formal
feature of all the postmodernisms to which we will have occasion to return in
a number of other contexts.

Then we must surely come to terms with the role of photography and the
photographic/negative in contemporary art of this kind: and it is this indeed
which confers its deathly quality on the Warhol image, whose glaced x-ray
elegance mortifies the reified eye of the viewer in a way that would seem to
have nothing to do with death or the death obsession or the death anxiety on
the level of content. It is indeed as though we had here to do with the inversion
of van Gogh's Utopian gesture: in the earlier work, a stricken world is by some
Nietzschean fiat and act of the will transformed into the stridency of Utopian
colour. Here, on the contrary, it is as though the external and coloured surface
of things - debased and contaminated in advance by their assimilation to glossy
advertising images - has been stripped away to reveal the deathly black-and-
white substratum of the photographic negative which subtends them. Although
this kind of death of the world of appearance becomes thematized in certain of
Warhol's pieces - most notably, the traffic accidents or the electric chair series
- this is not, I think, a matter of content any longer but of some more
fundamental mutation both in the object world itself - now become a set of
texts or simulacra - and in the disposition of the subject.



The Waning of Affect

All of which brings me to the third feature I had in mind to develop here
briefly, namely what I will call the waning of affect in postmodern culture. Of
course, it would be inaccurate to suggest that all affect, all feeling or emotion,
all subjectivity, has vanished from the newer image. Indeed, there is a kind of
return of the repressed in Diamond Dust Shoes, a strange compensatory deco-
rative exhilaration, explicitly designated by the title itself although perhaps more
difficult to observe in the reproduction. This is the glitter of gold dust, the
spangling of gilt sand, which seals the surface of the painting and yet continues



1078 Ideas of the Postmodern

to glint at us. Think, however, of Rimbaud's magical flowers 'that look back at
you', or of the august premonitory eye-flashes of Rilke's archaic Greek torso
which warn the bourgeois subject to change his life: nothing of that sort here,
in the gratuitous frivolity of this final decorative overlay.

The waning of affect is, however, perhaps best initially approached by way
of the human figure, and it is obvious that what we have said about the
commodification of objects holds as strongly for Warhol's human subjects, stars
- like Marilyn Monroe - who are themselves commodified and transformed into
their own images. And here too a certain brutal return to the older period of
high modernism offers a dramatic shorthand parable of the transformation in
question. Edvard Munch's painting The Scream is of course a canonical express-
ion of the great modernist thematics of alienation, anomie, solitude and social
fragmentation and isolation, a virtually programmatic emblem of what used to
be called the age of anxiety. It will here be read not merely as an embodiment
of the expression of that kind of affect, but even more as a virtual deconstruction
of the very aesthetic of expression itself, which seems to have dominated
much of what we call high modernism, but to have vanished away - for both
practical and theoretical reasons - in the world of the postmodern. The very
concept of expression presupposes indeed some separation within the subject,
and along with that a whole metaphysics of the inside and the outside, of the
wordless pain within the monad and the moment in which, often cathartically,
that 'emotion' is then projected out and externalized, as gesture or cry, as
desperate communication and the outward dramatization of inward feeling. And
this is perhaps the moment to say something about contemporary theory, which
has among other things been committed to the mission of criticizing and
discrediting this very hermeneutic model of the inside and the outside and of
stigmatizing such models as ideological and metaphysical. But what is today
called contemporary theory - or better still, theoretical discourse - is also, I
would want to argue, itself very precisely a postmodernist phenomenon. It would
therefore be inconsistent to defend the truth of its theoretical insights in a
situation in which the very concept of 'truth' itself is part of the metaphysical
baggage which poststructuralism seeks to abandon. What we can at least suggest
is that the poststructuralist critique of the hermeneutic, of what I will shortly
call the depth model, is useful for us as a very significant symptom of the very
postmodernist culture which is our subject here.

Overhastily, we can say that besides the hermeneutic model of inside and
outside which Munch's painting develops, there are at least four other fun-
damental depth models which have generally been repudiated in contemporary
theory: the dialectical one of essence and appearance (along with a whole range
of concepts of ideology or false consciousness which tend to accompany it); the
Freudian model of latent and manifest, or of repression (which is of course the
target of Michel Foucault's programmatic and symptomatic pamphlet La Volonte
de savoir); the existential model of authenticity and inauthenticity, whose heroic
or tragic thematics are closely related to that other great opposition between
alienation and disalienation, itself equally a casualty of the poststructural or
postmodern period; and finally, latest in time, the great semiotic opposition



VHIb The Critique of Originality 1079

between signifier and signified, which was itself rapidly unravelled and decon-
structed during its brief heyday in the 1960s and 70s. What replaces these
various depth models is for the most part a conception of practices, discourses
and textual play, whose new syntagmatic structures we will examine later on:
suffice it merely to observe that here too depth is replaced by surface, or by
multiple surfaces (what is often called intertextuality is in that sense no longer
a matter of depth). [ . . . ]



Euphoria and Self-Annihilation

Returning now for one last moment to Munch's painting, it seems evident that
The Scream subtly but elaborately deconstructs its own aesthetic of expression,
all the while remaining imprisoned within it. Its gestural content already
underscores its own failure, since the realm of the sonorous, the cry, the raw
vibrations of the human throat, are incompatible with its medium (something
underscored within the work by the homunculus' lack of ears). Yet the absent
scream returns more closely towards that even more absent experience of
atrocious solitude and anxiety which the scream was itself to 'express'. Such
loops inscribe themselves on the painted surface in the form of those great
concentric circles in which sonorous vibration becomes ultimately visible, as on
the surface of a sheet of water - in an infinite regress which fans out from the
sufferer to become the very geography of a universe in which pain itself now
speaks and vibrates through the material sunset and the landscape. The visible
world now becomes the wall of the monad on which this 'scream running
through nature' (Munch's words) is recorded and transcribed: one thinks of that
character of Lautreamont who, growing up inside a sealed and silent membrane,
on sight of the monstrousness of the deity, ruptures it with his own scream and
thereby rejoins the world of sound and suffering.

All of which suggests some more general historical hypothesis: namely, that
concepts such as anxiety and alienation (and the experiences to which they
correspond, as in The Scream) are no longer appropriate in the world of the
postmodern. The great Warhol figures - Marilyn herself, or Edie Sedgewick -
the notorious burn-out and self-destruction cases of the ending 1960s, and the
great dominant experiences of drugs and schizophrenia - these would seem to
have little enough in common anymore, either with the hysterics and neurotics
of Freud's own day, or with those canonical experiences of radical isolation and
solitude, anomie, private revolt, van Gogh-type madness, which dominated the
period of high modernism. This shift in the dynamics of cultural pathology can
be characterized as one in which the alienation of the subject is displaced by
the fragmentation of the subject.

Such terms inevitably recall one of the more fashionable themes in contem-
porary theory - that of the 'death' of the subject itself = the end of the
autonomous bourgeois monad or ego or individual - and the accompanying
stress, whether as some new moral ideal or as empirical description, on the
decentring of that formerly centred subject or psyche. (Of the two possible
formulations of this notion - the historicist one, that a once-existing centred



1080 Ideas of the Postmodern

subject, in the period of classical capitalism and the nuclear family, has today
in the world of organizational bureaucracy dissolved; and the more radical
poststructuralist position for which such a subject never existed in the first place
but constituted something like an ideological mirage - I obviously incline
towards the former; the latter must in any case take into account something
like a 'reality of the appearance'.)

We must add that the problem of expression is itself closely linked to some
conception of the subject as a monad-like container, within which things are
felt which are then expressed by projection outwards. What we must now stress,
however, is the degree to which the high-modernist conception of a unique style,
along with the accompanying collective ideals of an artistic or political vanguard
or avant-garde, themselves stand or fall along with that older notion (or
experience) of the so-called centred subject.

Here too Munch's painting stands as a complex reflexion on this complicated
situation: it shows us that expression requires the category of the individual
monad, but it also shows us the heavy price to be paid for that precondition,
dramatizing the unhappy paradox that when you constitute your individual
subjectivity as a self-sufficient field and a closed realm in its own right, you
thereby also shut yourself off from everything else and condemn yourself to the
windless solitude of the monad, buried alive and condemned to a prison-cell
without egress.

Postmodernism will presumably signal the end of this dilemma, which it
replaces with a new one. The end of the bourgeois ego or monad no doubt
brings with it the end of the psychopathologies of that ego as well - what I
have generally here been calling the waning of affect. But it means the end of
much more - the end for example of style, in the sense of the unique and the
personal, the end of the distinctive individual brushstroke (as symbolized by the
emergent primacy of mechanical reproduction). As for expression and feelings
or emotions, the liberation, in contemporary society, from the older anotnie of
the centred subject may also mean, not merely a liberation from anxiety, but a
liberation from every other kind of feeling as well, since there is no longer a
self present to do the feeling. This is not to say that the cultural products of
the postmodern era are utterly devoid of feeling, but rather that such feelings
- which it may be better and more accurate to call 'intensities' - are now
free-floating and impersonal. [. . .]



10 Haim Steinbach (b. 1944), Jeff Koons (b. 1955),
Sherrie Levine (b. 1947), Philip Taaffe (b. 1955),
Peter Halley (b. 1953), Ashley Bickerton (b. 1959)
'From Criticism to Complicity'

The discussion between these leading members of New York's art world of the 1980s
addresses an important shift in emphasis in the concerns of a 'postmodern' art: an
interest not in rejecting the world of commodities, but rather in working with and from



VIIIb The Critique of Originality 1081

within the now pervasive condition of commodification of values in general. The discus-
sion, moderated by Peter Nagy, took place at the Pat Hearn Gallery, New York, 2 May
1986. It was edited by David Robbins and published in Flash Art, no. 129, Milan,
Summer 1986, pp. 46-9, from which the present extracts are taken.

PETER NAGY: In what ways does this new work depart from or elaborate upon
work done by the Pictures generation of appropriators (that being the group
associated, early on, with Metro Pictures: Sherrie Levine, Richard Prince,
Troy Brauntuch, etc.)? Haim, would you address that question, because your
work is in many ways an elaboration of those strategies . . .

HAIM STEINBACH: [. . .] Whereas most of the Pictures-generation artists have
been lifting images to make their work, I have been using objects. The
discourse this art has been engaged in questions the position of the subject
in relation to the image/object. There has been a growing awareness of the
way that media affect our viewing of reality in a pictorial fashion. In a sense,
the media have been turning us into tourists and voyeurs outside our own
experience. The Pictures artists have been involved in questioning their own
position as producers of art in relation to the mythic baggage of subjectivity
and individuality, of which they have become acutely self-conscious. There
has been a shift in the activities of the new group of artists in that there is
a renewed interest in locating one's desire, by which I mean one's own taking
pleasure in objects and commodities, which includes what we call works of
art. There is a stronger sense of being complicit with the production of desire,
what we traditionally call beautiful seductive objects, than being positioned
somewhere outside of it. In this sense the idea of criticality in art is also
changing.

ASHLEY BICKERTON: If we're going to draw a difference,^ it's going to have to
be between the original program, as outlined by critics such as Douglas Crimp
and Craig Owens, and the tendencies now beginning to emerge with the
younger artists. A key operative word that may be useful right now would
be 'truth': I feel the Pictures group was after a particular deconstruction or
breakdown of the process of the corruption of truth, whereas at this point I
feel we are utilizing that process of corruption as a poetic form, a platform
or launching pad for poetic discourse in itself. Through tactile choices and
presentation, the art object has now been placed in a discursive relationship
with the larger scenario of the political and social reality of which it is a part.
In a self-conscious and ongoing dialogue with the social, political, and
intellectual climate of the time and place it will operate in, and with the
entire process of its absorption. Much of the work produced by the Pictures
group was essentially deconstructive and task-oriented in its spectacular
didacticism. It was a cool approach to hot culture, whereas this new work of
which we speak has more to do with information in general, specifically the
schism that exists between information and assumed meanings, particularly
how the formal elaboration of information necessarily affects its possible
meanings. This work has a somewhat less Utopian bent than its predecessor.

PN: So we've learned some strategies from the Pictures generation.



1082 Ideas of the Postmodern

AB: We've consciously learned and incorporated strategies from a lot of art-
historical sources. I tend to think that right now, at least from this vantage
point, with the wash of contrary information we have witnessed in the postwar
period, with the comings and goings of all sorts of different isms, we're now
able to step back and merge, in fact to implode a variety of different strategies
and epistemologies into the total art object that is capable of speaking of its
own predicament as well as in general. This would oppose it to the directed
programmatic operative of original Pictures practice.

PN: How integral are notions of leftist politics or cultural subversion in the
work?

* * *

PETER HALLEY: I think that Marxian thought really has to be integrated into
one's thinking, but I identify myself more with a New Left position, in which
an absurdist or existential position is integrated with Marxian concepts. In
addition, I'd like to bring in figures, like McLuhan, who are also involved
with a kind of political thinking. I think it's difficult nowadays to talk about
a political situation: along with reality, politics is sort of an outdated notion.
We are now in a post-political situation. As an artist, one ends up aspiring
to make an art object that is a situationist object, in and of itself, in the way
it's put together. Rather than addressing topical issues, I think that a work
of art has to address critical issues: the topical political issues of the day, to
the extent they exist, are certainly of concern to people as individuals, but
in a work of art it is the structural questions behind those topical issues that
are important. For me, the most political component in a work of art - and
it's a component that the work of everybody on this panel shares - is the
idea that the work be conceived in such a way that anyone could do it. That's
what I've always admired about Warhol or Stella - that one has a sense that
one could actually participate in the making of the work. Finally, I find myself
strongly interested in addressing postindustrial issues: the issues of the
situation of the suburbanized middle classes in postindustrial countries. That's
not to say that what's going on with other classes that are in even worse
shape isn't of interest, but those situations seem to me more clear cut. It's
precisely the ambiguity and the sort of unknown quality of life in the
subdivision that seems worth addressing.

PN: [ . . . ] It seems to me that (and perhaps this accounts for the great success
that so much of this work has achieved so quickly) in each of the individual
works of art, there are two separate dialectics operating: on one hand, the
work is appealing to an audience primarily composed of artists and intellec-
tuals, and on the other to an audience primarily composed of collectors and
dealers. I'm wondering how conscious the artist is of designing a work of art
for audiences that are, in fact, very different, very far apart.

HS: In my case, I spend a lot of time shopping, and I find the commodities
that I look at to be very often addressed to a general audience, of which I
am a part. On one hand there is an art context, out of which I come, and
through which I think about what it means to present an object with another
object or with another form. On the other hand I use groupings or arrange-



!



VHIb The Critique of Originality 1083

ments of objects that are already pre-set for a general audience.

PN: So you're saying it's pretty unconscious on your part.

HS: I am conscious that in many ways today the distinctions between an elite
as opposed to a more general audience are becoming blurred. There is an
equalizing factor at work in the way things are produced now giving an illusion
of a shared freedom, of one audience. This kind of dynamic interests me,
and I attempt to deal with it in my work.

PHILIP TAAFFE: Generally, I'm opposed to a difficult level of hermeticism
within a work. I want the work to be as open as possible. I want my work
to be freely experienced.

JEFF KOONS: To me, the issue of being able to capture a general audience and
also have the art stay on the highest orders is of great interest. I think anyone
can come to my work from the general culture: I don't set up any kind of
requirement. Almost like television. I tell a story that is easy for anyone to
enter into and on some level enjoy, whether they enjoy just a little glitter of
it and get excited by that or may be, like with the Equilibrium Tanks, they
get a kick out of the sensationalism of seeing basketballs just hover. The
objects and the other images that are interconnected to the body of work
have other contexts and, depending on how much the viewer wants to enter
it, they can try to get more out of it and start dealing in art vocabulary
instead of just sensational or personal vocabulary, and start to deal with
abstractions of ideas and of context. So, I purposely always try at least to get
the mass of people in the door, and if they can go farther, if they want to
continue to deal in an art vocabulary I hope that that would happen, because
by all means I am not trying to exclude high-art vocabulary. [ . . . ] I would
like to offer up a term that has had vital currency in the process of my own
thinking: contingency. I think that through this procession of contingencies,
discourses are being pulled together into the object itself, promoting an
awareness of the fact that all meanings are contingent upon some other
meaning, where meanings are appropriated for their relationship to external
forces, the larger social schema in which they're involved.

* * *

PN: Finally, much of the new sculpture can be understood specifically in terms
of the idea of the anxiety of the object, whether consumer commodity, fetish,
or art object. I'm wondering if this anxiety is actually the anxiety of late
capitalist culture, and the anxiety of the situation of the artist within late
capitalist culture, as well as perhaps the anxiety of the collector's complicated
and conflicting relationship within capitalism.

HS: The anxiety of late capitalist culture is in us: in the futility we experience
in value systems when faced with our reality; in the futility we find in
moralizing as a way of determining what's good or bad. Is there such a thing
as a consumer object, a fetish object, an art object, or is it our relation to it
that concerns us?

JK: As far as the relationship to the object, in a capitalist society we're repaid,
for the work that we do, with objects. And in the objects we can see
personality traits of individuals, and we treat them like individuals. Some of



1084 Ideas of the Postmodern

these objects tend to be stronger than we are, and will out-survive us. That's
a threatening situation to be confronted with.
AB: It's not just sculpture that is concerned with this development. After years
of pulling the object off the wall, smearing it across the fields in the Utah
desert, and playing it out with our bodily secretions, the artwork has not
awkwardly but aggressively asserted itself back into the gallery context: the
space of art - but this with an aggressive discomfort and a complicit defiance

SHERRIE LEVINE: I think there is a long modernist tradition of endgame art -
starting with dada and the suprematists (if you like), and a lot of artists have
made the last painting ever to be made. It's a no-man's land that a lot of us
enjoy moving around in, and the thing is not to lose your sense of humor,
because it's only art.



11 Julia Kristeva (b. 1941) Interview with Catherine
Francblin

By the 1980s Kristeva's main work was in psychoanalysis, particularly in fields con-
cerning religion and myth. In the present interview she relates images deriving from the
Catholic tradition, deeply embedded in Western culture, to the widespread contempor-
ary imagery of the mass media and popular culture. She also contrasts Modernism and
Postmodernism in psychoanalytic terms: seeing the former as engaged in 'psychic
unlinking', the latter as drawing together fragments into an eclectic unity. The interview
was originally published in Flash Art, no. 126, February-March 1986, pp. 44-7, from
which the present extracts are taken.

JK: [ . . . ] It seems important to me never to neglect the transverbal dimension
in communication, to take into account the visual factor, the plastic aspect
of the icon as signifier, which lends itself more readily to playfulness, to
invention, to interpretation, than verbal thought, which can have a repressive
intellectual weight. Catholicism understood the cathartic role of the image
well. Catharsis is not the equivalent, of course, of a treatment of the symptom
or traumatism, but it can provide a sort of pleasure and thus a rebirth for
the psychic economy. It was perhaps believed - both by American psycho-
analysis and by a certain Lacanianism - that it would be possible to do without
the imaginary once one got to a more logical treatment, a more rational way
of looking at symptoms. That was not, in my opinion, Freud's view, the
'fundamental rule' of analysis which is free association bears witness to the
importance that he attached to the imaginary. It is perhaps not excessive to
suppose that symbolical elaboration, which has recently been so valued, leads
to a truth that is established once and for all, a truth for which the imaginary
appears to be limited to a pleasure principle that is inferior to the reality
principal that is to be reached. But it is possible that this sort of demand, a
rather stoic one, is only applicable for certain individuals who are particularly
mature and autonomous. The present-day unfurling of images in a mass-media



VIIIb The Critique of Originality 1085

culture, the unfurling of regressive content, adolescent, infantile and sen-
timental, would tend to show that the rational, responsible individual is a
pure fantasy of psychoanalysis. The need for the imaginary, in fact, never
ceases to make itself felt and is never exhausted.

CF: Would the imaginary realm to which television and comic strips appeal
play the same cathartic role as the imaginary appealed to by sacred texts?

JK: Certainly. Mass-media culture is less codified, it is not as universal, we do
not have one book to put into images and forms, but several; that is why we
have this explosion of forms and images. They may seem mediocre compared
to the great myths that speak to us of life and death, but the 'minor details'
transmitted on the analyst's couch and on TV are not without effect on our
day-to-day ailments, just like sacred images. We are living through a frag-
mentation of the imaginary. It is less majestic, less impressive than a cathedral,
but the same mechanism in the psychic apparatus is involved.

CF: The works of young artists inspired by popular images might therefore be
our sacred images.

JK: Indeed I believe that these images have a therapeutic impact. They are as
passing flashes because they capture at a given moment an anxiety transmitted
by such and such a comic strip, or TV image, an anxiety that they frame
and represent so that your attention is drawn to it here and now, in the same
way that analytic practice does. As far as knowing whether these works have
'value' or not, that is another question. That is the question that all of
contemporary art poses. Yet isn't it true that our culture as a whole is involved
in a change of the scale of value in the Nietzschean sense? [ . . . ] A discourse
on art does not depend only upon the personality of the interpreter, but also
upon his strategy. He may wish to insist upon the continuity between the
ancients and the moderns. [. . .] There may be another strategy, which
demands that one accentuate the idea of a rupture and affirm novelty. Both
strategies are justified, because in my opinion rupture and continuity are both
present at once. Only the accents are different. Modern art puts the accent
on psychic unlinking, on the pulverizing of the image. From this point of
view, it evokes the experience of a sort of pre-narcissism in our psychic life.
Postmodernism, trying to gather together the pieces of this representation,
evokes, on the other hand, a moment of the psychic make-up when, under
the influence of the erotic drive or of death anxiety, the subject attempts to
unify the ego. Let's say that modern art insists upon the individual as
fragmented, wandering, at loose ends, as one who cannot find himself in the
mirror of any ideology. It seizes this moment of fragmentation in a gesture
that does not give it meaning but is, in its very formal existence, a gesture
of fleeting sovereignty and of momentary enthusiasm. Postmodernism, on the
other hand, tries to integrate this wandering in an eclectic unity, containing
regressive elements to be sure, but constituting a step beyond the idea of an
avant-garde as it imposes a content and the elaboration of a mediation.



vine

Figures of Difference



1 Edward Said (b. 1935) from 'Opponents,
Audiences, Constituencies, and Community'

Said is a Palestinian who at the time of writing occupies the position of Professor of
Comparative Literature at Columbia University, New York. His book Orientalism, 1978,
treats specifically of its subject as, in his own words, 'a Western style for dominating,
restructuring, and having authority over the Orient'. As the following text demonstrates,
his work has general application in the diagnosis of those mechanisms of imperialism
which are covertly at work in representation - at work, that is to say, both in forms of
representation and in the formation of those disciplines which make forms of repre-
sentation their business. Originally given as an address to a symposium on The Politics
of Interpretation' at the University of Chicago's Center for Continuing Education, 30
October-1 November 1981; first published in Critical Inquiry, vol. 9, no. 1, Chicago,
1982; reprinted in W. J. T. Mitchell (ed.), The Politics of Interpretation, Chicago and
London, 1983, pp. 7-32, from which the present extract is taken.

[. . .] Unlike France, high culture in America is assumed to be above politics
as a matter of unanimous convention. And unlike England, the intellectual center
here is filled not by European imports (although they play a considerable role)
but by an unquestioned ethic of objectivity and realism, based essentially on an
epistemology of separation and difference. Thus each field is separate from the
others because the subject matter is separate. Each separation corresponds
immediately to a separation in function, institution, history, and purpose. Each
discourse 'represents' the field, which in turn is supported by its own consti-
tuency and the specialized audience to which it appeals. The mark of true
professionalism is accuracy of representation of society, vindicated in the case
of sociology, for instance, by a direct correlation between representation of
society and corporate and/or governmental interests, a role in social policymak-
ing, access to political authority. Literary studies, conversely, are realistically
not about society but about masterpieces in need of periodic adulation and
appreciation. Such correlations make possible the use of words like 'objectivity,'
'realism,' and 'moderation' when used in sociology or in literary criticism. And
these notions in turn assure their own confirmation by careful selectivity of
evidence, the incorporation and subsequent neutralization of dissent (also known



VIIIc Figures of Difference 1087

as pluralism), and networks of insiders, experts whose presence is due to their
conformity, not to any rigorous judgment of their past performance (the good
team player always turns up).

[ . . . ] The particular mission of the humanities is, in the aggregate, to
represent noninterference in the affairs of the everyday world. As we have seen,
there has been a historical erosion in the role of letters since the New Criticism,
and I have suggested that the conjuncture of a narrowly based university
environment for technical language and literature studies with the self-policing,
self-purifying communities erected even by Marxist, as well as other disciplinary,
discourses, produced a very small but definite function for the humanities: to
represent humane marginality, which is also to preserve and if possible to conceal
the hierarchy of powers that occupy the center, define the social terrain, and
fix the limits of use functions, fields, marginality, and so on. Some of the
corollaries of this role for the humanities generally and literary criticism in
particular are that the institutional presence of humanities guarantees a space
for the deployment of free-floating abstractions (scholarship, taste, tact, human-
ism) that are defined in advance as indefinable; that when it is not easily
domesticated, 'theory' is employable as a discourse of occultation and legitim-
ation; that self-regulation is the ethos behind which the institutional humanities
allow and in a sense encourage the unrestrained operation of market forces that
were traditionally thought of as subject to ethical and philosophical review.

Very broadly stated, then, noninterference for the humanist means laissez-
faire: 'they' can run the country, we will explicate Wordsworth and Schlegel.
It does not stretch things greatly to note that non-interference and rigid
specialization in the academy are directly related to what has been called a
counterattack by 'highly mobilized business elites' in reaction to the immediately
preceding period during which national needs were thought of as fulfilled by
resources allocated collectively and democratically. [. . .]

. . . the politics of interpretation demands a dialectical response from a critical
consciousness worthy of its name. Instead of noninterference and specialization,
there must be interference, a crossing of borders and obstacles, a determined
attempt to generalize exactly at those points where generalizations seem impossible
to make. One of the first interferences to be ventured, then, is a crossing from
literature, which is supposed to be subjective and powerless, into those exactly
parallel realms, now covered by journalism and the production of information,
that employ representation but are supposed to be objective and powerful. [. . .]

... we need to think about breaking out of the disciplinary ghettos in which
as intellectuals we have been confined, to reopen the blocked social processes
ceding objective representation (hence power) of the world to a small coterie of
experts and their clients, to consider that the audience for literacy is not a
closed circle of three thousand professional critics but the community of human
beings living in society, and to regard social reality in a secular rather than a
mystical mode, despite all the protestations about realism and objectivity.

Two concrete tasks . . . strike me as particularly useful. One is to use the
visual faculty (which also happens to be dominated by visual media such as
television, news photography, and commercial film, all of them fundamentally



1088 Ideas of the Postmodern

immediate, 'objective,' and ahistorical) to restore the nonsequential energy of
lived historical memory and subjectivity as fundamental components of meaning
in representation. Berger calls this an alternative use of photography: using
photomontage to tell other stories than the official sequential or ideological ones
produced by institutions of power. [...] Second is opening the culture to
experiences of the Other which have remained 'outside' (and have been repressed
or framed in a context of confrontational hostility) the norms manufactured by
'insiders.' An excellent example is Malek Alloula's Le Harem colonial, a study
of early twentieth-century postcards and photographs of Algerian harem women.
The pictorial capture of colonized people by colonizer, which signifies power,
is reenacted by a young Algerian sociologist, Alloula, who sees his own frag-
mented history in the pictures, then reinscribes this history in his text as the
result of understanding and making that intimate experience intelligible for an
audience of modern European readers.

In both instances, finally, we have the recovery of a history hitherto either
misrepresented or rendered invisible. Stereotypes of the Other have always been
connected to political actualities of one sort or another, just as the truth of lived
communal (or personal) experience has often been totally sublimated in official
narratives, institutions, and ideologies. But in having attempted - and perhaps
even successfully accomplishing - this recovery, there is the crucial next phase:
connecting these more politically vigilant forms of interpretation to an ongoing
political and social praxis. Short of making that connection, even the best-
intentioned and the cleverest interpretive activity is bound to sink back into the
murmur of mere prose. For to move from interpretation to its politics is in
large measure to go from undoing to doing, and this given the currently accepted
divisions between criticism and art, is risking all the discomfort of a great
unsettlement in ways of seeing and doing. One must refuse to believe, however,
that the comforts of specialized habits can be so seductive as to keep us all in
our assigned places.



2 Mary Kelly (b. 1941) 'Re-Viewing Modernist
Criticism'

In Kelly's work as an artist the supposed objectivity of Modernist criticism is challenged
from the position of a feminist practice which makes sexual difference its explicit
material. In this essay she discusses what she takes to be the legacies of the
avant-garde practices of the later 1960s and early 1970s: a concern not with the
constraints of specific media but with the conditions of production of meaning; an
awareness of the determining role of the institutional contexts of distribution and
reception of art; and an acknowledgement of the significance of sexuality as a property
not simply of artistic authors but also of the 'readers' of artistic texts. Originally
published in Screen, vol. 22, no. 3, London, Autumn 1981, pp. 41-62, from which the
present text is taken.

[. . .] In this article, modernism is defined as a determinant discursive field
with reference to critical writing since 1945. It is maintained that modernist



I



VIIIc Figures of Difference 1089

discourse is produced at the level of the statement, by the specific practices of
art criticism, by the art activities implicated in the critic/author's formulations,
and by the institutions which disseminate and disperse the formulations as
events. [ . . . ]

The Pictorial Paradigm

In a note to the article 'Photography and Aesthetics,' Peter Wollen remarks.
'The category of "modernism" has increasingly been captured by those who see
twentieth-century art primarily in terms of reflexivity and ontological explora-
tion.' 1 If it is possible to define this capture in other terms as the predominance
of a particular discourse within the hierarchy of discourses which constitute
modernism as a discursive field, then the effectivity of that discourse can be
described more exactly as the production of a norm for pictorial representation
which does not necessarily correspond to definite pictures, but rather to a set
of general assumptions concerning 'Modern Art.' Further, if these assumptions
are not seen to be based on the consensus of a homogeneous mass audience of
art viewers, but formed within calculated practices of reviewing, publishing, and
exhibiting art for a specific public, then the reading of artistic texts is always
in some sense subjected to the determining conditions of these practices,
crucially those of criticism. [. . .]

* * *

Criticism's function is to initiate that work which art history eventually
accomplishes in the form of the 'biographic narrative' that is, as Griselda Pollock
describes it 'the production of an artistic subject for works of art'. 2 The critic's
dilemma is the production of artistic subjects for works of art at a time when
their authenticity (and market value) are still tentative. Modernist criticism
became particularly precarious when it concerned the installation of creative
purposes behind objects which were recalcitrant to such efforts or even, in the
case of some conceptual work, absent altogether.

The Crisis of Artistic Authorship

Greenberg's writing is often cited as the apodictic core of modernist criticism:
but it is far from coherent. Rather, it marks a point of diffraction, of incoherence
in that discourse. His particular attention to the materiality of the object allowed
a divergence from the ontological norm which was furthered by developments
of art practice and which, consequently, required a restatement of modernism's
central themes at a moment when the vacuity of that project was keenly
perceived in contrast to the aims and intentions of some of the artists to whom
he referred.

* * *

Greenberg's attempt to establish the objective purposiveness of the art
object, to define its particular forms of adaption to definite ends in terms of
material substrate, is continually undermined by the exigencies of a subjective
judgment of taste. And here an altogether different order of purpose emerges.



1090 Ideas of the Postmodern



The only necessary condition for judging good art is common sense; but for
producing good art, genius is required. With reference to Kant's Critique, genius
is the mental disposition (ingenium) through which nature gives the rule to art.
No definite rule can be given for the products of genius, hence originality is
its first property. At this point the modernist discourse emerges as the site of
an insistent contradiction which is indicated in Greenberg's criticism and
repeated in the opposing strategies of the institutions of education on the one
hand and those of entertainment and art patronage on the other. The former
exacts a formal field of knowledge about art, an empirical domain of teachable
crafts, while the latter requires a transcendental field of aesthetic experience and
reflection founded on the unteachable tenets of genius and originality. During
the 1960s artistic practices attempted to repudiate the notions of genius,
originality, and taste, by introducing material processes, series, systems, and
ideas in place of an art based on self-expression. [. . .]
* * *

[. . .] What is made more explicit, more transparent by the so-called 'dema-
terialization' of the object, is that the production of authenticity requires more than
an author for the object; it exacts the 'truth' of the authorial discourse.

By putting himself in circulation, the performance artist parodied the com-
mercial exchange and distribution of an artistic personality in the form of a
commodity. Nevertheless, for criticism, performance art initiated an appropriate
synthesis of the disparate elements that had fractured the modernist discourse.
On the one hand it provided the empirical domain with a universal object -
the body, and on the other, to the transcendental field, it brought the incon-
testable authenticity of the artist's experience of his own body.

With Lea Vergine's account of 'body art,' . . . criticism seems to subside once
again in the direction of ontology. She speaks of 'the individual obsessed by
the obligation to exhibit himself in order to be'. 3 But she is anxious to point
out that this move is more than a revival of expressionism. The use of the body
in art is not simply a return to origins, 'the individual is led back to a specific
mode of existence.' Moreover these activities, 'phenomena' as she puts it, also
document a style of living that remains 'outside of art.' The critic finds in the
analysis of the artist's actual experience, the third term which metaphorically
grounds the experience of nature (the body) and art (the culture). [ . . . ]

... the authenticity of body art cannot be inscribed at the level of a particular
morphology, it must be chiselled into the world in accordance with direct
experience. The discourse of the body in art is more than a repetition of the
eschatological voices of abstract expressionism; the actual experience of the body
fulfills the prophecy of the painted mark. It is also more than a confirmation
of the positivist aspirations of the Art of the Real. The art of the 'real body'
does not pertain to the truth of a visible form, but refers back to its essential
content: the irreducible, irrefutable experience of pain. The body, as artistic text,
bears the authenticating imprint of pain like a signature; Vergine insists, 'the
experiences we are dealing with are authentic, and they are consequently cruel and
painful. Those who are in pain will tell you that they have the right to be taken
seriously.' 4 (It is no longer a question of good art, but of serious artists.) [. . .]



VIIIc Figures of Difference 1091

... the specific contribution of feminists in the field of performance has been to
pose the question of sexual difference across the discourse of the body in a way
which focuses on the construction not of the individual but of the sexed subject.
The body is not perceived as the repository of an artistic essence: it is seen as a
kind of hermeneutic image. The so-called 'enigma of femininity' is formulated as
the problem of representation (images of women, how to change them) and then
resolved by the discovery of a true identity behind the patriarchal facade. This true
identity is 'the essence in women' according to Ulrike Rosenbach, who defines
feminist art as 'the elucidation of the woman-artist's identity; of her body, of her
psyche, her feelings, her position in society.' 3

Clearly the question of the body and the question of sexuality do not necessarily
intersect. When they do, for instance in this particular discourse, the body is
decentered and it is radically split; positioned; not simply my body, but his body,
her body. Here, no third term emerges to salvage a transcendental sameness for
aesthetic reflection. Within this system of representation, actual experience merely
confirms an irrevocable difference in the field of the other.

Partially because of this intransigence, feminist art has been problematic for
criticism; how does the critic authenticate the work of art when the author is sexed
and 'his' truth no longer universal? Consequently, most of this work has been
marginalized by or excluded from the so-called 'mainstream' even when the critic's
concerns have included areas such as psychoanalysis . . . Moreover the predominant
forms of feminist writing on art continue to counterpose a visible form to a hidden
content; excavating a different, but similarly fundamental order of truth - the truth
of the woman, her original feminine identity. But in practice what persistently
emerges as a result of foregrounding the question of representation, particularly the
image, is more in the order of an underlying contradiction than an essential content.
The woman artist 'sees' her experience as a woman particularly in terms of the
'feminine position,' as object of the look, but she must also account for the 'feeling'
she experiences as the artist, occupying the 'masculine position' as subject of the
look. The former she defines as the socially prescribed position of the woman, one
to be questioned, exorcised, or overthrown . . . , while the implications of the latter
(that there can be only one position with regard to active looking and that is
masculine) cannot be acknowledged and is construed instead as a kind of psychic
truth - a natural, instinctual, preexistent, and essential femininity. Frequently, in
the process of its production, the feminist text repudiates its own essentialism and
testifies instead to the insistent bisexuality of the drives. It would seem to be a
relevant project for feminist criticism to take this further - to examine how that
contradiction (the crisis of positionality) is articulated in particular practices and to
what extent it demonstrates that masculine and feminine positions are never finally
fixed - for the artist, her work, or her public. [ . . .]

Following the paradoxical logic of modernism's demand for objective purposes
as well as transcendental truths, avant-garde practices between 1965 and the
mid-1970s initiated areas of work that divided the very field of which they were
an effect. The potential of that divergence has not been completely realized.
First, the materiality of the practice: initially defined in terms of the constraints
of a particular medium, it must now be redefined as a specific production of



1092 Ideas of the Postmodern

meaning. Secondly, sociality, raised as the question of context, i.e. the gallery
system (inside vs. outside), and the commodification of art (object vs. process,
action, idea, etc.). This must be reconsidered as the question of institutions, of
the conditions which determine the reading of artistic texts and the strategies
which would be appropriate for interventions (rather than 'alternatives') in that
context. Thirdly, sexuality, posed as the problem of images of women and how
to change them, must be reformulated as a concern with positionality, with the
production of readers as well as authors for artistic texts and crucially, with the
sexual overdetermination of meaning which takes place in that process.

The dominant critical practices of that same period have, however, so
consistently converged on the traditional vanishing point of the artistic subject,
self-possessed and essentially creative, that it is not surprising now to find a
certain consolidation of that position in artistic practices themselves, in the
return of painterly signifiers and their privileged site - the classical pictorial
text. Finally, a further question is raised - why theoretical criticism, with a
very different history from that discussed so far, was also unable to sustain the
discontinuities in the modernist discourse and develop an accessible critique.

Exhibition and System

Critical writing on art which places emphasis on the analysis of signifying
practice rather than on the exhortation or description of artistic auteurs,
generally acknowledges that art forms are inscribed within the social context
that gives rise to them. Nevertheless, there is a problematic tendency to
constitute the pictorial text as the paradigmatic insistence of that inscription in
a way which forecloses the question of its institutional placing. The pictorial
paradigm constructs the artistic text as both essentially singular and as centrally
concerned with the practice of painting; but, as Hubert Damisch has pointed
out, when painting is considered at the semiotic level, that is with reference to
its internal system, it functions as an epistemological obstacle - an obstacle never
surmounted, only prodded by an endless redefinition of the sign or averted
altogether by taking the semantic route. 6 Perhaps to some extent this accounts
for what appears to be a certain impasse in the area of art criticism when
compared, for instance, with developments in film theory.

Critical texts have focused either on analysis of the individual tableau (some-
times an individual artist's oeuvre) or on the construction of general cultural
categories and typologies of art. This work has been both necessary and
important. The arguments outlined here are not so much against such contribu-
tions as for a reconsideration of what might constitute appropriate terms for
the analysis of current practices in art. This reconsideration is prompted firstly
by developments within particular practices. Feminist art, for instance, cannot
be posed in terms of cultural categories, typologies, or even certain insular forms
of textual analysis, precisely because it entails the assessment of political
interventions, campaigns, and commitments as well as artistic strategies. In this
instance, interpretation is not simply a matter of what can be discovered at the
interior of a composition. Secondly, a reconsideration of critical methods is



VHlc Figures of Difference 1093

required if one takes account of the specific conditions which determine the
organization of artistic texts and their readings at the present time; that is, the
temporary exhibition and its associated field of publications - the catalogue, the art
book, and the magazine. From this point of view, 'art' is never given in the form
of individual works but is constructed as a category in relation to a complex
configuration of texts.

In terms of analysis, the exhibition system marks a crucial intersection of
discourses, practices, and sites which define the institutions of art within a
definite social formation. Moreover, it is exactly here, within this inter-textual,
inter-discursive network, that the work of art is produced as text.

Rather schematically, it can be said that at one level an exhibition is a
discursive practice involving the selection, organization, and evaluation of artistic
texts according to a particular genre (the one-person show, the group show, the
theme exhibition, the historical survey, and the Annual, Biennial, etc.), displayed
in certain types of institutions (museums, galleries), within specific legal struc-
tures (contractual agreements, fees, insurance), and preserved by definite mat-
erial techniques in a number of ways (catalogues, art books, magazines). At
another level, an exhibition is a system of meanings - a discourse - which, taken
as a complex unit or enunciative field, can be said to constitute a group of
statements; the individual works comprising fragments of imaged discourse or
utterances which are anchored by the exhibition's titles, subheadings, and
commentary, but at the same time unsettled, exceeded, or dispersed in the
process of their articulation as events. [. . .]

The exhibition has a definite substantive duration. In its phenomenal form
the installation is subject to the constraints of a definite site, it is only
reproducible in a limited sense, but the catalogue remains. It is infinitely
reproducible and, moreover, it constitutes the determinant means of institutional
control over the continued distribution of works of art. In this context, the
absence of a catalogue also becomes significant. Artists generally maintain that
the catalogue is more important than the exhibition itself. It gives a particular
permanence to temporary events, an authenticity in the form of historical
testimony. Together with art books and magazines, exhibition catalogues con-
stitute the predominant forms of receiving and, in a certain sense, possessing
images of art. The exhibition remains the privileged mode of reception in terms
of the viewer's access to the 'original' work, but far more often the reader's
knowledge of art is based on reproductions in books and magazines. Critical
theories of art founded on the notion of artisanal production fail to recognize
that these historically specific means of organization, circulation, distribution,
not only determine the reception - reading, viewing, reviewing, reworking - of
artistic texts, but also have an effect on the signifying practices themselves. [. . .]

1 Peter Wollen, 'Photography and Aesthetics,' Screen, 19, no. 4, Winter 1978/91, p. 27, n. 22

2 Griselda Pollock, 'Artists, Mythologies and Media - Genius, Madness and Art History,' Screen,
vol. 21, no.3, Autumn 1980, pp. 57-96.

3 Lea Vergine, in // Corpo Come Linguaggio, Milan, 1974, p. 3.

4 Ibid., p. 5.

5 Ulrike Rosenbach, Korpersprache, Frankfurt, 1975.



1094 Ideas of the Postmodern

6 See Hubert Damisch, 'Eight Theses For (or Against?) a Semiology of Painting,' enclitic 3, no. 1
Spring 1979, pp. 1-15.



3 Krzysztof Wodiczko (b. 1943) 'Public Projection'

Wodiczko is a Polish artist based in New York. His text concerns the form of work he
was engaged in at the time of writing: the projection of carefully selected images on
to the walls of public buildings. This work is explicitly distinguished from the liberal
urban decoration of 'art in public places'. It is Wodiczko's position that precedents for
a critical public art are to be found in those avant-garde practices which were until
recently consigned to the margins of modern art history, among them the synthetic
theatre of the Futurists, the agit-prop activities of the Constructivists, and the 'unitary
urbanism' of the Situationists. From this point of view, it is in these margins that the
prehistory of the postmodern is to be discovered. Originally published in the Canadian
Journal of Political and Social Theory/Revue canadienne de theorie politique et sociale,
vol. 7, nos. 1-2, Winter/Spring 1983, pp. 184-7, from which the present text is taken.

Motto

It's not a matter of emancipating truth from every system of power (which
would be a chimera, for truth is already power) but of detaching the power
of truth from the forms of hegemony, social, economic and cultural, within
which it operates at the present time.

Michel Foucault, Truth and Power

The Body

We are looking at the multiple sites of its body, and at the shapes of its external
organs; the collonades, porticos, domes, helmets, arches, columns, pilasters,

pediments, stairs, doors, windows Attracted by its appearance, we begin

to gravitate around its body. Gazing, viewing, observing, and staring, we are
trying to fathom its mysterious grammar. Standing face to face with the front,
pacing along the facade, touring all of the elevations of its vast structure, we
are being transformed into the mediums of a gigantic cultural seance. We are
being drawn into the magnetic field of its architectural appeal and symbolic
influence.

The Aura

Crossing the monstrous shade of its elevation, we are halted by the blow of a
cool wind which is cruising around the corners of its lofty massif. As we
approach its body, we are confronted by an intimate protective warmth radiating
through the walls, wings, and open doors, confused with the heavy breath of
the air conditioning ventilators.

We feel desire to identify with or to become part of the building. We recognize
the familiarity of our body and of that of the building. We feel a drive to
'complete' the building and we desire to be 'completed' by it. We sense that



VIIIc Figures of Difference 1095

there is something about us which is incomplete, and which can only be
completed by a full integration with the building.

Superficially, we resent the authority of its massive monumental structure.
We rebel against a tyranny of its deaf, motionless, immortal walls, yet in our
heart of hearts, we not only allow ourselves to be outwitted by an academic
methodicalness of the hierarchal order, charm, loftiness of its parts, and the
harmony of its proportional body, but, more dangerously, we will allow ourselves
to become intoxicated and seduced by its structural ability to embody, and to
artistically grasp our intimate, unspoken drive for the disciplined collaboration
with its power.

Social Body

Its body is both individual and social; its harmony is based upon the same
discipline, governing a totality of relationships of the whole structure to the
parts and of each part to the other. This embodies and physically represents
the concept of the organization of a Utopian society in the form of a disciplined-
disciplining body, allowing for both the multidirectional flow of power and the
controlled circulation of the individual bodies.

The Father

In the process of our socialization, the very first contact with a public building
is no less important than the moment of social confrontation with the father,
through which our sexual role and place in society is constructed. Early
socialization through patriarchal sexual discipline is extended by the later
socialization through the institutional architecturalization of our bodies.

Thus the spirit of the father never dies, continuously living as it does in the
building which was, is, and will be embodying, structuring, mastering, repre-
senting, and reproducing his 'eternal' and 'universal' presence as a patriarchal
wisdom-body of power.

The Medium

The building is not only an institutional 'site of the discourse of power', but,
more importantly, it is a metainstitutional, spatial medium for the continuous
and simultaneous symbolic reproduction of both the general myth of power and
of the individual desire for power.

For these purposes, the building is 'sculptured' to operate as an ascetic
structure, thus assisting in the process of inspiring and symbolically concretizing
(reflecting) our mental projections of power.

Social Effect

The prime occupation of the building is to remain still, to be rooted permanently
to the ground, abstaining from any visible movement.



1096 Ideas of the Postmodern

This static occupation - annexation of time and territory - creates both a
dynamic and a somnambulistic social effect. The 'aura' of the unmoving building
hypnotically animates and sustains our ritualistic movement around its body.

Circulating around and between the buildings, we cannot stop moving. We
are unable to concentrate and focus on their bodies. This establishes an
absentminded relation to the building, an unconscious contact, a passive gaze.

By imposing our permanent circulation, our absent-minded perception, by
ordering our gaze, by structuring our unconscious, by embodying our desire,
masking and mythifying the relations of power, by operating under the discrete
camouflage of a cultural and aesthetic 'background', the building constitutes an
effective medium and ideological instrument of power.

The Method of Projection

We must stop this ideological 'ritual', interrupt this journey-in-fiction, arrest
the somnambulistic movement, restore a public focus, a concentration on the
building and its architecture. What is implicit about the building must be
exposed as explicit; the myth must be visually concretized and unmasked. The
absentminded, hypnotic relation with architecture must be challenged by a
conscious and critical public discourse taking place in front of the building.

Public visualization of this myth can unmask the myth, recognize it 'physi-
cally', force it to the surface and hold it visible, so that the people on the street
can observe and celebrate its final formal capitulation.

This must happen at the very place of myth, on the site of its production,
on its body - the building.

Only physical, public projection of the myth on the physical body of myth
(projection of myth on myth), can successfully demythify the myth.

The look, the appearance, the costume, the mask of the buildings is the most
valuable and expensive investment. In the power discourse of the 'public'
domain, the architectural form is the most secret and protected property.

Public Projection involves questioning both the function and the ownership
of this property.

In defending the public as the communal against the public as the private,
the projection reveals and is effected by the political contradictions of the culture
of capitalism.

As a private property, the architectural appearance is well protected by the
police, the guards, and the city by-laws.

The attack must be unexpected, frontal, and must come with the night when
the building, undisturbed by its daily functions, is asleep and when its body
dreams of itself, when the architecture has its nightmares.

This will be a symbol-attack, a public psychoanalytical seance, unmasking and
revealing the unconscious of the building, its body, the 'medium' of power.

By introducing the technique of an outdoor slide montage and the immediately
recognizable language of popular imagery, the Public Projection can become a
communal, aesthetic counter-ritual. It can become an urban night festival, an
architectural 'epic theatre', inviting both reflection and relaxation, where the