The American Wood Council (AWC) is the wood products division of the American Forest
& Paper Association (AF&PA). AF&PA is the national trade association of the forest,
paper and wood products industry, representing member companies engaged in growing,
harvesting and processing wood and wood fiber, manufacturing pulp, paper andpaperboard
products form both virgin and recycled fiber, and producing engineered and traditional
wood products. For more information see www.afandpa.org.



While every effort has been made to insure the accuracy of the information presented,
and special effort has been made to assure that the information reflects the state-of-
the-art, neither the American Forest & Paper Association nor its members assume any
responsibility for any particular design prepared from this publication. Those using this
document assume all liability from its use.



Copyright © 2006
American Forest & Paper Association, Inc.

American Wood Council

1111 19 th St., NW, Suite 800

Washington, DC 20036

202-463-4713

awcinfo@afandpa.org

www.awc.org



WOOD CONSTRUCTION DATA 6



TABLE OF CONTENTS



Chapter/Title



Page Chapter/Title



Page



Introduction 3

Principles of Good Design 3

The Role of Building Codes 3

Moisture Control 4

Sources of Moisture 4

Principles of Water Management 4

Termite Control 15

Termite Barrier 16

Chemical Soil Treatment 16

Construction Details 17

In-Ground Bait Systems 17

Fumigation 17

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

Figure Page

1 Rain Exposure Zones 4

2 Hygro-Thermal Zones 4

3 Water Management Principles 5

4 Flashing Over Openings in Exterior Walls .. 6

5 Flashing Under Window in Exterior Wall 6

6 Flashing Where Changes in Exterior
Finish Occur 6

7 Flashing at Various Points on a Roof 7

8 Clearance Between Wood Siding and
Earth 7

9 Clearance Between Wood and Exposed
Earth in Crawl Space or Other
Unexcavated Concealed Areas 8

10 Clearance Between Wood Columns and
Floor or Exposed Earth when in
Basements or when Exposed to Weather... 8

11 Wood Beams or Girder Framing into
Masonry or Concrete Wall 9

12 Exterior Wood Steps 9



Durable Materials 17

Naturally Durable Wood 17

Pressure Treated Wood 19

Conditions of Use for Pressure Treated

and Naturally Durable Wood 19

Non-Pressure Treated Wood 20

Bibliography 20

Treating Specifications and Standards: ....20

Selected References: 20

Endnote 20



Figure Page

13 Exterior Concrete Steps 9

14 Concrete Porch or Patio Slab 9

15 Masonry Veneer Finish Over Wood
Framing 10

16 Site Drainage Away from Structure 10

17 Damp Proofing and Drainage of a
Masonry Foundation 11

18 Damp-Proofing and Drainage of a Wood
Foundation 11

19 Drainage of a Crawl Space 11

20 Shingles and Flashing at Eave 12

21 Methods of Ventilating Roof Spaces and
Amount of Ventilation Required 14

22 Installation of Termite Shield 16

23 Application of Soil Treatment 18

24 Termite Control for Slab-on-Ground
Construction 18



AMERICAN FOREST & PAPER ASSOCIATION



DESIGN OF WOOD FRAME STRUCTURES FOR PERMANANCE



AMERICAN WOOD COUNCIL



WOOD CONSTRUCTION DATA 6



DETAILS FOR CONVENTIONAL WOOD FRAME CONSTRUCTION



INTRODUCTION

Design of durable structures is the result of careful
planning and understanding of loads and forces that will
likely act upon a building during its lifetime. If these key
elements are not taken into consideration, the designer
may compromise the ability of the structure to remain fully
functional over extended periods of time.

Building codes establish minimum requirements for
structural strength, safety from fire, and other hazards.
To this end, the American Forest & Paper Association
(AF&PA) provides several design standards and construc-
tion guides. AF&PA's National Design Specification®
(NDS®) for Wood Construction, and the related Wood
Frame Construction Manual for One- and Two-Family
Dwellings, provide standards and guidelines for structural
design and construction of wood-frame buildings. Like-
wise, AF&PAs Design for Code Acceptance (DCA) series
provides building code accepted methods for complying
with fire safety provisions of the codes. Yet, building codes
do not address all of the issues that promote long-term
durability of buildings and structures. This document de-
scribes practices to control moisture and protect a building
from infestations of living organisms, which can influence
the long-term durability of buildings, as can structural
loads and fire exposures.

Design of durable structures begins with an under-
standing of moisture loading and how it interacts with
building materials. The designer must be concerned with
sources of water, how it is transported, and how it can be
controlled and removed. Moisture flows within a building
must be managed to prevent water accumulation or stor-
age that may lead to premature deterioration of building
products. Quality control is also extremely important in
constructing building envelope assemblies to resist the
negative effects of moisture.

In many areas, there may also be a risk of insect in-
festation. In particular, termites may attack wood frame
structures and, in turn, reduce the life expectancy of the
building.

When properly designed, wood frame structures
will resist damage by moisture and living organisms.
Recommendations for control of moisture and protection
against decay and insect infestations are contained in this
document. Many of the recommendations are established
practice among architects, engineers, and builders.

PRINCIPLES OF GOOD DESIGN

Protection of wood frame structures to provide
maximum service-life involves four methods of control,
which can be handled by proper design and construction:



(1) control moisture content of wood, (2) provide effec-
tive termite controls, (3) use of durable materials such as
naturally durable or pressure treated wood, and (4) quality
assurance.

Wood construction maintained at a moisture content of
20 percent or less will not decay. Optimum conditions for
decay occur when moisture content is above 25 percent.
It should be stressed that when wood is protected from
water or from vapor condensation, and exposed to normal
atmospheric conditions such as exist inside buildings and
outdoors, its moisture content rarely exceeds 15 percent
Therefore, moisture content control by means of accepted
design and construction details is a simple and practical
method of providing protection against decay.

Moisture control also contributes to prevention of
subterranean termite attack. One of the primary control
methods for termites is elimination of sources of water
for termites to ingest. Other methods include the use
of effective barriers and bait systems supplemented by
periodic inspection. Termite barriers are provided by use
of accepted construction practices that drive termites into
the open where shelter tubes can be detected by inspection
and destroyed.

Wood frame structures that properly manage moisture
and are provided with a recognized termite control system
supplemented by periodic inspections will resist subter-
ranean termite attack and last for many years.

In some cases architectural considerations or use ex-
posures (swimming pools, marine structures, wet process
industries, ground contact, or unusual climatic conditions)
may complicate moisture control and termite protection
and necessitate greater protection. In certain geographical
regions, for example, high incidences of precipitation or
termite infestation may indicate the need for greater protec-
tion. Under these circumstances naturally durable wood
of certain species may be used or wood pressure treated
with chemicals to prevent decay and termite damage may
be required.

THE ROLE OF BUILDING CODES

Building practices described in this document reflect
a building science approach to mitigating moisture, pest,
and durability problems in new and existing wood con-
struction. State and local codes and ordinances may differ
in their approaches to the same issues. In such cases, the
local code official having jurisdiction should be consulted
and shall have the final authority in determining local
requirements.



AMERICAN FOREST & PAPER ASSOCIATION



DESIGN OF WOOD FRAME STRUCTURES FOR PERMANANCE



MOISTURE CONTROL

Sources of Moisture

Sources of moisture include water from rain, snow,
high humidity, soils, and water vapor from interior and
exterior environments.

The degree to which moisture will load a structure is
dependent on a variety of factors including:

• Climatic conditions;

• Site-specific factors, such as location, solar expo-
sure, wind exposure, and relationship to surrounding
buildings, vegetation, and terrain;

• Building design features, such as overhangs, cornic-
es, site drainage, and crawl space ground cover.

For design purposes, the probability of external envi-
ronmental loads can be analyzed according to two climatic
zones: rain exposure zones (Figure 1), and hygro-thermal
zones (Figure 2). Microclimate and building design factors
also influence the actual exposure level. These additional
factors must be accounted for in the design process. To ac-
count for moisture loads an understanding of how moisture
may be transported into a structure is needed.

Moisture loading will migrate into and through build-
ing assemblies through several transport mechanisms
including:

• Liquid Flow/Capillarity - Liquid flow is the move-
ment of liquid water under the influence of a driving
force, such as gravity, or suction caused by capillary
action.

• Air movement - Air movement refers to the trans-
port of water vapor through air leakage in and out
of wall, ceiling, and roof envelope cavities.

• Diffusion - Diffusion is the direct movement of wa-
ter vapor through ceiling and wall surfaces, driven
by vapor pressure differentials.

Of these three transport mechanisms, liquid flow gen-
erally produces the most significant moisture loads. Thus,
it is not surprising that rain penetration and groundwater
control has been the primary focus of builders and designers
for generations. Air movement and vapor diffusion are also
important, though less significant and less obvious contribu-
tors to development of moisture problems in buildings.

Principles of Water Management

The primary objective when addressing moisture
loads is to keep the building envelope dry by reducing the
amount of water transported inside the building envelope
and to achieve a balance of the moisture content within the
building. To limit the amount of water intrusion and obtain
a balance of moisture content, general principles of water
management including deflection, distance (separation),
drainage, and drying (Figure 3) should be followed.



Figure 1 Rain Exposure Zones




Figure 2 Hygro-Thermal Zones




Lo*Q ] Under 20'



Following the general principles of water management
require that wetting and drying mechanisms be estab-
lished and maintained to balance moisture content levels
at or below the tolerance of building materials being
used. Where the tolerance of building materials to
moisture is likely to be exceeded, durable materials such
as preservative treated wood should be utilized.

Deflection

Deflection is the first principal and main priority of
water management. The intent is to keep rainwater away



AMERICAN WOOD COUNCIL



WOOD CONSTRUCTION DATA 6



from the building and to minimize the potential for water
penetration into the envelope. The deflection principle is
evident in many building design patterns that have histori-
cally proven effective at reducing the amount of rainwater
on exterior walls. These include:

• Placing the building so it is sheltered from prevailing
winds.

• Providing sizable roof overhangs and water collec-
tion systems at the roof perimeters.

• Providing architectural detailing including flashing
and caulking that directs rainwater away from the
building.

• Providing an approvedt drainage system around the
foundation perimeter to accept roof water runoff.

• Installing permeable bulk vapor diffusion retarders
on the exterior of walls and floors, including below
a concrete slab or atop the bare soil within a crawl
space.

• Providing adequate separation of elements from
moisture sources including soil and concrete.

Figure 3 Water Management
Principles




Used with permission of the Canadian Wood Council.



Sheltering

Structures exposed to wind are more susceptible to
moisture loads. To reduce wind and moisture loads, struc-
tures should be located near other structures or be sheltered
with natural barriers such as trees or large shrubbery.

Overhangs

A pitched roof with sufficiently wide overhangs can
help ensure long-term durability of wood-frame buildings
by deflecting precipitation. Detailing of projecting sills,
flashings, and drip edges is also a critical component.
Cladding and sealants are also part of the deflection line-
of-defense.

Flashing

To prevent moisture from entering joints between build-
ing elements, flashing is needed at the following places:

• Heads of all openings in exterior walls unless pro-
tected by overhanging eaves (Figure 4).

• Under window openings where masonry veneer is
used (Figure 5).

• Where changes in exterior finish materials occur
(Figure 6).

• At the junction of roof deck and wood siding, at
roof valleys, and around chimneys and vent stacks
(Figure 7).

Vapor Diffusion Retarder

Vapor diffusion retarders should be provided to de-
flect moisture away from the structure. For walls, this is
called a "housewrap" or "building-wrap" and is attached
to sheathing underneath the siding. These building wraps
need to be breathable by allowing some transfer of water
vapor. Without some vapor transfer, the water barrier can
easily become a surface for condensation.

Vapor diffusion retarders should also be placed under
an exterior floor. In crawl spaces a vapor diffusion retarder
should be placed upon the ground within a crawl space to
deflect ground moisture.

Where concrete/masonry foundations are used to
support a wood-frame building, the natural inclination of
moisture to move through the foundation wall must be
restricted. Moisture movement through poured concrete
foundation walls is controlled by externally applied, water
repellant coatings and perimeter drains that reduce soil
moisture. Coats of asphalt or tar should also be applied
from footing to finish grade. Unit masonry walls require
a 1/2-inch layer of portland-cement mortar applied from
footing to finish grade, leaving a cove at the junction of
the footing and wall. Mortar should then be mopped with
asphalt or tar.

Moisture control for concrete slab-on-grade con-
struction is also essential. A high quality vapor diffusion
retarder with a 1-perm rating and complying with ASTM

1" Approved, as used in this text, means approved by the authority having jurisdiction.



AMERICAN FOREST & PAPER ASSOCIATION



DESIGN OF WOOD FRAME STRUCTURES FOR PERMANANCE



E 1745 needs to be installed immediately below the con-
crete slabs. At worst, these vapor diffusion retarders allow
only minute amounts of water vapor to pass through into
the slab. And, since many soils contain alkali and other
chemicals that can cause many plastic products to fail,
the vapor diffusion retarders must be capable of resisting
chemical attack.

Figure 4 Flashing Over Openings in
Exterior Walls



Distance - Separation of Wood Elements

Separation of untreated wood from the ground and
other sources of moisture and termite infestation is very
important. The separations specified in this section are
recommended for all buildings and are those considered
necessary to maintain wood elements in permanent struc-
tures at safe moisture contents for decay protection. When
it is not possible or practical to comply with the clearance
specified, the use of naturally durable or pressure treated
wood is recommended.

• In crawl spaces and other similar unexcavated areas,
clearance between the bottom of wood joists, or a
wood structural floor without joints, and the ground
should be at least 18 inches. Between the bottom of
wood girders and the ground, the clearance should
be at least 12 inches. Clearance between a post or



column supporting a permanent structure intended
for human occupancy and exposed to earth should
be at least 8 inches (Figure 8 & Figure 9).

• When in basements, cellars, or when exposed to
the weather, wood columns which support perma-
nent structures should be supported by a metal or
concrete pedestal extending 1 inch above concrete
slabs or decks and 6 inches above exposed earth
and separated from soil by an impervious moisture
barrier (Figure 10).

• Wood joists, beams or girders framing into exterior
masonry or concrete walls should have at least 1/2
inch of air space at top, end, and sides (Figure 11).

• Wood sills which rest on concrete or masonry exte-
rior walls should be at least 8 inches above exposed
earth on the exterior of the building (Figure 8).

The bottom of wood joists, girders, and subfloors sus-
pended from foundation walls should be at least 8 inches
above the horizontal projection of the outside grade level
and should terminate at the interior face of any foundation
wall studs.

• Wood siding and wood trim should be at least 6
inches above exposed earth on the exterior of a
structure (Figure 8).

• Fences and similar items should be separated from
the main structure by at least 2 inches.

• Exterior wood steps. Structural portions of wood
stairs, such as stringers and posts, should be at least
6 inches above the finished grade (Figure 12).

• Porches, breezeways, and patios. Beams and head-
ers supporting floor framing should be at least 12
inches above ground. Floor joists or the bottom of
a wood structural floor without joists should be at
least 18 inches above ground. Posts which rest on
wood, concrete, or masonry floors should be sup-
ported on metal or concrete pedestals extending at
least 1 inch above the floor or at least 6 inches above
exposed earth, and separated by an impervious bar-
rier (Figure 9 & Figure 10).

• Concrete steps, concrete porch slabs, patio slabs or
planters resting on the ground should be below the
top of the foundation, and separated from wood in
the main structure by at least 2 inches, or otherwise
protected from moisture or concealed termite pen-
etration (Figure 13 & Figure 14).

• Shutters, window boxes, and other decorative at-
tachments should be separated from exterior siding
to avoid trapping rainwater.

• Moisture permeable floors or roofs which are ex-
posed to the weather, such as concrete or masonry
slabs, should be separated from any wood structural
members supporting them by an impervious mois-
ture barrier.



AMERICAN FOREST & PAPER ASSOCIATION



DESIGN OF WOOD FRAME STRUCTURES FOR PERMANANCE



Figure 9



Clearance Between Wood
and Exposed Earth in
Crawl Space or Other
Unexcavated Concealed
Areas



Figure 10 Clearance Between

Wood Columns and Floor
or Exposed Earth when
in Basements or when
Exposed to Weather


Drainage

Drainage is the next principle of moisture control,
second only to deflection in terms of its capacity to man-
age rainwater. Building design patterns that incorporate
drainage principles include pitched roofs, sloped surfaces
at horizontal elements, and soil drains around the perimeter
of building foundations.

Site Drainage and Sanitation

The building site should always be graded to provide
positive drainage away from foundation walls. In de-
termining the height of the foundation, it is important to
take into consideration the proposed height of finish grade
to assure proper clearance for wood members resting on
top of the foundation (Figure 16).

Figure 16 Site Drainage Away from
Structure



TREATED
WOOD SILL



MAINTAIN PROPER
CLEARANCE




MASONRY, CONCRETE

OR PRESSURE

TREATED WOOD

FOUNDATION



Building Drainage

All exposed wood surfaces, as well as adjoining
areas, should be pitched to assure rapid water run-off.
Construction details, which tend to trap moisture in end
grain joints should be avoided.

At the detail level, drainage is accomplished by
collecting incidental moisture accumulation in the wall as-
sembly and returning it to or beyond the exterior face of the
cladding by means of gravity flow. Water is then diverted
away from the structure using soil and site drainage.

In its simplest form, building drainage is achieved by
adding a drainage plane and cavity within the assembly,
between the cladding and the sheathing. In wood frame
construction, the drainage plane typically consists of a
moisture barrier such as building paper, felt, or house-
wrap, working in combination with window and door
flashings. 1 Drainage is generally the primary means of
providing redundancy for moisture control in a wall as-
sembly.



AMERICAN WOOD COUNCIL



WOOD CONSTRUCTION DATA 6



Drainage Cavities introduce an airspace between the
cladding and the drainage plane/sheathing. The airspace
serves as a capillary break to prevent water from excessive-
ly wetting the drainage plane. The airspace, particularly
when it provides a pressure equalization function, can also
be seen as another means of deflection, in that pressure-
equalization neutralizes the primary driving force behind
rain penetration (air pressure differential), and thereby
reduces the amount of moisture being driven through the
cladding into the drainage cavity.

Insulation applied internally or externally to founda-
tion walls helps insure that cold interior concrete surfaces
will not condense moisture and promote growth of mold
and mildew.

Foundation drainage and damp-proofing of walls
below grade are insurance against development of undesir-
able moisture conditions in crawl spaces and basements
(Figure 17, Figure 18, and Figure 19).

Figure 17 Damp Proofing and

Drainage of a Masonry
Foundation



GRAVEL




PARGING WITH
COVE



BUILDING
PAPER

DRAIN PIPE



Footing drains, connected to a positive outfall, should
be installed around foundations enclosing habitable spaces
below grade (Figure 17).

The gravel drainage system used for wood founda-
tions, described below, may be substituted for footing
drains around concrete or masonry foundations when there
is provision for drainage from outside the footing to a sump
or positive outfall under the basement slab.

Moisture movement around wood foundation walls
enclosing basements or other habitable spaces below-grade
is controlled by drainage and by applying polyethylene
sheeting on the outside of the wall, extending from the
footing to finish grade. Drainage is provided by a porous
layer of gravel or crushed stone placed below the floor



slab and footer plate and extending at least one foot up the
wall for well drained sites or half the total backfill height
for poorly drained sites (Figure 18). This gravel layer is
drained to a sump or positive outfall. For more detail on
wood foundations, see the Permanent Wood Foundation:
Design and Construction Guide, published by the Southern
Forest Products Association.

Drainage may also be needed within a crawl space
where excessive moisture prevails (Figure 19).



Figure 18



Damp-Proofing and
Drainage of a Wood
Foundation



POLYETHYLENE
FILM



FDN PRESSURE
TREATED WOOD




DRAINED GRAVEL OR CRUSHED STONE



Figure 19 Drainage of a Crawl Space



OUTFALL TO STORM
SEWER OR NATURAL
DRAINAGE





GRATE



DRAIN PIPE



AMERICAN FOREST & PAPER ASSOCIATION



DESIGN OF WOOD FRAME STRUCTURES FOR PERMANANCE



For slab-on-ground construction and basement floors,
earth should be covered with not less than 4 inches of
coarse gravel or crushed stone over which a separating
membrane is placed before pouring the slab. In slab-on-
ground construction and where basements contain living
space, this membrane should be a vapor diffusion retarder
having a permeability not greater than one perm.

Siding. Exterior wood siding should extend at least 1
inch below the top of the foundation to provide a drip line
protecting the sill from rainwater (Figure 8).

Where the exterior finish is masonry veneer, a one-inch
space should be provided between sheathing and the veneer
extending down to at least the bottom of the sill plate. Weep
holes and flashing should be provided at the base of the
veneer wall to allow for drainage (Figure 15).

Roofs. Shingles should project at least 1/2 inch beyond
the roof sheathing to provide a drip line. When asphalt
shingles are used, a starting course of wood shingles is
desirable. Gutters and downspouts are needed unless eave
projection is 24-inches or greater. Roof run-off should be
drained away from the structure.

In northern areas, melting snow may result in ice dams
on roof overhang and gutters to the extent that water may
work back under shingles and drip into attic spaces or
walls. Protection is provided by applying eave flashing
consisting of 55-pound roll roofing or 6-mil polyethylene
extending over the roof sheathing from the edge of the eave
to a point 18 inches inside the inner face of the exterior
wall (Figure 20).

Exposed Structural Members. Exposed structural
members should be designed to provide sufficient venti-
lation and drainage away from end joints to allow rapid
drying. In instances where proper detailing of such joints
may not provide sufficient protection, the designer can
specify naturally durable or pressure treated wood.

Figure 20 Shingles and Flashing at
Eave



EAVE FLASHING'

EXTENDING BEYOND

INSIDE FACE OF

WAlL MAINTAIN

2" <:UA*ANCi




INSULATION



GUTTER SET

OUT F*OA4

FASCIA



Drying

Drying is the mechanism by which moisture accu-
mulations are removed by venting (air movement) and
vapor diffusion (direct movement through wall and ceil-
ing coverings). Moisture originates from both inside and
outside the structure. Excessive moisture may condense on
the underside of roof decking and inside walls, which can
lead to mold and decay. Adequate ventilation and properly
placed vapor diffusion retarders help provide solutions.
The latter should always be located on or near the warm
side of walls, floors, and ceilings. However, vapor diffusion
retarders are typically omitted in ceiling assemblies where
attics are well ventilated. The permeability of cladding,
moisture barriers, vapor diffusion retarders and interior
finish materials will greatly affect overall drying potential.
Vapor diffusion retarders should be carefully installed to
provide a complete envelope preventing moisture vapor
produced inside the structure from entering enclosed
spaces where condensation may occur.

Local climate conditions, types of occupancy, and
design methods determine the requirements for control
of vapor movement and ventilation. Some energy-saving
practices, such as reducing air leakage or adding insula-
tion, may increase the potential for moisture condensation.
Good construction practices (attention to detail) must be
followed to prevent problems caused by condensation.
Care should be taken to dry-frame cavities to a moisture
content of < 20% prior to enclosure. General code provi-
sions are largely based on houses where heating of the
building is the primary concern. To build long-lasting,
energy-efficient, healthy houses in areas where cooling of
the building, not heating, is a primary concern, the climatic
conditions of the area must be considered.

Ventilation, vapor diffusion retarders, and ground
cover requirements may vary. Consult the local building
department to confirm specific requirements.

Crawl Spaces

Ventilation. Crawl spaces under buildings, and other
unexcavated concealed spaces under porches, breezeways,
patios or other appendages, should be naturally ventilated
by openings in foundation walls or by suitable mechanical
means. Such spaces should be provided with access panels
so that they may be easily inspected. Crawl spaces must
be designed to allow sufficient drying to prevent build-up
of moisture to levels where water vapor will condense or
where fungal growth can occur. In some hot and humid
climates, local or state codes may restrict crawl space
ventilation.

Minimum ventilation requirements for crawl spaces
are specified in the codes. The requirements are usually
based on the ratio of the free ventilation area to the area
to be ventilated. Typically, the required ratio is 1 to 150.
When a vapor diffusion retarder is placed over the ground



AMERICAN WOOD COUNCIL



WOOD CONSTRUCTION DATA 6



within a crawl space, the ventilation ratio may be reduced
to 1 to 1500.

Ventilation openings should be arranged to provide
cross ventilation. They should be kept clear of shrubbery
and should be covered with corrosion resistant wire mesh,
with mesh openings not less than 1/4 inch nor more than
1/2 inch in any dimension. Vents should be at least 3 inches
above outside grade and below the bottom of floor joists,
or wells with 6 inches of clearance around the vent should
be provided. No unventilated, inaccessible spaces should
be permitted.

It is very important that ventilation should not be cut
off at any time during the year when it is the only means
of moisture control in crawl spaces. Ventilation openings
are not necessary when crawl space walls are insulated,
an approved vapor diffusion retarder is provided over the
ground, and conditioned air is provided to the crawl space.
Ventilation requirements are based on the assumption that
outside air has a lower absolute humidity than air in the
crawl space. In hot and humid climates where exterior air
has a high absolute humidity, use of natural ventilation may
not be the best option for drying the crawl space.

Vapor Protection. Except in arid or semi-arid areas,
soil should be covered with a fungi resistant vapor dif-
fusion retarder having a permeability of 1 perm or less,
such as 6 mil polyethylene lapped approximately 4 inches
at joints. The vapor diffusion retarder should conform to
ASTM El 745 and be resistant to chemicals in the soil.
Laps should be sealed. The vapor diffusion retarder should
lap-up onto the foundation so the concrete slab is isolated
from soil and the foundation. Seam tape should be used to
seal the retarder to any pipes or other objects that penetrate
the retarder and the slab. The ground surface should be
leveled and the cover turned up at walls and piers.

Multi-Family and Nonresidential Buildings

For multi-family or nonresidential buildings where
crawl space configuration or building location may reduce
the efficiency of natural ventilation, the required net area
of vent openings should be increased. A vapor diffusion
retarder is also recommended for such installations.

Concrete Slab Foundations. Soil is a constant source
of moisture, so deflection of soil moisture is important.
The use of a sturdy vapor diffusion retarder beneath slabs
prevents ground-based moisture from migrating up through
the concrete by capillary action or diffusion. Lapping of
joints in the vapor diffusion retarder and liberal use of
tape and other sealants around pipe penetrations is critical.
However, care should be taken in hot climates to slow the
rate of concrete surface curing. Vapor diffusion retarders
placed under the slab slow the rate of drying in the lower
depth of the concrete. When the upper depth is exposed to
high heat and dries too fast, it shrinks relative to the deeper
concrete that can not disperse its moisture as fast because



of the vapor diffusion retarder. Surface cracking can result.
After the surface initially hardens, some means of covering
the slab to slow the rate of curing is advised.

Attics

Natural Ventilation. To eliminate the problem of mois-
ture condensation on roof framing in cold weather and to
permit escape of heat in hot weather, ventilation of all attic
spaces is required by model building codes (Figure 21).
In some hot and humid climates, local codes may restrict
attic space ventilation.

For gable roofs that depend upon screened louvered
openings for ventilation, a net open area of 1/150 of the
area of the ceiling below should be provided. The free ven-
tilating area may be reduced to 1/300 when a 3/4 inch slot
is provided beneath the eaves in addition to the screened
gable-end louvers (1/600 inlet and 1/600 outlet vent areas),
or when a vapor diffusion retarder having a permeability of
1 perm or less is installed on the warm side of the ceiling
(Figure 20). For hip roofs, it is customary to provide a 3/4
inch slot beneath the eaves and install ventilators near the
peak, to obtain net inlet and outlet open areas of 1/450 and
1/900, respectively, of the area of the ceiling below.

In hot and humid regions, attic spaces can heat up
to 130°F or more on a hot summer day. Eventually, that
heat transfers through the ceiling insulation into living
spaces below, increasing the cooling load. To counter this
problem, it is suggested that twice the recommended roof
ventilation be used and it is recommended that a radiant
barrier be installed, such as labor-saving roof sheathing
with foil laminated directly to it. The radiant barrier blocks
transfer of heat from the roof to the attic. The radiant bar-
rier should be applied to the underside of the roof, not on
the attic floor, with adequate openings along the ridge and
below the low-profile vents so that attic air can exhaust.
Light colored roofing may also be used to slow heat trans-
fer into the attic space.

For flat roofs, blocking, bridging, and insulation should
be arranged to permit unobstructed movement of air for
ventilation. Such roofs may be ventilated along overhang-
ing eaves on the basis of net open area equal to 1/250 of the
area of the ceiling below. A vapor diffusion retarder having
a maximum permeability of 1 perm should be applied to
the warm side of the ceiling below flat roofs.

Mechanical Ventilation. In lieu of natural ventilation
of attic spaces described above, mechanical ventilation
may be used. Such ventilation should provide minimum
air changes of 0.7 cu. ft./min. (at 0.03" standard pressure)
per sq. ft. of the ceiling below. Air intakes of 1 sq. ft. of
free openings per 300 cu. ft./min. of fan capacity should be
provided. Mechanical ventilation should provide adequate
protection against harmful condensation throughout the
year.



AMERICAN FOREST & PAPER ASSOCIATION



DESIGN OF WOOD FRAME STRUCTURES FOR PERMANANCE



Figure 21 Methods of Ventilating Roof Spaces and Amount of Ventilation
Required



GABLE ROOF (NO EAVE SLOTS)




/



X,



750



300



RATIO OF NET
VENT AREA TO
CEILING AREA

WITHOUT VAPOR BARRIER



WITH VAPOR BARRIER



\W^



GABLE ROOF (WITH EAVE SLOTS)




*



*|



^ 7\



t



INLET

1
600



OUTLET

1
600



^





HIP ROOF




INLET
450



OUTLET

1
900



7



ii.i -j. -i, — „ _



3 C£



FLAT ROOF



\



1
250



In dwellings having roof slopes less than 3 in 12 or in
cold weather climates, a vapor diffusion retarder having
a permeability of 1 perm or less should be applied on the
warm side of the ceiling. Where exposed interior wood
roof decking is used, a vapor diffusion retarder should be
installed between the wood roof decking and any insulation
used on the exterior side of the roof decking. A vapor dif-
fusion retarder is not necessary in unconditioned buildings
where wood roof decking is not insulated.



Walls

Vapor Protection of Walls. The principle of vapor pro-
tection is to make the warm side of the wall as vapor tight
as possible, and the cold side permeable enough to permit
passage of moisture vapor to the outside of the wall.

Placement of the vapor diffusion retarder is dependent
on climatic conditions. In cold climates, the vapor diffu-
sion retarder should be placed on the interior of the wall.
In hot humid areas the vapor diffusion retarder should be



AMERICAN WOOD COUNCIL



WOOD CONSTRUCTION DATA 6



on the exterior of the wall. A permeability of at least 5
times the vapor diffusion retarder permeability should be
maintained between the vapor diffusion retarder and the
cold-side face of the wall. In cold climates where the 5 to
1 ratio of warm-side to cold-side permeability rating can-
not otherwise be obtained, such as may occur with rigid
foam plastic or foil faced sheathing, use of foilback gyp-
sum board, polyethylene sheeting, or other special vapor
diffusion retarder treatment located at the warm-side of
the wall may be needed to avoid condensation in the wall
cavity. In tightly sealed dwellings, use of dehumidifiers
may be necessary to prevent objectionable condensation of
moisture in kitchen, bathroom, laundry and similar areas.
In regions of extreme heat, it is highly recommended not
to place an impermeable vapor diffusion retarder under
gypsum board, or cover gypsum board with vinyl wall
paper. In regions where extreme heat and cold may oc-
cur, inclusion and placement of vapor diffusion retarders
should be carefully considered. Local codes may allow
vapor diffusion retarders to be excluded all together in
such climates.

Where batt insulation with an integral vapor diffusion
retarder is used in walls, care should be taken to insure that
the retarder is face-stapled to studs to prevent movement of
moist air into the enclosed wall space and avoid batt com-
pression. Where batt insulation does not have an integral
vapor diffusion retarder and such a retarder is required, a
separate vapor diffusion retarder should be provided.

In wall construction, the drying potential of both the
cladding and the wall sheathing/framing must be consid-
ered. Air spaces introduced for drainage purposes also
offer a means to dry material by back-venting. Drying of
sheathing and framing is often a separate matter and is
greatly affected by the selection of moisture barrier and
vapor diffusion retarder materials.

TERMITE CONTROL

Termites attack above the ground by means of shelter
tubes attached to foundation walls, piers, and other ele-
ments in contact with the ground. However, only under
conditions which permit the insect to establish and main-
tain contact with moisture, is a colony able to penetrate
and consume wood in-service.

There are more than 2,000 species of termites. The
most damaging are roughly 20 species called "subter-
ranean" termites because of their nesting and foraging
habits. Of the subterranean termites, Formosan are by far
the most damaging in the U.S. Formosan termites, which
were introduced to Hawaii and the southeastern United
States from Southeast Asia at the end of World War II, can
cause more damage than domestic termites and at a faster
rate. Formosan colonies also tend to be larger than those



of domestic subterranean termites.

The general information given below concerning pro-
tection against termites is applicable to Formosan as well
as domestic termites. However, given the increased level
of damage possible from Formosans, additional precau-
tions should be taken where they exist. Those geographic
areas near enough to current infestations to be reasonably
threatened by existing Formosan termite colonies or by
migration in the near future are considered to be areas of
severe risk. Those areas elsewhere would be considered
to be intermediate and low risk areas.

• Suppression. Formosan termite colonies should
be contained in their current geographic region of
infestation. Precautions should be taken to assure
that logs, soil, landscape timbers, mulch, and other
transportable sources of infestation are free of ter-
mites.

• Site Management. Construction sites must be man-
aged to assure that nothing exists that promotes
establishment of colonies. All construction debris
should be removed from the site, along with dead
trees, foliage, stumps and other sources of food for
termites.

• Soil Barriers. Soil barriers that kill or restrict move-
ment of termites should be introduced based on the
severity of infestation. In areas of severe risk, the
use of barriers such as graded gravel or termite-
resistant steel mesh is appropriate along with the
use of chemical soil treatment or bait systems. In
low-risk areas, soil barriers are not required.

• Foundation Details. In all risk areas, the use of
preservatively treated or naturally durable wood
and termite barriers as discussed below is necessary.
It is also important that foundation design be done
with care. Depending on the type of foundation, use
of graded gravel or termite-resistant steel mesh at
points where piping penetrates slabs is reasonable.
Where concrete masonry units are used as elements
of the foundation, the bottom of the units should be
protected with graded gravel or termite-resistant
mesh, or the units should be filled with concrete.

• Structural Protection. In areas of severe risk, an
increased level of protection of structural elements
of the building is justified. The structural frame
- including posts, poles, columns, joists, girders,
rafters, structural sheathing, and bracing - should
be either preservatively treated wood or naturally
durable.

Prevention of subterranean termite attack is typically
achieved using a barrier separating wood from earth, the
application of chemical termiticide to the soil under and
around the building, or through use of baiting systems
which poison termite colonies.



AMERICAN FOREST & PAPER ASSOCIATION



DESIGN OF WOOD FRAME STRUCTURES FOR PERMANANCE



The termite hazard will vary from one region to the
next. In all areas, structures should still be designed to
provide adequate and accessible clearance between earth
and wood in order to permit periodic inspection for ter-
mite shelter tubes and wood damage. Where clearances
recommended under the heading "Distance - Separation of
Wood Elements" is provided, no additional protection is
required, unless a specific termite hazard is known to ex-
ist. However, all foundations and piers of hollow masonry
units should have solid masonry caps in which all joints
or voids are filled with mortar.

In addition, all roots, wood forms, stakes, and scraps
of wood should be removed from the immediate vicinity
of the house before back-filling and before placing a floor
slab. Particular care should be taken to remove all scraps
of wood from enclosed crawl spaces.

Where local experience indicates that additional pro-
tection against termites is required, one or more of the
following systems should be specified depending on the
degree of hazard:

Termite Barrier

The most common method of control is a termite
barrier which is considered to be any building material or
component which is impenetrable to termites and which
drives the insect into the open where its activities can be
detected.

Properly installed termite shields should be of not less
than 26 gauge galvanized steel, or other suitable metal of
proper thickness, installed in an approved manner on top of
all foundation walls and piers, and around all pipes leading
from the ground (Figure 22). Longitudinal joints should
be locked and soldered. Where masonry veneer is used,
the shield should extend through the wall to the outside
face of the veneer (Figure 22).

Any of the barriers mentioned can be installed with-
out major changes in established construction methods.
However, periodic inspection is essential to the successful
function of any of the barrier types recommended.



Figure 22 Installation of Termite
Shield



SOLID
MASONRY




SOU COVER
19 „ WHEN

M/N. N££DED



DAMP-PROOFED




DAMP-PROOFED ^



Chemical Soil Treatment

Chemical soil treatment has been a standard
practice for preventing termite infestation of structures for
some time. A termiticide is placed into the soil under and
around a structure to create a continuous chemical barrier
that blocks potential routes of termite entry. Typically, a
trench is dug around slabs, piers, or other supports touch-
ing the soil, which is then saturated with termiticides.
Soil below the slab is also treated with the termiticide.
Application of soil treatments should be carried out by a
licensed professional in accordance with requirements of
the authority having jurisdiction. The typical effective life
of a soil treatment varies between products.



v^w ^S^^^ ^^SSS^^^



FIOOR JOIST



^ - dlRDFIl

TERMITE
SHIELD




r



AMERICAN WOOD COUNCIL



WOOD CONSTRUCTION DATA 6



Application of chemicals and precautions involved
in their use should be in accordance with manufacturer's
recommendations (Figure 23). For permanent wood foun-
dations, soil treatment should be in accordance with the
recommendations for poured concrete foundation walls,
except that the treatment should extend below the wood
footing.

Construction Details

A critical element in controlling termite access to the
structure is proper detailing during the building design
process, particularly in those areas at ground level. For
foundations:

• Poured concrete foundation walls may allow access
when cracks greater than 1/64 inch are present.

• Poured reinforced concrete caps, which should be
at least 4 inches thick, on unit masonry foundations,
may allow access when cracks greater than 1/64
inch occur.

• Slab-on-ground construction requires special con-
sideration in areas where a termite hazard exists.
Concrete slabs vary in their susceptibility to penetra-
tion by termites and cannot be considered to provide
adequate protection unless the slab and supporting
foundation are poured integrally (monolithic slab)
to avoid cracks or holes through which termites may
enter (Figure 24).

• Where other types of slab construction are used,
termites may penetrate joints between the slab and
wall. They may also enter through expansion joints
or openings made for plumbing or conduit. Thus, it
is necessary to provide a barrier at these points by
use of termite shields or by chemical soil treatment
(Figure 22 & Figure 23).

Stucco, masonry veneer, and other non-wood siding in
contact with the ground may provide access for termites
in infested areas. For this reason, the veneer or siding
should be kept at least 8 inches above finished grade, un-
less termite shields are installed in an approved manner or
the soil on the exterior has received a chemical treatment
(Figure 22).

Rigid expanded polystyrene or polyurethane insulation
used against foundations can provide concealed access and
are easily penetrated by termites. Where such foundation
wall insulation is used and a particular termite hazard is
known to exist, it is important that soil treatment, shields,
or pressure treated wood be used as appropriate to the
design.

In-Ground Bait Systems

In-ground bait systems are a relatively new technol-
ogy for treating subterranean termites. In-ground bait



stations are placed around a house in the soil. Untreated
cellulosic material is placed in several of the stations and
monitored several times a year for signs of termite activity.
Once termite activity is found in the station, the cellulosic
material is replaced by termiticide-treated, cellulosic mate-
rial that the termites will return to their colonies. In order
for this system to be effective, it must be maintained and
serviced.

Fumigation

Structures subjected to a fumigation system are
covered with a tent and a lethal gas is released into the
structure. This treatment kills termites in the structure, but
not termites in the soil. This system is effective in killing
drywood termites as they infest and live self-contained in
the wood of a structure. Fumigation is not recommended
without other treatments for controlling subterranean ter-
mites because termites in the soil may re-enter the structure
as soon as 24-hours after fumigation.

DURABLE MATERIALS

Another principle involves selection of materials.
Durable materials must be selected for use at all locations
where moisture tolerance is necessary or where termite
infestation is likely. Where deflection, distance, drainage,
and drying cannot effectively maintain moisture content of
wood components below 28%, decay resistant wood must
be selected. For most wood framing components, this is
achieved using preservative-treated wood. For some ap-
plications, this is achieved through selection of naturally
durable species of wood.

Approved durable and preservative-treated wood is
usually recommended when location of the member in
question may be such that it cannot be maintained at a safe
moisture content and when climatic or site conditions in
certain areas may not permit control of decay or termites
by construction practices alone.

The use of naturally durable or preservative-treated
wood in a particular condition depends on the exposure
and importance of the given member. Recommended uses
for naturally durable and pressure treated wood are given
in the section entitled "Conditions of Use for Pressure
Treated and Naturally Durable Wood."

Naturally Durable Wood

Substances deposited by the living tree makes the
heartwood of certain species resistant to decay or termite
attack. The following commercial species of naturally
durable wood should consist of 100% heartwood, except
that an occasional piece may have corner sapwood if 90%
or more of the width of each side on which it occurs is
heartwood:



AMERICAN FOREST & PAPER ASSOCIATION



DESIGN OF WOOD FRAME STRUCTURES FOR PERMANANCE



Figure 23 Application of Soil Treatment




TREATED
AREA



TREATED
AREA




DAMP-PROOFED



GRAVEL FILL



Figure 24 Termite Control for Slab-on-Ground Construction



NATURALLY DURABLE OR

PRESSURE TREATED WOOD

SLEEPER




GRAVEL FILL




DAMP-PROOFED



NATURALLY DURABLE OR

PRESSURE TREATED WOOD

SLEEPERS



VAPOR
RETARDER



GRAVEL FILL



SOIL POISON



AMERICAN WOOD COUNCIL



WOOD CONSTRUCTION DATA 6



• Decay Resistant Species: Redwood, Cedars, and
Black Locust.

• Termite Resistant Species: Redwood and Eastern
Red Cedar.

• In addition to the applications recommended under
"Conditions of Use for Pressure Treated and Natu-
rally Durable Wood," naturally durable wood may
be used wherever untreated wood is used.

Pressure Treated Wood

The effectiveness of preservative treatment is depen-
dent upon the following factors: (a) type of chemical used,
(b) amount of penetration, (c) amount of retention, and
(d) uniform distribution of preservative. The expression
"pressure treated wood" refers to wood meeting the reten-
tion, penetration and other requirements applicable to the
species, product, treatment, and conditions of use in the
approved standards of the American Wood Preservers As-
sociation (AWPA). Since penetration and retention may be
controlled in the pressure treating process, it is important
to select the right preservative and to specify the correct
retention for the intended exposure. All wood required
to be pressure treated should bear the quality mark of an
approved inspection agency which maintains continuing
supervision, testing, and inspection over the quality of the
product. The mark should identify whether the pressure
treated wood is suitable for use in contact with the ground,
or is limited to above-ground use.

Wood members selected for pressure treatment should
be dimensioned and machined prior to preservative appli-
cation. When such precutting is not feasible, all untreated
surfaces exposed by sawing, planing, boring, or routing,
must be treated with a liberal application of preservative.
Wood pressure treated with a water-borne preservative
and used in enclosed locations where drying cannot read-
ily occur should be at a moisture content of 19% or less
before being covered with insulation, interior wall finish,
floor covering, or other material.

Applications for pressure treated wood are not limited;
it may be used where naturally durable or non-pressure
treated wood is used. However, it should be required for
members which are exposed to severe service conditions.
Where members are to be painted or when finished ma-
terials will be nailed to, or placed in direct contact with
treated wood, water-borne or water-repellent preservatives
should be specified.

Conditions of Use for Pressure Treated and
Naturally Durable Wood

Where recommended clearances between wood and
earth are not maintained for wood joists or girders, or the
bottom of wood structural floors without joists, the floor
assembly, including posts, girders, joists, and sub-floor,



should be approved naturally durable or pressure treated
wood. Naturally durable or pressure treated wood should
also be used when recommended clearances cannot be
maintained between the earth and sills which rest on con-
crete or masonry exterior walls, and between the earth and
wood siding and posts or columns. When ends of wood
girders entering exterior masonry or concrete walls are
not provided with the recommended clearance, or when
posts or columns cannot meet the recommended clearance
between the wood and concrete or masonry floors, those
members should also be approved naturally durable or
pressure treated wood.

Sleepers and sills on a concrete or masonry slab, which
are in direct contact with soil should be approved naturally
durable or pressure treated wood. Pressure treated wood
should be used for:

• members in contact with the ground (except when
completely below the permanent ground water table
or continuously submerged in fresh water);

• posts or columns embedded in concrete which is in
direct contact with the earth; and

• members not separated by an impervious moisture
barrier from moisture permeable (concrete, masonry
slabs) floors or roofs which they support.

Retaining or crib walls should be approved pressure
treated wood except that such walls of approved naturally
durable wood up to 4 feet in height and of untreated wood
up to 2 feet in height may be used when separated from
the property line or a permanent building by a minimum
distance equal to the height of the wall. Retaining or crib
walls not more than 2 feet in height located on the property
line also may be of approved naturally durable wood.

In geographical areas where experience has demon-
strated a specific need for protection against termites and
decay, approved pressure treated or naturally durable
wood should be used for those portions of wood members
which form the structural supports of buildings, balconies,
porches or similar permanent building appurtenances
when such members are exposed to the weather without
adequate protection from a roof, eave, overhang, or other
covering to prevent moisture or water accumulation on
the surface or at joints between members. In addition to
providing preservatively treated floor framing members
where suggested elsewhere, the use of treated sub-flooring
is recommended for increased termite protection.

Wood furring strips or other wood framing members
attached directly to the interior of exterior masonry or
concrete walls below grade should be approved naturally
durable or pressure treated wood.

Fasteners for naturally durable and preservative-
treated wood shall be resistant to corrosion or protected to
resist corrosion. Fasteners used in preservatively treated
wood should be of a type recommended by the treating



AMERICAN FOREST & PAPER ASSOCIATION



DESIGN OF WOOD FRAME STRUCTURES FOR PERMANANCE



industry and by the manufacturer of the chemical used in
the treatment. When sacrificial coatings are applied to fas-
teners, a minimum coating thickness capable of protecting
the fastener for the expected service life of the structure
shall be provided.

Non-Pressure Treated Wood

Non-pressure treatments are intended to provide resis-
tance to decay in moderate exposures and, in the case of
the water-repellent preservative, to retard liquid moisture
absorption as well. They provide little, if any, protection
against termite damage. Their effectiveness is based on
the ability of the wood to absorb the preservative. While
the end grain of wood readily absorbs the preservative to
a sufficient depth for adequate protection, penetration into
side grain is usually less than that obtained by pressure
treatment.

Moderate exposure implies that the wood is dry most
of the time but occasionally may be damp enough to permit
decay to occur. In general, non-pressure treatments are ef-
fective for protection where the thinness and dryness of the
member permits sufficient penetration and retention.

Non-pressure treatments have been widely used for
window sash and doors and their frames, as well as for
wood siding and miscellaneous exterior trim. The wa-
ter-repellent preservatives have the extra advantage of
providing better paint performances on these items. Other
applications include: fence parts not in contact with the
ground; and exterior stairs, porch framing, and trim. Where
wood members are exposed to the weather, ends which
abut or are held by fastenings which tend to retain moisture
may be protected by non-pressure treatment.

Wood may be preservatively treated by one of the
following non-pressure processes: (a) cold soaking or dip-
ping in which immersion time is dictated by the desired
retention and end penetration; and (b) vacuum process or
hot-and-cold-bath method using treating cycles designed
to produce the desired retention and penetration.

Preservatives used for non-pressure treated wood are
petroleum based. The water-repellant preservative should
meet the standards of the Window & Door Manufacturers
Association or the American Wood Preservers Association
Standard for Oil-Borne Preservatives (P8). The treatments
prescribed in AWPA P8 have a heavier concentration of
preservatives and are not recommended for painting.



BIBLIOGRAPHY

Treating Specifications and Standards:

1. American Wood Preservers Association. AWPA
Book of Standards. Selma, Alabama.

2. Window & Door Manufacturers Association. In-
dustry Standard for Water-Repellent Preservative
Non-Pressure Treatment for Millwork. NWMA I.
S. 4-05. Des Plaines, Illinois.

Selected References:

1. American Society of Testing Materials, ASTM
El 745 Standard Specification for Water Vapor
Retarders Used in Contact with Soil or Granu-
lar Fill under Concrete Slabs, Annual Book of
ASTM Standards v. 04.12.

2. American Forest & Paper Association. National
Design Specification for Wood Construction.
Washington, DC.

3. American Forest & Paper Association. Wood
Frame Construction Manual for One- and Two-
Family Dwellings. Washington, DC.

4. International Codes Council. International Build-
ing Code. Falls Church, Virginia.

5. Southern Forest Products Association. Perma-
nent Wood Foundation Design and Construction
Guide. Kenner, Louisiana.

ENDNOTE

1. §1403.2 of the International Building Code
specifically requires the exterior wall envelope
to be designed and constructed in such a manner
as to prevent the accumulation of water within
the wall assembly by providing a water-resistive
barrier behind the veneer. In some exterior wall
applications, a double layer of felt paper may be
required. The designer should check with the list-
ing or the Evaluation Report for specific installa-
tion requirements beyond those specified in the
building code.