Well, it is a small group and this was my intent by focusing on the Hermetic Corpus and alchemy. I've just gotten
tired of talking about psychedelic drugs and always saying the same things over and over again, nevertheless it's
a challenge to go outside my own ballywick. Mean I've had an interest in hermeticism and alchemy since was
about 14 and read Jung's psychology and (of) alchemy and it opened for me the fact of the existence of this
vast literature, a literature that is very little read or understood in the modern context. The Jungians have
made much of it, but to their own purposes and perhaps not always with complete fidelity to the intent of the
tradition. We'll talk a lot about the Jungian approach but there are other approaches even within the 20th
century. Believe, since don't have the catalog I'm not absolutely certain, but believe the catalog urged
you to read Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic Tradition by Dame Frances Yates and this is, though Frances Yates
scholarship is very controversial, think that to get an overview of the landscape her book is probably the best
single book between covers. It's not pleasing to some factions and we can talk about that, mean, we will
probably discover within the group all strains of alchemical illusions and delusions that have always driven this
particular engine, but thought to get one book that sort of covered the territory that was a good one to start
with. Well then found out that it's very hard to get this book. Didn't realize that because it's been sitting
on my shelf for years. Richard Bird found a reprint at the Bodhi Tree. Wasn't aware of this particular edition
so, though probably none of you brought it with you in heavily underlined form, if after this weekend you want to
try and get it, it is available and if you can't get that edition, why, a good book service can probably come up
with the first edition which is Routledge Kegan Paul.
| wouldn't hold a weekend like this simply to go over a body of ancient literature if didn't think it had some
efficacy or import for the modern dilemma and some of you may know the song by the Grateful Dead in which the
refrain is "| need a miracle every day." think any reasonable person can conclude that the redemption of the
world, if it's to be achieved, can only be achieved through magic. It's too late for science. It's too late for
hortatory politics.
Well, it's very interesting - every ancient literature has its apocalypses and in the hermetic literature there
is a prophecy, think it's in book two but that really doesn't matter, and the prophecy is that a day will come
when men no longer care for the earth and at that day the gods will depart and everything will be thrown into
primal chaos and this prophecy was very strongly in the minds of the strains of non-Christian thought that
evolved at the close-at the centuries of closure-of the Roman Empire. When you look back into historical time
i's when you reach the first and second centuries after Christ that you reach a world whose psychology was very
much like the psychology of our own time. It was a psychology of despair and exhaustion. This is because Greek
science which had evolved under the aegis of democratian atomism and Platonic metaphysics had essentially come to
a dead end in those centuries. We can debate the reasons why this happened. An obvious suggestion would be that
they failed to develop an experimental method and so everything just dissolved into competing schools of
philosophical speculation and a profound pessimism spread through the Hellenistic world and out of that pessimism
and in the context of that kind of universal despair which attends the dissolution of great empires a literature
was created from the first to the fourth centuries after Christ which we call the Hermetic Corpus or in some
cases the Trismegistic Hymns. Now this body of literature was misunderstood by later centuries, especially the
Renaissance, because it was taken at face value and assumed to be at least contemporary with Moses if not much
older. So the Renaissance view of Hermeticism was based on a tragic misunderstanding of the true antiquity of
this material and there are people, hopefully none in this room, who still would have us believe that this
literature antedates the Mosaic Law, that it is as old as Dynastic Egypt. But this is an indefensible position
from my point of view. In the early 16th century two men, a father and son, Issac and Marik Casaubon, showed
through the new science of philology, that this material was in fact late Hellenistic. Now, I've always said that
| am not a Classicist in the Viconian sense, in the sense that there is a certain strain of thought that always
1
wants to believe that the oldest stuff is the best stuff. This is not the case to my mind. To my mind what is
amazing is how recent everything is. So have no sympathy with the fans of lost Atlantis or any of that kind of
malarky because to me what is amazing is how it all is less than 10,000 years old. Anything older than 10,000
years puts us into the realm of an aceramic society relying on chipped flint for it's primary technology.
What the Hermetic Corpus is is the most poetic and cleanly expressed outpouring of ancient knowledge that we
possess. But it was reworked in the hands of these late Hellenistic peoples and it is essentially a religion of
the redemption of the earth through magic. It has great debt to a tradition called Sevillian which means to mean
Mandeanism and Mandeanism was a kind of proto-Hellenistic gnosis that laid great stress on the power of life, Zoa,
Bios, and in that sense it has a tremendously contemporary ring to it.
We also are living in the twilight of a great empire, and don't particularly mean the American empire, mean
the empire of European thinking created in the wake of the Protestant Reformation and the rise of modern
industrialism, the empire, in short of science. Science has exhausted itself and become mere techrii. It's still
able to perform its magical tricks, but it has no claim on a metaphysic with any meaning because the program of
rational understanding that was pursued by science has pushed so deeply into the phenomenon of nature that the
internal contradictions of the method are now exposed for all to see. In discussing alchemy especially we will
meet with the concept of the coincidencia apositorum-the union of opposites. This is an idea that is completely
alien to science. It's the idea that nothing can be understood unless it is simultaneously viewed as both being
what it is and what it is not and in alchemical symbolism we will meet again and again symbolical expression of
the coincidencia apositorum. It may be in the form of a hermaphrodite, it may be in the form of the union of soul
and Luna, it may be in the form of the union of Mercury with lead, or with sulphur, in other words alchemical
thinking is thinking that is always antithetical, always holds the possibility of by a mere shift of perspective
its opposite premise will gain power and come into focus.
| think it was John, when we went around the circle, who mentioned his interest in shamanism. There's a wonderful
book called The Forge and the Crucible by Mircea Eliade in which he shows that the shaman is the brother of the
smith, the smith is the metalurgist, the worker in metals, and this is where alchemy has its roots. In a sense,
alchemy is older than the Trismegistus Corpus and then it is also given a new lease on life by the philosophical
underpinings which the Corpus Hermeticum provides it. Alchemy, the word alchemy, can be traced back to mean Egypt
or a blackening and in its earliest strata it probably refers to techniques referring to dying, meaning the
coloring of cloth, and gilding of metals, and the forging and working of metal. Mean, we who take this for
granted have no idea how mysterious and powerful this seemed to ancient people and in fact it would seem so to us
if we had anything to do with it. Mean how many of us are welders or casters of metal. It's a magical process
to take for instance cinnibar, a red, soft ore and by the mere act of heating it in a furnace it will sweat
liquid Mercury onto its surface. Well, we have unconsciously imbibed the ontology of science where we have mind
firmly separated out from the world. We take this for granted, it's effortless, because it's the ambience of the
civilization we've been born into but in an earlier age, and some writers would say a more naive age, but
wonder about that, but in an earlier age mind and matter were seen to be alloyed together throughout nature so
that the sweating of mercury out of cinnibar is not a material process, it's a process in which the mind and the
observations of the metalworker maintain an important role, and let's talk for a moment about mercury because the
spirit Mercurius is almost the patron deity of alchemy.
You all know what mercury looks like-at room temperature it's a silvery liquid that flows, it's like a mirror.
For the alchemists, and this is just a very short exercise in alchemical thinking, for the alchemists mercury was
mind itself, in a sense, and by tracing through the steps by which they reached that conclusion you can have a
2
taste of what alchemical thinking was about. Mercury takes the form of its container. If pour mercury into a
cup, it takes the shape of the cup, if pour it into a test tube, it takes the shape of the test tube. This
taking the shape of its container is a quality of mind and yet here it is present in a flowing, silvery metal.
The other thing is, mercury is a reflecting surface. You never see mercury, what you see is the world which
surrounds it, which is perfectly reflected in its surface like a moving mirror, you see. And then if you've ever,
as a child, mean have no idea how toxic this process is, but spent a lot of time as a child hounding my
grandfather for his hearing aid batteries which would then smash with a hammer and get the mercury out and
collect it in little bottles and carry it around with me. Well, the wonderful thing about mercury is when you
pour it out on a surface and it beads up, then each bead of mercury becomes a little microcosm of the world. And
yet the mercury flows back together into a unity. Well, as a child had not yet imbibed the assumptions and the
ontology of science. Was functioning as an alchemist. For me, mercury was this fascinating magical substance
onto which could project the contents of my mind. And a child playing with mercury is an alchemist hard at work,
no doubt about it.
Well, so then, this is a phenomenon in the physical world and then mind is a phenomenon in the Cartesian
distinction, which is between the Res Extensa and the Res Verins. This is the great splitting of the world into
two parts. Remember Al Wong once said to me, we were talking about the yin yang symbol, and he said you know
the interesting thing is not the yin or the yang, the interesting thing is the s shaped surface that runs between
them. And that s shaped surface is a river of alchemical mercury. Now, where the alchemists saw this river of
alchemical mercury is in the boundary between waking and sleeping. There is a place, not quite sleeping, not
quite waking, and there there flows this river of alchemical mercury where you can project the contents of the
unconscious and you can read it back to yourself. This kind of thinking is confounding to scientific thought
where the effort is always to fix everything to a given identity and a given set of behaviors.
Now, the other hermetic perception that is well illustrated by just thinking for a moment about mercury is the
notion, and this is central to all hermetic thinking, of the microcosm and the macrocosm. That somehow the great
world, the whole of the cosmos is reflected in the mystery of man, meaning men and women, it's reflected in the
mystery of the human mind/body interface. So, for an alchemist, it makes perfect sense to extrapolate from this
internal, what we call internal psychological processes, to external processes in the world. That distinction
doesn't exist for the alchemist, and let me tell you, the longer live the more am convinced that this is
absolutely the truth.
The myth of our society is the existential myth that we are cast into matter, that we are lost in a universe that
has no meaning for us, that we must make our meaning. This is what Sartre, Kierkegaard, all those people are
saying, that we must make our meaning. It reaches its most absurd expression in Sartre's statement that nature is
mute. Mean, this is as far from alchemical thinking as you can possibly get because for the alchemist nature
was a great book, an open book to be read by putting nature through processes that revealed not only its inner
mechanics, but the inner mechanics of the artifex (person performing experiment)-the person working upon the
material, in other words, the alchemist.
Well, in other contexts I've talked about the importance of language and how our world is made of language and
part of the problem in understanding alchemy is that the language is slipping out of our reach. We are so
completely imbued with the Cartesian categories of the Res Verins, the world of thought, and the Res Extensia,
the world of three dimensional space, and causality, and the conservation of matter and energy, and so forth that
in order to do more than carry out a kind of scholarship of alchemy we have to create an alchemical language, or
a field in which alchemical language can take place. Some of you may have been with me a couple of weeks ago in
3
Malibu when Joan Halifax and debated the roots of Buddhism and think Joan deserves great credit for saying
that Buddhism would never have taken root in America were it not for the psychedelic phenomenon. Not that
Buddhism is psychedelic, it in fact is fairly touchy about that, but Buddhism would have gotten nowhere in
America had not psychedelics created a context for Buddhist language to take root, And wager that would never
have gotten to first base with proposing a weekend on alchemy at Esalen were it not understood that psychedelics
have prepared people for the notion that mind and world can be pureed together like mercury and sulphur, like the
Sophic waters, to create a new kind of understanding because otherwise modernity has fixed our minds in the
category of Cartesian rationalism and so will not claim, and do not in fact think it's so, that there was
anything overtly psychedelic in the sense of pharmacologically-based about alchemy. When we look back through the
alchemical literature there's very little evidence that it was pharmacologically driven. Only when you get to the
very last ademptions of the alchemical impulse in someone like Paracelsus do you get the use of opium. But it is
interesting that the great drugs of modern society were accidentally discovered by alchemists in their researches;
distilled alcohol is a product of alchemical work and then, as mentioned, opium was very heavily used by the
Peracelsian school. But what they possessed was an ability to liquify their mental categories and then to project
the contents of the mind onto these processes and read them back.
Now this is what made alchemy so fascinating to the Jungian school because the Jungians were discovering the
unconscious and they realized, before Jung's involvement with alchemy, that the best material for psychotherapy
to work upon was dreams and mythology and these were the two poles of the data field that the discovery of the
unconscious was working on. Well then Jung had the prescience to realize that alchemy, which to that point, as
the gentleman over here said, had been dismissed as a naive effort to turn base metals into gold-this is the
first fiction that you have to absolutely purge from your mind, the only alchemists who ever tried to turn base
metals into gold were charlatans, the so-called puffers. They were called that not only for their exaggerated
speech but for their use of bellows to drive their fires. Alchemy has always had a core of true adepts and then a
surround of misguided souls and outright con artists who were trying to change base metals into gold. Now, it's
interesting that science, in its naivety, in the 20th century has actually completed the program of
psuedo-alchemy. You can, if you have a sufficiently powerful nuclear reactor, change lead into gold. Mean, the
cost is staggering. It has no economic importance whatsoever but it can be done by bombarding gold with a
sufficient amount of heavy particles. Lead, you can change it into gold, but this is not what the original intent
was. In fact, when we look at the history of 20th century science we will see that, in a way, it's a
misunderstanding of what the alchemical goals were to be and, one by one, it has done these things that were
stated goals of the alchemists except that the alchemists always spoke in similies and in a secret control
language that was symbolic.
O.K., now, another point that was brought up in going around the circle was the externalization of the soul and
what we're trying to do in this weekend is study and talk about the idea of redeeming the world through magic.
And how is this to be done? Well, the philosopher's stone is a complex of ideas that, no matter how you divide it,
no matter how you slice it, it's very difficult to hold the pith essence of this concept, but what it really
comes down to is the idea that spirit is somehow resident in matter in a very diffuse form. The goal of hermetic
thinking and later alchemy is the concentration and redemption of this spirit, a focusing of it, a bringing of it
together. This is an idea that was common in the Hellenistic world not only to hermetic thinking but also to
Gnosticism.
Gnosticism is the idea that somehow the pure, holy, real light of being was scattered through a universe of
darkness and of Saturnine power and that the goal is that by a process which we can call yogic or alchemical or
medatative or moral/ethical, the light must be gathered and concentrated in the body and then somehow released
and redeemed. All esoteric traditions, East and West, talk about the creation of this body of light and we will
not, in this weekend, talk very much about alchemy, non-western alchemy, Taoist and Vedic alchemy, but in those
4
systems too the notion is about the creation of this vehicle of light. This is one metaphor for the
externalization of the soul.
The philosopher's stone is another and will challenge you to try and imagine what the achievement of the
philosopher's stone would be like because it's in trying to think that way that you begin to dissolve the
categories of the Cartesian trap. So, image for a moment an object, a material, which can literally do anything.
It Can move across categorical boundaries with no difficulty whatsoever. So what do mean? Mean that if you
possess the philosopher's stone and you were hungry, you could eat it. If you needed to go somewhere you could
spread it out and sit on it and it would take you there. If you needed a piece of information, it would become
the equivalent of a computer screen and it would tell you things. If you needed a companion, it would talk to you.
If you needed to take a shower you could hold it over your head and water would pour out. Now, you see, this is
an impossibility. That's right, it's a coincidencia apositorum. It is something that behaves like imagination and
matter without ever doing damage to the ontological status of one or the other. This sounds like pure pathology
in the context of modern thinking because we expect things to stay still and be what they are and undergo the
growth and degradation that is inimical to them, but no, the redemption of spirit and matter means the
exteriorization of the human soul and the interiorization of the human body so that it is an image freely
commanded in the imagination.
Imagination. Think this is the first time I've used this word this evening. The imagination is central to the
alchemical opus because it is literally a process that goes on the realm of the imagination taken to be a
physical dimension. And think that we cannot understand the history that lies ahead of us unless we think in
terms of a journey into the imagination. We have exhausted the world of three dimensional space. We are polluting
it. We are overpopulating it. We are using it up. Somehow the redemption of the human enterprise lies in the
dimension of the imagination. And to do that we have to transcend the categories that we inherit from a thousand
years of science and Christianity and rationalism and we have to re-empower and re-encounter the mind and we can
do this psychedelically, we can do this yogically, or we can do it alchemically and hermetically.
Now there is present in the world at the moment, or at least like to think so, an impulse which have named
the archaic revival. What happens is that whenever a society really gets in trouble, and you can use this in your
own life-when you really get in trouble-what you should do is say "what did believe in the last sane moments
that experienced" and then go back to that moment and act from it even if you no longer believe it. Now in the
Renaissance this happened. The scholastic universe dissolved. New classes, new forms of wealth, new systems of
navigation, new scientific tools, made it impossible to maintain the fiction of the Medieval cosmology and there
was a sense that the world was dissolving. Good alchemical word-dissolving. And in that moment the movers and
shakers of that civilization reached backwards in time to the last sane moment they had ever known and they
discovered that it was Classical Greece and they invented classicism. In the 15th and 16th century the texts
which had lain in monasteries in Syria and Asia Minor forgotten and untranslated for centuries were brought to
the Florentine council by people like Gimistos Placo(sp?) and others and translated and classicism was born-its
laws, its philosophy, its aesthetics. We are the inheritors of that tradition but it is now, once again,
exhausted and our cultural crisis is much greater. It is global. It is total. It involves every man, woman and
child on this planet, every bug, bird and tree is caught up in the cultural crisis that we have engendered. Our
ideas are exhausted-the ideas that we inherit out of Christianity and its half-brother science, or its bastard
child science. So, what I'm suggesting is that an archaic revival needs to take place and it seems to be well in
hand in the revival of Goddess worship and shamanism and partnership but notice that these things are old-10,000
years or more old-but there was an unbroken thread that, however thinly drawn, persists right up to the present.
So the idea of this weekend is to show the way back to the high magic of the late Paleolithic, to show that there
were intellectual traditions, there were minority points of view that kept the faith, that never allowed it to
die. And, to my mind, this alchemical, hermetic, Gnostic, Egyptian, Caldean thread is the thread and if we
unravel it with sufficient care and attention then we can build a bridge from the otherwise nearly
incomprehensible high magic of the late Paleolithic. We can get it as near to ourselves as John Dee, who died in
1604. We can discover that it's no further away form us than the beginning of the 30 years war and, for my money,
after that, it gets pretty mucked up. Mean, after Ulias Levy, who's already waffling, I'm not very interested
in the occultism of the 17th, 18th and 19th century but it's not necessary because scholarship gives us the
Caldean oracles, the Trismegistic Hymns, the library at Nag Hammadi, and so forth and so on. So my impulse is to,
in the most austere sense, repopularize, reintroduce this kind of thinking so that people can live it out. Then,
step, by step, we can evolve our language and evolve our understanding to make our way back to the garden, back
to Eden.
It's occurred to me recently, you know it's said that Christ opened the doors to paradise, yes, but he closed the
doors to Eden and paradise is a very airy place where everybody sits around on clouds strumming their lyres.
think that what we want to do is make our way back to the alchemical garden. That's where our roots are. That's
where meaning is. Meaning lies in the confrontation of contradiction-the coincidencia apositorum. That's what we
really feel, not these rational schemas that are constantly beating us over the head with the "thou shalts" and "
thou should." but rather a recovery of the real ambiguity of being and an ability to see ourselves as at once
powerful and weak, noble and ignoble, future-oriented, past-facing. We each need to become Janus-based(?) and
to incorporate into ourselves the banished contradictions of being that so haunt the enterprise of science. We
can leave that behind and when we do we reclaim authentic being. And authentic being, make no mistake about it,
is what alchemical gold really is. That's what they're talking about-authentic being.
(question from the group): So right now we're lead?
That's right, we're Saturnine and we'll talk about Saturn and Pluto and all of that. Yes, tomorrow we'll talk
about the stages of the alchemical opus and though the stages are many and multifarious, it all begins in what is
called the negrado, the blackening, the depths of the leaded, Saturnine, chaotic, fixed place. And that's where
we have been left by science and modernity and so forth and so on. That's where the alchemist loves to begin.
That's where he or she stokes the fire and begins the dissolucio et coagulatio that leads to the appearance of
the stone.
I'll show you some books and this is by no means exhaustive. The literature on hermeticism and alchemy is vast
and could have brought 5 or 6 boxes of this size from my own library. This a smattering. It doesn't mean that
what show you is the best. It simply tries to spread over a large area. Oh, someone put this here. This is a
new novel that's just been published by Lindsay Clark called The Chemical Wedding and see last week it was
number 10 on the New York Time's best sellers list which is astonishing for such an obscure subject. It's a
retelling of a famous incident in alchemy in the 19th century when a woman named Mary Alice Datwood, who had a
very, very Close relationship to her father, Dr. South, and the two of them worked together, she on a text, he on
a long poem and to make a long story short, eventually they decided to destroy both the poem and the book feeling
that they had said too much and given the secret away-at least that's one version. So this is fictionalized
retelling of that incident intercut with a modern cast of characters very clearly modelled on the poet Robert
Graves. So if you like to absorb your information in a fictionalized form, this is a wonderful book. John Borman
the movie director recently optioned this book-the guy who made "The Emereld Forest" and "Excalibur" so we may
have an alchemical movie downstream, a year or two.
6
A number of compendiums of alchemical texts have been published over the centuries and if you wish to study
alchemy you have to obtain these. If you're fortunate enough to read French you should read Vespugiare and
Berthelo. They collected alchemical texts into encyclopedic-sized volumes but unfortunately these have never
really come into English. One that did come into English is the Museum Hermeticum Amplificarum et Theatrum,
think, which A.E. Waite, who some of you may know for his role in the Golden Dawn, collected. There are about 40
alchemical texts and all the greats are in here: Lull, Vilanova, Michael Maier, Basil Valentine, Kramer, Edward
Kelly and so on and so forth.
The place to begin, think, is obviously with the question "Who is Hermes Trismegistus?" What are we talking
about here? Mean, this sounds so incredibly exotic to people. The Renaissance had the concept of what it called
the Presqui Poaloque (sp?) and if my Latin and Greek irritates you, you have to understand you're dealing with
a boy from a coal mining town in Colorado, so do mangle these things. The Presqui Paoloque were Orpheus, Moses,
and primarily Hermes Trismegistus. Hermes Trismegistus was the primary source, from the point of view of the
Renaissance, of this whole mysterious tradition and, you recall from last night's lecture, this is based on a
misunderstanding. The Renaissance believed that Hermes Trismegistus was older than Moses. We know now, thanks to
Issac and Marik Casaubon, two philologists of the early 17th century, that definitely the Hermetic corpus was
composed between the first and second centuries after Christ. The method of the Casaubons was to examine the
philosophical language of the Corpus Hermeticum and show that there were words and phrases there that were
post-Platonic and derivative of philosophers whose dates we have fully in hand.
Now, if you go to an occult bookstore you will find that, to this date, this error persists. There are people who
still want to claim that this stuff is older than dyanstic Egypt. There are even books, was in Shambala weeks
ago, claiming to teach you how to change lead into gold. Well, from my point of view this just evokes a small
smile. The old errors persist. The Puffers are still at it. But wnat Hermes Trismegistus is is a character who
appears in many guises in these hermetic dialogs. The hermetic hymns are usually couched in the form of dialogs
between Hermes and his son Thoth and Thoth takes the position of the uninitiated ingenue who is sitting at the
feet of the master. Thoth asks questions: what is the true nature of the world, what is the true nature of man,
and Hermes answers and the general form of these texts, with exceptions, because there are 20 of them, is an
intellectual dialog which builds to an ecstatic revelation and then in the wake of the ecstatic revelation there
is a hymn of praise to Hermes Trismegistus. Trismegistus means thrice-blessed and is sometimes called Hermes
Triplex to distinguish this Hermes from all the other Hermes of early, middle and late Greek thinking. Hermes is
of course the messenger god, the god of scribes. The reason this lbis-headed being holding a staff is embossed on
the cover of each of these books is because this is how Hermes Trismegistus, Thoth Hermes was imagined. He was
associated with the scribe god of the Egyptian pantheon.
The two distinguishing factors that stand out, at least for me, that think you need to incorporate into your
thinking about hermeticism, two very important concepts. The first is the divinity of human beings-an
extraordinarily radical idea in the context of late Hellenistic thinking. We all operate under the spell of the
concept of the fall of man. Man is an inferior being, errors were made in the Garden of Eden and that we are far,
far from the nature of divinity. All magic, and all magic in the West is derivative from this tradition, takes
the position that man is a divine being, men and women are divine beings. The Corpus Hermeticum actually refers
to man as God's brother and this is a double-edged perception. It gives tremendous dignity to the human
enterprise but it also raises the possibility of the error of pride and hubris.
7
In the Renaissance, Marcello Ficino boiled this notion down to the aphorism "man is the measure of all things."
And you may notice that this is the position of science, that man is the measure of all things, that it is up to
us, we can decide the course of the cosmos. All magic stems from this position. This is why the church was so
concerned to stamp out magic-because it assigns man an importance that the church would rather reserve for deity.
So that's the first great division between Christian thinking and hermetic thinking. An entirely different
conception of what human beings are and when we get into the text, I'll read you some of these passages.
Now, the second distinguishing factor, and notice that position on man empowers tremendous freedom, man is the
measure of all things, the second distinguishing factor in hermeticism is the belief that we can control fate,
that we can escape from cosmic fate. The late Hellenistic mindset, and what you get in the Gnostics, is the
belief that because of astrology, because of the stars, we are subject to control from these exterior forces. In
most Gnostic thinking the whole concern is to somehow evade what is called the hemarmeny (sp?), cosmic fate.
And in the Gnostic systems, the only way it can be done is by ascending through the shells of cosmic, ordering
forces-the archons, the planets, the planetary demons, and so forth and so on, and then beyond the hemarmeny,
which is actually thought of as a place in space that you burst through when you transcend fate. What the
hermetic thought is is that these fates become personified as the decans, as stellar demons, and then it is held
that there is a magic, a magical system, which is possible where you can call these archangels to your side and
work with them and not be subject to the inevitable working of the cosmic machinery and this burst like a
revelation over the late Hellenistic world because there was such philosophical and emotional and political
exhaustion that this comes, this is a counterpoint to the message of the New Testament, which is a similar
message, that you can be saved in the body, that you can escape the inevitable dissolution and degradation laid
upon us by time. So, these are the two distinguishing factors: the divinity of man and the possibility of using
magic to evade the machinery of fate.
So, want to read some of the Corpus Hermeticum to you to give you the flavor of it, but before do, want to
say something about the history of these texts. You're all familiar, more or less I'm sure, with Apuleius The
Golden Ass, which is a novel of initiation which is late Roman. Apuleius also put together what is called the
Asclepius and the Asclepius is true hermetic literature that was not lost. It was the only one that was available
throughout the Dark and Middle ages. All the rest was lying untranslated in Syrian Monasteries until Gemistus
Plethon in 1490 brought these manuscripts to Florence, to the court of the Di Medicis and then the translation
project began. The only other hermetic material that was accessible throughout the high Gothic period was a book
of magic called the Picatrix. And the Picatrix was probably written in the 1200's although this elicits screams
of dissent from the burning-eyed faction. But reason dictates that we consider Picatrix 12th century so only the
Asclepius and the Picatrix represented this strain of thought before the 1460's. And the importance of hermetic
thinking can be seen by the fact that Gimistis Platho brought Plato to the Florentine council as well as Hermes
Trismegistus. And when Marcello Ficino sat down to do this translation work Cosumo Di Medici said "Plato can wait,
I'm getting old. You do the Hermetic Corpus first. That's much more important. We'll sort out this Plato
business in a few years." And so it was done. It was completed in 1493 and in 1494 Cosumo died so he never saw
the translations of Plato but felt that the Corpus Hermeticum was more important. Mention this to show you the
importance that was attached to this stuff.
Here is one of the key passages on man's nature. This is from Book one of the Corpus Hermeticum: "But mind the
father of all, he who is life and light gave birth to man, a being like to himself and he took delight in man as
being his own offspring for man was very goodly to look on, bearing the likeness of his father. With good reason
then did God take delight in man for it was God's own form that God took delight in and God delivered over to man
all things that had been made." This is the basis of the Ficinian statement man is the measure of things. "And
8
man took station in the Maker's sphere and observed the things made by his brother who was set over the region of
fire. And having observed the Maker's creation in the region of fire he willed to make things for his own part
also. And his father gave permission having in himself all the workings of the administrators." This is a
reference to the angel heirarchary "And the administrators took delight in him and each of them gave him a share
of his own nature."
So man is the brother of God and a creature at home with the angels. This idea is echoed in the Asclepius which
you'll recall was available throughout the Middle Ages. "The range of man is yet wider than that of the demons"
meaning the angels - this term is transposable in its hermetic thought "The individuals of the human kind are
diverse and of many characters. They, like the demons, come from above and, entering into fellowship with other
individuals they make for themselves many and intimate connections with all other kinds" and then the famous
passage "man is an honor then, Asclepius, honor and reverence to such a being. Man takes on him the attributes of
a god as though he were himself a god. And he is familiar with the demonkind for he comes to know that he is
sprung from the same source as they. And strong in the assurance of that in him which is divine, he scorns the
merely human part of his own nature. How far more happily blended are the properties of man then those of other
beings. He is linked to the gods inasmuch as there is in him a divinity akin to theirs. He scorns that part of
his own being which makes him a thing of earth and all else with which he finds himself connected to by heaven's
ordering he binds to himself with the tie of his affection."
So this is an incredibly radical conception of what it means to be human. So radical that it is unwelcome even in
the present context. Notice the modern feeling of this stuff. This is not biblical rhetoric. This is
philosophical discourse as we know it and carry it out ourselves. This is a passage on the adept and initiation.
Let me see who's speaking here, Thoth speaks to Pimondres, this is book one, "But tell me this too, said, God
said let the man who has mind in him recognize himself' but have not all men mind?" And then Pimondres replies "
Oh man, said mind to me speak not so, even mind come to those men who are holy and good and pure and merciful
and my coming is a succor to them and forthwith they recognize all things and win the father's grace by loving
worship and give thanks to him praising and hymning him with hearts uplifted to him in filial affection." Again
the reference to being God's brother in filial affection. "And before they give up the body to death which is
proper to it they loathe the bodily senses knowing what manner of work the senses do." This introduces the theme
of asceticism.
Like the Gnostics, there is in much of hermetic literature a kind of horror of the earth, a desire to ascend and
to get away from it. Scott makes the distinction between what he calls pessimistic Gnosis and optimistic Gnosis.
And within the 20 texts of the Corpus Hermeticum you get vacillation on this point. In some cases the Mandaean,
the Cebian(?) tendency is there and the world soul is invoked and the whole of creation is seen as a living
being involved in this soteriological process, this process of salvational mechanics through magic. In other
texts this Gnostic horror of matter is strongly stressed. It's very clear that the Hellenistic mind was
ambivalent on this point. Even as we are ambivalent on this point. It's a real question, are we here to be the
caretakers of the earth or are we strangers in the universe and is our task to return to a forgotten and hidden
home no trace of which can be found in the Saturnine world of matter. It's very hard to have it both ways. You're
going to have to take a position on that and these people were forced into the same dilemma. There's no middle
ground between those two positions and so that dichotomy, that conundrum, haunted a lot of hermetic thinking.
Here is the hermetic creation myth. This is book three, paragraphs one through a few, and you'll see the
comparison and similarities with the Christian creation myth but with extraordinary differences. "There was
darkness in the deep and water without form and there was a subtle breath, intelligent, which permeated the
9
things in chaos with divine power. Then, when all was yet undistinguished and unwrought, there was shed forth
holy light and the elements came into being. All things were divided one from another and the lighter things were
parted off on high, the fire being suspended aloft so that it rose unto the air and the heavier things sank down
and sand was deposited beneath the watery substance and the dry land was separated out from the watery substance
and became solid. And the firey substance was articulated with the gods therein and heaven appeared with its
seven spheres and the gods, visible in starry forms, with all their constellations and heaven revolved and began
to run its circling course riding upon the divine air. And each god by his several powers set forth that which he
was bidden to put forth. And there came forth four-footed beasts and creeping things and fishes and winged birds
and grass and every flowering herb, all having seed in them according to their diverse natures for they generated
within themselves the seed by which their races should be renewed." And then it goes on to describe the birth of
man.
This kind of thinking is what alchemy seized upon in it's ambitions. One way of thinking of what alchemy came to
attempt is, the thinking went like this - since man is God's brother, the purpose of man is to intercede in time
and it was believed that ores, precious metals and things like this grew in the earth. It was a thorough going
theory of evolution that reached right down into the organic realm. It was thought that gold deposits in the
earth would actually replenish themselves over time. It's passages like this that give permission for that kind
of thinking. In line with that, we're now in book four and remember the tone changes slightly from book to book,
they were, after all, written over a 300 year period by various people.
"You must understand that God is pre-existent, ever existent, and that he alone made all things and created by
his will the things that are. And when the creator had made the ordered universe, he willed to set and order the
earth also and so he sent down man, a mortal creature made in the image of an immortal being, to be an
embellishment of the divine body for it is man's function" - here it comes, the purpose of man according to book
four - "for itis man's function to contemplate the works of god and for this purpose he was made, that he might
view the universe with wondering awe and come to know its maker. Man has this advantage over all other living
beings, that he possess mind and speech. Now speech, my son, God imparted to all men but mind he did not impart
to all. Not that he grudged it to any, for the grudging temper does not start from heaven above, but comes from
being here below in the souls of those men who are devoid of mind." This introduces the concept of an elect, or a
perfectee, a heirarchy of human accomplishment and understanding and this is also basic to Gnosticism. It's not
for everyone, they're saying, it's for the pure of heart and what pure of heart means depends on the school
you're looking at. For some, it was mathematical accomplishment. For others, it was contact with the logos, for
others it was the ability to resist the temptations of the senses. But there was always the sense of the higher
and lower possibilities within the human experience. Questions?
I'm still back in the last lecture we shared on plant intelligence. So I'm listening to all this divinity of man
and wondering where the position of the plant realm or the planning(?) was. There was one section where you
read that, so...
Yes. This is the opening of book 12 and this is a heavy Mandaean sensitivity, this sensitivity to life. This
whole cosmos, and notice how this transcends even the Buddhist point of view because in Buddhism plants have no
soul, this is a tremendous failure in the Buddhist perception as far as I'm concerned, o.K., this is book 12 - "
Now this whole cosmos, which is a great god and an image of he who is greater and is united with him and
maintains its order in accordance with that will, is one mass of life and there is not anything in the cosmos,
nor has been through all time, from the first foundation of the universe, neither in the whole, nor among the
several things contained within it that is not alive. There is not, and has never been, and never will be in the
10
cosmos, anything that is dead. For it was the father's will that the cosmos, as long as it exists, should be a
living being and therefore it must needs be a God also. How then, my son, could there be dead things in that
which is a God, in that which is an image of the father, in that which is one mass of life. Deathness is
corruption and corruption is destruction. How then can any part of that which is incorruptible be corrupted or
any part of that which is a God be destroyed." And there are other passages. Ah, this is a good one. This is book
18, "For as the sun, who nurtures all vegetation also gathers the first fruits of the produce with his rays as it
were with mighty hands, plucking the sweetest odors of the plants, even so we too, having received into our own
souls, which are plants of heavenly origin, the efflux of God's wisdom must in return use his service for all
which springs up in us."
Now, this conception that the human soul is a plant is a unique idea. Don't know of another tradition, Those of
us who were in Ojai heard Johanes Wilbur(sp?) talk about how, among the Amazon Indians, the wural(sp?), men
actually marry trees. They actually take trees as their wives, a tree, and it is a man's job throughout his life
to take care of this tree with the same tenderness and affection which he lavishes on a living wife. This is a
more radical conception than that. This is the conception that the most important part of us is a plant. It
reminds me of the joke that occasionally make in these groups, the notion that animals are something invented
by plants to carry them from place to place. Well, according to this, that's right on. So, the sensitivity to the
vegetative nature is so great that it raises the plant to be the pith essence, the soul of man, the brother of
God! So you see the valuation of the vegetative universe is of an extremely radical type.
The upper echelon of humanity that was given the mind, was that predetermined at birth or can someone develop a
mind?
No, it is not predetermined. It is something that is acquired through cultivation of a relationship to, in the
hermetic language, nous, the higher mind, and in the Gnostic language logos, the informing spirit. Nothing is
predetermined in the hermetic system because through magic we can overcome the energies of cosmic fate. This is
the great good news of hermeticism, that we are not subject to fate. We should probably talk a little about this
logos concept. This is something which seems very alien to modern people unless they are psychedelically
sophisticated. The logos was the sine qua non of Hellenistic religion and what it was was an informing voice that
spoke in your head or heart, wherever you want to put it, and it told you the right way to live. You get this
idea even in the later Old Testament where it's said that the truth of the heart can be known. It's no great
dilemma to know good from evil, you simply inquire of your heart, "is it good or evil?" and you will discover a
voice which will tell you and all the great thinkers of this Greco-Hellenistic period sought and cultivated the
logos. Plato had his demon. Everyone sought the informing voice of the nous, that's what it's called in
Neo-Platonism and then in hermeticism and then in Gnosticism, the logos.
For modern people, well no, for me, the only way I've ever had this experience is through the presence of
psychedelic substances and then it is just crystal clear, there's just no ambiguity about it. Somehow, it's
possible for an informing voice to come into cognition that knows more than you do. It is a connection with the
collective unconscious, suppose, that is convivial, conversational, that just talks to you about the nature of
being in the world and the nature of your being in the world. It's puzzling to us because it seems so remote, for
us a voice in the head or the heart is pathology and you may know the famous story of, in the first century, some
fishermen were off the shore of the island of Argos in the Mediterranean Sea and they heard a great voice from
the sky and the voice said, "great Pan is dead." Well, people like Lactantius and Euseibus, these patristic
fathers, the people who built Christianity, who took the Gospels and turned them into a world religion, they took
this annunciation from the sky of the death of Pan as the annunciation of the change of the Aeon.
11
By the Aeon, mean these roughly 2,000 year periods that are associated with the equinocial procession. Do you
all understand how this works? That over 26,000 years, the helical rising of the solsticial sun slips slowly from
one house to another and around AD100, there's argument because these things are never precise, the age of Picses
began and the previous Aeon ceased and the cosmic machinery, the great gears of the largest scale of the cosmic
machinery, clicked past a certain point and into the age of Picses and this was then taken as very fortuitous for
Christianity because Christ was associated with the sign of the fish and it was seen as a Picsean movement.
believe that it's entirely possible that the logos in that rough moment in time fell silent and it has been
silent for 2,000 years so what we have is the exegesis of text and Noetic archeology of the sort we're carrying
on here. Now, a phenomenon as trivial and hyped on(?) as channeling can be seen as the reawakening of the logos.
The long night of Picsean silence is ending and the spirit of nous is again moving in the world, speaking in the
minds of the adepts and the heirophants who have the techniques and the will to connect with this stuff. Don't
know how got off on that. But obviously this kind of literature can be seen as the last message from the fading
logos. The last statements before the change of the Aeons rendered this control language very difficult and
non-intuitive and somewhat incomprehensible.
Reading...You broke off, and had a puzzlement about the use of the word mind. What, in this context, does this
refer to?
It's Scott's translation of this word nous. It simply means this universal, permeating intelligence.
The statement there is that it is only available to an elite through...
Through asceticism and desire, intent. There are proscriptions, they lived a life of purity, although their
definitions of purity varied widely.
Man is brother of God and yet we have to earn it. This seems kind of a denial of that.
That's right. This persists right up to this moment. The quote always love is from Thomas Hobbes' Levaithan.
Hobbes was the great theoritician of modern government and social systems and he was basically a paranoid S.O.B.
and he says in the Levaithan "man to man is likened to an errant beast and man to man is likened to a god." It's
absolutely true, you know, our noblest aspirations and our most hideously dehumanizing activities take place in
the context of our relationship to other people. This is what the alchemists were trying to do - separate the
gold from the dross. They were trying to take the errant beast, and when we look at alchemical art we will see
dragons, dogs, pigs, we will see the errant beast and we will see the angelic beings that are trying to be
separated out of our nature. This is within each and every one of us. Man to man is likened to a god and man to
man is likened to an errant beast.
This question has to do with mind. According to my understanding of some of the Platonic tradition and
Neo-Platonic thought, this has to do with the divided line in Plato. You can divide that line...Into five stages
of knowing. You start with the senses as being agency or avenue, knowing something about something like contact...
most external form of knowledge...The level above the senses is designated as the instincts, it's an inactive
knowing, in that sense a biologically active knowing that we have. The third stage is described as sometimes
estimation, this is, an approximation(?), yes, this characterized mainly sort of logical activity and then the
next level of cognitive activity is reason and this reason is not the type of reason we normally engage in, it's
a very different, a very creative type of activity. Above the reason is what they call intuition or intellect or
nous and that's put in as the fifth...
And would that be revelation?
Reason is a Creative activity and one can generate and think things through with creative ability. One goes
through activity and stages of the activity and things(?) transpire over time and one comes to complete
understanding of the thing one is trying to grasp and sometimes that's described as discursive activity although
the logical activity is discursive. So you're moving through a process...Pieces, the nous or the intellect of the
higher mind grasp things in totality. It doesn't engage in...
In reseosination(?). You raise an important point which further complicates the picture, but it's how it was,
folks. The reference here is to Neo-Platonism which is a kind of parallel tradition to what we're talking about.
Plato had at least a couple of phases in the evolution of his thinking. The young Plato is a rational thinker but
the later Plato, apparently after he fell under the influence of Pythagorean schools, becomes a full-blown mystic
and then in the late Roman empire, almost a thousand years after Plato, we have to remember, in our minds these
people get squeezed together like they could all have dinner together, but Plotinus is as far from Plato as we
are from King Connaught so you have to bear in mind the scale of history. But, so 900 - 1,000 years after Plato a
Byzantine school of philosophy arouse around Porphery, Plotinus and Procelus as the major exponents and they
worked with the late Plato and elaborated a beautiful mystical cosmology. This is what did a workshop on here a
year ago and many of those ideas and terms parallel conceptually the stuff in the Corpus Hermeticum and if you're
of a certain intellectual bent you may find yourself more comfortable with the Neo-Platonists than this. This
tends to be emotional, evocative, poetic and while there's great poetry in Plotinus there's also very tight
thinking that goes along with it.
And there are other traditions, I'm making it simple for you, there was a whole tradition called the Caldean
oracles and this was a collection of 100 or more fragments all of which were the great commentaries of Eusebius
in 30 volumes. The Amblicus(?) is one of them. That's all lost, we don't have that material and it is in a way
the most mysterious of these traditions because it just didn't survive and it may be that that, the Caldean
Oracles is the missing link to push this stuff several centuries back into time because the Caldean Oracles may
actually be pre-Platonic. There's considerable evidence of that. But these are very arcane matters. You have to
give yourself over to a lifetime of learning these languages and the philology of these languages to penetrate
this stuff.
Neo Platonism was Byzantine, basically Constantinople. The Hermetic Corpus was largely Alexandrian. There were
also Christian Platonists in Alexandria. There were certain centers: Rome, Alexandria, Byzantium, Heliopolos in
Egypt was a Cult site that was maintained for a very long time. If you're interested in this stuff but don't like
13
to absorb it this way, Flaubert, of all people, the Flaubert of Madame Bovary, wrote an incredible novel called
The Temptation of St. Anthony in which he describes second century Alexandria in a fictionalized form and gives
you a real flavor for the intellectual complexity of the Alexandrian world. Christianity had not yet gelled, it
was many things, so you not only have Gnostics of five or six schools: Simonists, Valentinians, Baselideans and
so forth, but you also have Christians, a numbers of cults calling themselves Christians, who were in fierce
competition. Docetists, Montanists, and later Nestorians. There were Gymnosophists from India, people who were
actually carrying yogic doctrines into the Mediterranean world, plus you then have all the surviving cults of the
older Egyptian strata, the Cults of Isis, and Seville, and Dionysus, and Adonis, it just goes on and on. The
richness of this intellectual world is very, there's nothing comparable in our experience and it shows the
passion with which people were trying to understand the dilemma of a dying world because this is what they were
confronted with. The intellectuals of the empire could feel it all slipping through their hands. Flaubert gives a
wonderful picture of this. Flaubert has a very romantic streak. It's like smoking hashish, reading this book -
the attention to fabrics, architecture, food and odor. And because the subject matter is the temptation of St.
Anthony, it's an excuse to describe these temptations in all their sensual richness and erotic kinkiness. It's a
wonderful way to absorb this material.
Somebody else raised the point of the elitism, of an elite group of people. And if one considers a society like
the one you had in Alexandria, or some of the other centers, the only people who really had access to this were
first of all people who had money and who were well educated and could read so already you had an elite group...
Yes, definitely. What survives from a civilization is it's literatures and these literatures are usually the
production of an elite. We have to remember, don't have any illusions about the Roman Empire. Always think of
the wonderful description, don't even know why it's there, Boris Pasternac, in Doctor Zhivago, goes off ona
riff about Rome and he describes it as a bargain basement on three floors. This was an empire that lived by human
cruelty. It was on the backs of slaves that this airy, intellectual speculation was based. It was a tremendously
pluralistic society but that pluralism was maintained by standing armies of enormous size and policies of
occupation of enormous cruelty. Because of our relationship to the Christian tradition we're aware of such things
as the Zealot revolt of 69 and the reign of Herod Antiochus in Jerusalem, but that was just one little corner of
the empire and in Armenia, in Gaul, in Spain, in North Africa, military governments were carrying out outrageous
suppressions of native populations, it was not a pretty time to be alive. And what comes down to us then is the
yearning to escape. No wonder these people saw the earth as a cesspool and a trap because that's what it was for
them. Our own age is very similar. We do not have slavery but we suffer under propaganda -mass manipulation of
ideas and the degradation of exploitation of the third world on a scale the Roman Empire couldn't even dream of.
So, there is a great affinity.
If any of you are interested in this kind of thing, highly recommend a book by Hans Jonas called The Phenomenon
of Life. It's a book of philosophical essays but there's one essay called "Gnosticism and the Modern Temper" in
which he shows that once you take Gnosticism and dump all the angels and all the star demons and all the colorful
bricabrac of late Roman thinking what you have is a thorough going existentialism completely compatible with Jean
Paul Sartre, Jean Genet, and the kind of intellectual despair that characterized the post WWII generation in
Europe. Heidegger is thorough goingly Gnostic in his intentionality, it's just that the language is modern and
stripped of this magical thinking and by being stripped of this magical thinking in a way modern, the modern
resintion(?) of that state of mind is even more hopeless and disempowering.
Fortunately, think we're moving out of the shadow of that, but I'm 44 years old, grew up reading those people
and it made my adolescence much harder than it needed to be. Mean, my god, there wasn't an iota of hope to be
14
found anywhere. That's why, for me, psychedelics broke over that intellectual world like a tidal wave of
revelation. Quoted to you last night Jean Paul Sartre's statement that nature is mute. Now see this as an
obscenity almost, an intellectual crime against reason and intuition. It's the absolute antithesis of the logos
and much of our world is ruled by men, older than am, who are fully connected into that without any question
and they just think that the rest of this is just namby pamby ecological softheartedness of some sort. There is
no openness to the power of Bios, to the fact of a living cosmos. This is what Rupert Sheldrake is always trying
to say. The reinvestuture of spirit into matter, the rebirth of the world soul is a necessary concomitant to what
we understand about the real nature of the world. In a way, the theory of evolution, which was born in the 1850s,
was the beginning of the turning of the tide because even though the first 100 years of evolutionary theory was
fantastically concerned to eliminate teleology, eliminate purpose, nevertheless nobody ever understood that
except the hardcore evolutionists. To everyone else, evolution meant ascent to higher form. Once heard someone
say "if it doesn't have to do with genes, it ain't evolution." Well, that's a tremendously limited view of what
evolution is. The inorganic world is evolving, the organic world is evolving and there the currency is genes but
also the social and intellectual world of human beings is evolving and there the currency is not genes but means
so that idea carries with it the implication of ascent to higher form and correctly broadened and understood
becomes permission to optimism and to the kind of hope that these folks were trying to articulate.
...The concept of mind as something that is attainable and not necessary is a separation and therefore for me
it's a lie and so want ...| don't know, assume there are many different definitions of mind, don't mean
functions of mind, mean definitions of mind, and I'm toying now with the notion of meshing of the notion of
mind and the notion of logos. For logos is, and it seems to me that mind is, if it is available through trial
then we're back in a separation...And this is to me a false separation
Yes, you're right, but it's a separation necessary for philosophical discourse, that's why philosophical
discourse is not the top of the mountain. Language itself is the process of making distinctions that are false.
This is why all language is a lie. This is why the ultimate truth lies in something unspeakable but the ascent to
the philosophical is through this kind of philosophical analysis.
Language is only the vehicle...
Well it's the vehicle but eventually there's no road and you have to park the vehicle and get out and walk, and
that's the journey. Plotinous, the great Neo Platonist has this wonderful phrase. He calls the mystical
experience "the flight of the alone to the alone." love this image. It's so uncompromising and it's about as
true as something can be and still move in the realm of language, because it's saying: finally words fall away
and finally there is only that which cannot be said. Many of you who've stuck with me know that love to quote
this poem by this obscure poet who died in the trenches in France in the first World War, Trumble Stickney, and
he wrote a poem called "Meaning's Edge" and the punch line goes like this "| look over meaning's edge and feel
the dizziness of the things you have not said," and think that every one of these weekends, this is the effort
- to carry you to the edge of an abyss and then push you over into the dizziness of the things unsaid and they
will always be unsaid.
Wittgenstein, God bless him, had the concept of the unspeakable. He said "philosophy operates in the realm of the
unspeakable but eventually we must confront that which cannot be said." The dizziness of things unsaid, and
there's where real authenticity then flows back into the world of community and speech but it comes from a place
15
of utter silence and unsayability. How could it be otherwise? What hubris would it be to expect that the
small-mouthed noises of English could encompass being. That's a primary error that all philosophy chooses to make
at the beginning of it's enterprise in order to set up shop at all. No, these are lower-dimensional slices of a
reality that is ultimately unitary, ineffable, unspeakable, and dazzling.
Philosophical discourse is verbal and mental masturbation?
Absolutely. Masturbation, because it's, there's a pun here, it's autopoetic, it is completely out of yourself,
there is no union with the other and the other is what you're always trying to get to. The other is a common term
in these literatures. The other is that which cannot be fully known. Always like to quote the British
enzymologist JBS Haldane, who made a wonderful statement. He said, "the universe is not only stranger than we
suppose, it is stranger than we can suppose." That's a dizzying perception. It's one thing to think it's very
strange. It's another thing to think it's stranger than you can suppose. You may suppose and suppose and suppose
and you'll fall so short of the mark that it's absurd. That's what it means to be in the presence of a mystery.
The modern word mystery translates out to unsolved problem. That's not what a mystery is. A mystery is not an
unsolved problem. A mystery is a mystery and raciocination(?) can exhaust itself and make no progress with it
and that's what's at the core of our being and that was what was at the core of this ancient perception. These
were thoroughly modern people. They were shoved up against the same things that tug at our hearts and our minds
and our souls and beyond that there's not a whole hell of a lot that you can say about it.
| just wanted to add that the idea of the earth as a living organism makes an appearance in psychology at the end
of the last century with Gustave Fechner who survives in footnotes of textbooks as the father of experimental
psychology. Read a book about the soul life of plants also and that whole part of his work is utterly ignored...
influenced anybody but William Jameson
This is an idea that will not die but it's practitioners end up in footnotes. They do not have a happy fate.
Certainly Henri Birkson, with his idea of the elan vitale, this is an effort to preserve the idea of a world soul
and yet the fate of Birkson, his influence on modern philosophy is certainly minimal. Alfred North Whitehead is
my great favorite. Think that he's the cat's pajamas and he has this idea of the living cosmos - that life and
vitality extend right down to the electron yet in spite of his mathematical contributions, the fact that he wrote
Principia Mathematica with Bertrand Russell, Whitehead is not taught. Think there's one university in this
country where they take him seriously. Modern philosophy is a desert for my money. Who cares about it? Nobody
cares about it. Who's living their life according to the perceptions of modern philosophy. Nobody, as far as
can see. But yes, vitalism was this impulse in biology that persisted right up to the 1920s with embryologists
like Dreche and his school and mechanical biology has been at great pains to suppress that. That's why Rupert
Sheldrake is such a breath of fresh air, because he can be seen as a person carrying the vitalist message back
into science. His new book on the greening of science and nature is nothing more than a manifesto for the
re-recognition of the presence of the world soul.
What about the Native Americans, their philosophy?
Yes, well, Aboriginal people, not only the Native Americans but the tribes of the Amazon, if you live next to
16
nature this is such an overwhelming perception that it's never called into question. But you see we, most of us,
trace our civilization to desert dwellers who invented agriculture which lead to surpluses so then we had to
build walled enclosures to defend our surpluses from starving neighbors and we're talking 6,000 BC at Jericho for
this kind of stuff. So,we have been cut off from the natural mind longer than any other group of people on earth.
This is how we're able to carry out the demonic, in the negative sense, reconstruction of the world that we have.
If there is a sin then we have sinned. Robert Oppenheimer said beyond all rational argument the physicists have
known sin and it's because they reached into the heart of matter without reverence and their greatest trick was
to call down the light that burns at the center of stars and they call it down to the test centers of the deserts
and onto the heads of our enemies, if necessary. But this is a cosmic sin, it's an abomination. It's the story of
Western Civilization.
The first great error was the urbanization, well, don't know, the first great error, the invention of
agriculture was a pretty staggering bad turn, then urbanization and then a piece of bad luck which we didn't need
to befall us was the invention of the phonetic alphabet. And with the invention of the phonetic alphabet we moved
away from symbolism and lost even the symbolic connection to the world and that happened with the evolution of
Demotic Greek and even earlier languages - linear A and B and that kind of stuff. McLuhan talks a lot about this.
We live in a universe so alienated that we can barely conceive of the way back but hopefully. Archeology is a
wonderful thing. We are actually digging into the stratographic layers of our past and reconstructing these
ancient intellectual machines and setting their gears going and seeing how it works and hopefully when we recover,
we're like amnesiacs, people who don't remember who they are or where they came from, we just wander mumbling
through the streets of our cities foraging through garbage cans and frightening other people and yet if we could
wake up, and archeology and the rebirth of an awareness of the Goddess and the pushing of science to the point
where it's irrational foundations become clear - this is all part of an awakening, an archaic revival which will
then make us part of the living world and not a disease, a parasitic force upon it.
It struck me that one comment you read there talked about the creation of the world. It said the elements were
brought forth and at first was thinking earth, air, fire, and water but was thinking in relationship to some
other...Of life that...Being, life, and intellect and being, life, and intellect are what that come into
manifestation from the one who pours forth the world and creates the world and those are the first elements that
come into existence - being, life, and intellect. Life itself is an element of the cosmos as it were. It's an
irreducible aspect of things and you're paying respect to the fact that life is an omnipresent thing in the
foundation of things. It's one of the elements.
| think that in one of the other things read it said that everything that exists, that ever has been, that ever
will be, is alive.
I'll read a bit more of this. This refers to the theme touched on a little bit last night of the importance of
the imagination and how think that our destiny lies in the imagination. "God is ever existent and makes
manifest all else. But he himself is hidden because he is ever existent. He manifests all things but is not
manifested. He is not himself brought into being in images presented through our senses but he presents all
things to us in such images. It is only things which are brought into being that are presented through sense.
Coming into being is nothing else than presentation through sense." This is so thoroughly modern, it's staggering.
For 1,500 years people couldn't say anything that clearly. "It is evident then that he who alone has not come
into being cannot be presented through sense and that being so he is hidden from our sight. But he presents all
things to us through our senses and thereby manifests himself through all things and in all things and especially
to those to whom he wills to manifest himself. For though thought alone can see that which is hidden inasmuch as
17
thought itself is hidden from sight and if even the thought which is within you is hidden from your sight, how
can he, being in himself, be manifested to you through your bodily eyes. But if you have power to see with the
eyes of the mind then, my son, he will manifest himself to you, for the Lord manifests himself ungrudgingly
throughout all the universe and you can behold God's image with your eyes and lay hold on it with your hands."
To my mind, this is permission for the psychedelic experience. We lay hold of the ineffable through the eyes. "If
you wish to see him, think on the sun, think on the course of the moon, think on the order of the stars. The sun
is the greatest of the gods in heaven. To him as to their king and overlord, all the gods in heaven yield place
and yet this mighty god, greater than earth and sea, submits to have smaller stars circling above him. Who is it
then, my son, that he obeys with reverence and awe. Each of these stars too is confined by measured limits and
has an appointed space to range in. Why do not all the stars in heaven run like and equal courses? Who is it that
has assigned to each its place and marked out each for the extent of its course." And then it goes on and on. And
then here is an amazing modern anticipation of modernity. "Would that it were possible for you to grow wings and
soar into the air. Poised between earth and heaven you might see the solid earth and the fluid sea and the
streaming rivers, the wandering air, the penetrating fire, the courses of the stars and the swiftness of the
movement with which heaven encompasses all. What happiness were that, my son, to see all these borne along with
One impulse and to behold Him who is unmoved moving all that moves and Him who is hidden made manifest through
his works." This is an image of the planets seen from space. It's absolutely the unified image of our planet. It
is, think, the central image in this early hermetic thing. This is the unifying, this is as close to an image
of what godhead is that they were able to reach.
This is a shamanic flight that delivers a scientific description of the earth moving in space. This is written
AD150. This is book five. Nobody had that in sight until we reach Giordano Bruno and if you read Giordano Bruno
and the Hermetic Tradition you know that Bruno was burned at the stake and the reason that he was burned at the
stake is because he looked up at the sky and did not see the stellar shells and the angelic heirarchies. Bruno
had a mystical experience and when it was over he said, "the universe is infinite. The stars go on forever." That
single statement was the intellectual dynamite that destroyed the whole Medieval, Hellenistic, the entire
previous cosmological vision was left behind with that single statement. It was such a powerful statement that he
had to go to the stake for that. And we have never recovered from that perception. It was a fundamental
perception and it occurred because he looked without preconception into the night sky and did not see wheels and
demons and angels and shells of cosmic fate and necessity and he just said, that's bullshit, what is there is
infinite space, infinite time, the stars are hung like lamps onto the utmost regions of infinity. This, then,
inaugurates the beginning of modernity and it's a perception that arose on the foundation of all this earlier
thinking.
Here's another passage on the imagination. Yes?
Is the implication that there's a meditation that one does where one tries to go inside and see this universe on
a cosmic scale. Is the implication that their practice was somehow...
Well, the practice, we know a lot less about that because there was much secrecy around this. What we have is the
philosophical discourses. When we talk about alchemy this afternoon you'll see that there the technique becomes
projection onto matter. That you enter into a kind of self hypnosis wher, by having what we call naive
ontological categories, in other words, not being sure exactly how much of mind is in matter or how much matter
18
is in mind, you can erase the boundary between self and world and project the contents of the unconscious onto
chemical processes. What went on in the early stages we don't know. The Trismegistic Hymns are largely as you see
them here, philosophical discourses. There was stress on diet and purity. Asceticism was typical of the hermetic
approach. In Gnosticism it went one of several ways. There were schools of Gnosticism which were vegetarian and
puristic and then, because they felt that man was no part of the universe, that man was somehow hermetically
sealed, if you will, hermetically sealed against contamination from the universe, some Gnostic schools said you
can do anything you want. You can have any kind of sexual arrangement you want, you can do anything you want. Do
not think that you are part of the universe. And so you had Gnostic schools side by side, some orgiastic and
quasi-tantric and some ascetic. There were Gnostic sects that, you see because the idea was that light was
trapped in matter by the act of procreation, there were Gnostic sects that only practiced forms of sexual union
that couldn't lead to union. So there were presumably exclusively homosexual sects. There were sects that only
practiced anal intercourse. For them, that was the same as celibacy because the real concern was not to trap any
of the light. And don't seriously advocate this but think that in our current situation of overpopulation a
little dose of this kind of thinking wouldn't be a bad thing. Too much light is trapped in the organic matrix.
And so these Gnostic sects that were, for instance, exclusively homosexual or exclusively practiced anal
intercourse, of course they were suicide sects. They disappeared very quickly because they could only make
converts by a missionary conversion. You didn't have children, you couldn't hand it off. It shows how thorough
going their rejection of the world was, how contaminated they felt themselves to be by the material world. But
you also had, as mentioned, optimistic schools that saw nature as something to be perfected and said, "man has
been set on the earth not to reject it but to perfect it" and utopianism, the belief that one can create a
perfect society, it goes back into these hermetic ideals. Because the idea was that a perfect society could be
the goal of the alchemical work.
Let me read you a passage from Giordano Bruno. This is a wonderful passage from the Picatrix. This was the book
of 12th century magical texts that began to introduce these hermetic ideas and this passage is the core passage
that inspired the Rosacrucians and numerous other utopian movements. Here is Frances Yeats, "Hermes Trismegistus
is often mentioned as the source for some talismanic images and in other connections but there is in particular
one very striking passage in the fourth book of Picatrix in which Hermes is stated to have been the first to use
magical images and is credited with having founded a marvelous city in Egypt." And here is the passage from the
Picatrix, "There are among the Caldeans very perfect masters in this art and they affirm that Hermes was the
first to construct images by means of which he knew how to regulate the Nile against the motion of the moon. This
man also built a temple to the sun and he knew how to hide himself from all so that no one could see him although
he was within it." Those of you who are scholars in Rosicrucianism know that one of the things that was always
said of Rosicrucians was that they were invisible. This was how Robert Fludd proved to people he wasn't a
Rosicrucian, he'd say "you're looking at me so how could be one?" So, he's in the temple but he could not be
seen within it. "It was he, Hermes Trismegistus, too, who, in the East of Egypt constructed a city, 12 miles long,
within which he constructed a castle which had four gates within each of its four parts. On the Eastern gate he
placed the form of an eagle. On the Western gate, the form of a bull, on the Southern gate, the form of a lion,
and on the Northern gate he constructed the form of a dog. Into these images he introduced spirits which spoke
with voices. Nor could anyone enter the gates of the city except by their permission. There he planted trees in
the midst of which was a great tree which bore the fruits of all generations. On the summit of the castle he
caused to be raised a tower 30 cubits high on the top of which he ordered to be put a lighthouse the color of
which changed every day until the seventh day, after which it returned to the first color. And so the city was
illuminated with these colors. Near the city there was abundance of waters in which dwelt many kinds of fish.
Around the circumference of the city he placed engraved images and ordered them in such a manner that by their
virtue, the inhabitants were made virtuous and withdrawn from all wickedness and harm. The name of the city was
Adocetine(sp?)."
Now, what we're familiar with from the Platonic literature is a quasi-rational, largely rational approach to
utopian thinking that you get in the Republic. However, the students of the Republic will recall that, is it the
fifth or tenth book (it's the tenth), contains the myth of Er, which we went over in detail in the section
did on Neo Platonism. The myth of Er is one of the most bizarre and puzzling passages in the entire ancient
literature. You remember Er was a soldier who died, he was killed in battle but after eight days he returned to
life and then he told a story that is the absolute puzzlement of ancient scholars. It's highly mathematical, it
has to with the spindle of necessity and the description of some kind of cosmic machine and all the ratios of the
gears of this machine are given and nobody knows what is being talked about. But here we have a different thrust.
A magical utopianism and the idea of a perfected human society using magic because these engraved images that he
ordered in such a manner that by their virtue the inhabitants were made virtuous, that means he was able to
deflect the energies of cosmic fate. The city was immune to astrological, malefic influence. It was protected and
when we talk later about the alchemical aspirations of the Rosicrucians and John Dee and Frederick the Elector
Palatine of Bohemia, we'll see that this impulse toward an alchemical kingdom returns again and again. In a way,
utopianism is, the four-gated city of utopian magical dreaming is one version of the philosopher's magical stone.
It's a kind of diffuse idea of the philosopher's stone, but it's a society in perfect harmony with fully realized
beings living within it practicing a cosmic religion that frees them from the impulses of cosmic fate. The other
thing that is going on in some of this alchemical imagery is a kind of subtext of late alchemy, is what's called
the Ars Memoria, the art of memory, and in fact, Frances Yates has a book called The Art of Memory and this is a
lost art, literally.
It begins with the Roman orator Cicero and was practiced up until the early 17th century and what it consisted of
was people, orators, it was considered very bad form to read your speech if you were an orator and so you had to
memorize your speech and there were tricks of memory. The commonest mnemonic trick was to think of a building, it
was Called the memory palace, a building that is familiar to you, I've done this myself with the University of
California because it's an area that I'm very familiar with because was a student there, there are many
buildings and many hallways and many floors and what you do is when you make your speech in your mind you are
moving through the memory palace and at various points you construct what are called emblemata and the idea of
these emblemata is that they be as unusual, shocking, and unexpected as possible in order to be memorable to you.
So, say you're giving a speech about the seven deadly sins. So then luxuria might be for you a nun copulating
with a dog and you'll set the nun and the dog in a little niche in the hallway of the memory palace. When you
reach that place in your imaginary journey all these associations will spring to mind and you'll be able to give
you speech flawlessly. To us, this sounds tortured and particular but it works quite well. One of the
practitioners of the Ars Memoria was Giordano Bruno and he wrote a book called Spaccio Della Bestia Trionfante,
the expulsion of the triumphant beast, and my god, Max Ernst, eat your heart out, this is a surreal epic read as
straight plain text because that's not how it's supposed to be read. It's a conglomeration of these mnemonic
emblemata that led him on to probably give a fairly conventional disputation on one subject or another but there
are even old books of these emblemata that are before surrealism. These were some of the wildest images that the
Western mine would tolerate.
The one thing that we didn't get into this morning was talking about the astrological side of it. The role of the
Decans. The Decans are these demons, three to a sign, so there are 36 of them, and this was thought to be an
astrological conceit that went back to Egypt as opposed to the ordinary zodiacal significators which go back to
Huran(?) in what is now modern Iraq. These Decans were the demons that were summoned by these Renaissance Magi
in an effort to control and manipulate fate. You may, if you were paying attention this morning, have noticed
that in all the reading did from the Corpus Hermeticum, there was really nothing explicitly magical about it.
It was philosophical. There was one mention, think, of animating statues in the description of the four-gated
city. But it was those magical animation passages that really captured the imagination of the Renaissance and
they built on that and the idea, simply put, is that these Decans and zodiacal signs are at the center of
associative schemata which include plants, minerals, odors, certain flowers, certain animals, everything had its
20
Decanic assignation and so if you were involved with promoting an affair with a woman or something like that then
you would do an invocation to Venus and you would gather the associated minerals and stones and animals and you
would put them in a room and then certain tonal modes were also associated with these things and so you would
play the music, have the flowers present, the minerals present, the invocations and what you were trying to do
was create a microcosm of the macrocosm to draw down this stellar energy. It wasn't about the classical Hollywood
appearance of demons in a circle, that's the stuff of Picatrix, the earlier somewhat less refined style of magic.
| wanted to read you one passage from Frances Yates' Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic Tradition because this
describes this change of status of the magician that we're interested in. And also what we didn't talk about this
morning was the importance of the Kabbalah, which came in quite late, that was then worked out in great detail.
This was originally the idea, it was the Jewish contribution to this kind of magic, it was, the idea was that
since the world had been made by Jehovah, by the speaking of words, In Prigipio et verbum et verbo corufactum est
(?), in other words the speaking of Hebrew was thought to be a primary linguistic tool for the purposes of
creation. The problem for these Italians was that very few of them spoke Hebrew so it was sometimes practiced
silently, the mere constructing of these Hebrew letters and the setting out of messages in Hebrew was deemed
efficacious as well. And then a further declenched(?) for people who were even frustrated with that was to
channel magical languages which were pseudo-Hebraic in structure. This is a whole branch of research, much too
arcane for us to go into here. The only non-Hebraic magical language that may mention here will be Enochian and
Enochian was an angelic language channeled by John Dee and used by him in his magical evocations and later it was
taken up by Aleister Crowley and the folks of the Golden Dawn. But there were many, many of these magical
languages. The Voynitch(sp?) manuscript is written in one of them.
But want to read you this passage about how the Renaissance changed the status of the magician. "We begin to
perceive here an extraordinary change in the status of the magician. The necromancer concocting his filthy
mixtures, the conjurer making his frightening invocations were both outcasts from society, regarded as dangers to
religion and forced into plying their trades in secrecy. These old-fashioned characters are hardly recognizable
in the philosophical and pious magi of the Renaissance. There is a change in status almost comparable to the
change of status of the artist from the mere mechanic of the Middle Ages to the refined companion of princes of
the Renaissance. And the magics themselves are changed almost out of recognition. Who could recognize the
necromancer studying his Picatrix in secret in the elegant Ficino, in his infinitely refined use of sympathies,
his classical incantations, his elaborately Neo Platonized talismans. Who could recognize the conjurer using the
barbarous techniques of some Clavis Solomonus in the mystical Pico lost in the religious ecstasies of Kabbalah
drawing archangels to his side. And yet there is a kind of continuity because the techniques are at bottom based
on the same principles. Ficino's magic is an infinitely refined and reformed version of neumatic necromancy.
Pico's practical Kabbalah is an intensely religious and mystical version of conjuring."
So now we move in this realm, these were the companions of princes and there was in that 120 years, from about
1500 to the beginning of the 30 year's war, a constant effort in various parts of Europe to try and turn parts of
European society toward a kind of magical revolution. The Europe of the 11th and 12th century was entirely ruled
by scholastic rationalism. Witchcraft was virtually unknown and very curious. It's the 15th and 16th centuries
where you get this tremendous proliferation of magical systems, magical ideas and social hysterias related to
witchcraft, alchemy, conjuring and magic. Those are the centuries when these things really broke out into the
open. And alchemy in that period is basically a story of personalities, wonderful personalities, too many for us
to really talk about in detail. We have Nicholas and Pernelle Flamel who sought and found the philosopher's stone,
according to legend and according to legend are living to this day somewhere in central Asia in perfect
happiness having achieved not only the chemical wedding but the water stone of the wise. And then we have Basil
Valentine who refined red wine and distilled it in distillation apparati until he got essentially pure alcohol
and upon drinking this was so sure that he had found the philosopher's stone that he announced the eminent
21
approach of the end of the world based on his discovery and he was not secretive at all. He propagated his
recipes and in fact sampled the distillates of some of his brother alchemists and popularized this very widely.
To this day the reason certain cognacs are in the hands of monastic orders and no one else can make these things
is because they were originally alchemical secrets and many of these early alchemists were men of the cloth,
quite a number of them.
So what thought would do is, in a highly chaotic fashion, read you some of this alchemical literature. The
big bring down about alchemical literature is that apparently the muse didn't always smile on the alchemist and
some of this poetry is pretty tormented stuff. Why this is, who can say, but let's try one here and see if you
can bear with it. Also, my Middle English is not as good as it might be. This is a short one, and typical, and
you will see why the alchemists were charged with unbearable obscurity and prolex prose. This poem is called "A
Description of the Stone:"
Though Daphne fly from Phobeus bright yet shall they both be one
And if you understand this rite you have our hidden stone
For Daphne is fair and white but volatile is she
Phobeus a fixed god of might and red as blood is he
Daphne is a water nymph and hath of moisture store
Which Phobeus doth confine and heat and dries her very shore
They being dried into one a crystal flood must drink
Till they be brought to a white stone which washed with with virgin's milk So long until they flow as wax and no
fume you can see
then have you all you need to ask. Praise God and thankful be.
This is a recipe for the production of the philosopher's stone and the author, I'm sure, felt that he'd spoken as
clearly as he dare speak. And yet making something of this is no easy task. This is from the Teatrium Chemicum
Britannicum and the late phase of alchemy. Here's another one:
The world is a maze and what you why
For sooth of late a great man did die
And as he lay a-dying in his bed
These words in secret to his son he said
My son' quoth he, 'tis good for thee
22
| die for thou shall much the better be
Thereby and when thou seest that life hath me bereft
Take what thou findest and where have it left
Thou dost not know, nor what my riches be
All which will declare give ear to me
An earth had all venum(?) to expel
And that cast into a mighty well
A water ick(?) to cleanse what was amiss
| threw into the earth, and there it is
My silver all into the sea cast
My gold into the air and, at the last
Into the fire, for fear it should be found
| threw a stone worth forty thousand pound
Which stone was given me by a mighty king
Who bade me wear it in a fourfold ring.
Quoth he, ' this stone is by that ring found out
If wisely thou cans't turn this ring about
For every hope contrary is to other
Yet all agree and of the stone is mother
So now, my son, will declare a wonder
That when die this ring must break asunder
The king said so, but when he said with all
Although the ring be broke in pieces small
An easy fire shall soon it close again
Who this can do he need not work in vain
Till this my hidden treasure be found out
When am dead, my spirit shall walk about
23
Make him to bring your fire from the grave
And stay with him till you my riches have.
These words a worldly man did chance to hear
Who daily watched the spirit but nay though near
And yet it meets with him and everyone
Yet tells him not where is the hidden stone.
This stuff is obscure, it's deliberately obscure, it was obscure to its contemporaries and the whole effort
became one of collecting this kind of material and finding it out. And you have to understand this was all
circulating in manuscript, very little of this was printed. The Teatrium Chemicum Britannicum was not printed
until 1652 so this was a world without vehicular transportation other than the horse and carriage and these
people were paranoid of being discovered and persecuted for wizardry and witchcraft by the church. So, each
alchemist working in secret, with a limited number of texts, with a local control language, created this vast
conceptual patchwork of ideas and this is in large measure responsible for the obscurity of what is said.
Then another factor which impinges on this and further complicates the matter is that the name of the game was
projection of the contents of the imagination onto physical processes, so taking red cinnibar and heating it ina
furnace until it sweats mercury, for one alchemist this is the incineration of the red salamander and the
collection of aurmercurius in the great pelican. They named their chemical apparati after animals and gods and so
the pelican is a standard distillation apparatus, basically a condenser on top of something which is boiled and
then these materials would be collected, ground, powdered, refired, mixed with other materials, refired again and
in the process these people were, we call it, and it's such a weak term, the projection of the intellect into
this dimension, they were living in a waking dream and many of the recipes are designed to wipe out the
boundaries between waking and sleeping.
Remember talked about the river of mercury that runs between the yin and yang? Many of the alchemical processes
were of 40 days duration. Well you can imagine a hermit fearing discovery by the church, trying to keep his fires
not too hot, not too cold, working day after day, night after night, eventually all boundaries dissolve and
you're just living in a pure world of intellectual projection and then in the swirling of the alembic, in the
chemical processes going on in the retort, you begin to be able to project your consciousness onto this. It's
what we call visualization but for us it's a kind of a weak term because we are never really able to accept in
the psychedelic state to transcend the belief in the inner world and the outer world being somehow separate so
for us it's always separate. But they were able to wipe out that boundary. Well then, what they saw in their
swirling retorts and alembics was not carbonization, calcination, condensation of various molecular weights of
liquids and oils out, but rather the birth of the red lion, the coming of the eagle, the appearance of the
smagdarian(can't quite make out this word) stone. They had hundreds and hundreds of these words. Didn't bring
any with me, but much alchemical literature is dictionaries. Martinus Rulando's Alchemical Dictionary is a huge
book of words with special meanings in the alchemical context.
So, why, why do this and what happens when you do it. Well, no matter what alchemist you're reading, there's
always an agreement that there are stages in the great work. Stages in the opus, as they called it. You can't get
24
any agreement on in what order these stages come, but roughly it's something like this: most agree that it begins
in the nigredo, the blackening, Arcro(?), the Saturnine world of what we would call manic depression, despair,
and that Aurchaos(?), a chaotic near psychotic state of unbounded hopelessness and that is the precondition,
then, for the alchemical work though the stages of the opus never occur in order.
| had a dream last night that was, think, triggered by an illustration in Fabricious(?) that I'll show you
tonight but it was a classical alchemical dream. It was that was at a country fair and its antiquity was
indicated by the fact that it was happening in the school yard of my childhood and as moved among the
participants of this country fair began to notice that they were freaky. There were people with withered arms
and one side of their face slid down and so forth and so on. The whole thing began to drift toward nightmare and
Richard Hermes Bird appeared in my dream as my alchemical compadre and at one point a black woman, perfect
symbolism for the nigredo, a black woman with three withered arms and six or seven breasts, slid herself sideways
in front of me and it was at that point that went and found Richard and said, "I think we'd better get out of
here."
Now, an alchemist would greet a dream like this with great anticipation and joy and would understand that this
sets the stage now for the next movement forward. Well, then accounts differ. Those of you who really want to get
into this, recommend you read Mysterium Cunjunctiones by Jung, the Mysterious Conjunction. He discusses the
nigredo in great detail. Another symbol for the nigredo is the Senax(?), the old man, because the old man is
just short of death and that's the state that the nigredo makes you feel. Then you must take this raw, chaotic,
unformed material, often compared to feces, compared to corruption, compared to the contents of an opened grave,
and you must cook it in the alchemical fires of contemplation, prayer, and ascetic self control and then you will
move through a series of stages that are associated with colors. There is the rubado, the reddening, there is the
citronitas, the yellowing, there is the veriditas, the greening, and the order in which this occurs differs
according to who you follow but then there is closure at the end of the process. Most alchemists, although
certainly not all, agreed that the higher state is the albedo, the whitening, the purificacio. At each stage
there are substages of dissolution, dissulutio et coagulacio. There's one alchemical aphorism that says "
dissolutio et coagulacio, know this and this is all you need to know." And so it's a melting and a recasting and
a purifying of psychic content. So finally you reach the albedo, the whitening, the highest stage, the stage of
great purity.
But remember how said last night that mercury was always the metaphor for mind in alchemy, or one of the
metaphors for mind in alchemy, and talked about its mutability and its ability to take the shape of its
container and when you shatter it it then splits into many reflections. So, once you move into the domain of the
albedo, the whitening, then a whole new problem arises for the alchemist. This is the problem of the fixing of
the stone. Somehow the mutability of mercury must be overcome and it must be crystalized, it must be fixed so
that it doesn't get away from you, so that it doesn't slip through your fingers. To achieve aurmercury is nothing
unless you have the secret of the coagulacio. So then, there is a huge amount of effort devoted to this.
What is being described is what Jungians call the individuation process. A dissolving of the boundaries of the
ego, an allowing of the chaotic material of the unconscious to pour forth where it can be inspected by
consciousness, and we'll see tonight when we look at this art, these images are full of ravening beasts,
incestuous mother/son pairs, incestuous brother/sister pairs, hermaphrodites, all taboos are broken, this stuff
just boils up from the unconscious then is sublimed through these processes and then is somehow fixed and this
fixing is the culmination of alchemy and if you can bring off this trick then you possess our stone, the
philosopher's stone, the lapis, the Sophic Hydrolith of the Wise, Aranius Philolithes(sp?) calls it. There were
25
hundreds of control words for naming the secret difficult to attain.
Alchemical gold, in short, this is what we're after. If you possess it, nothing else is worth anything because it
is psychic completion, peace of mind, Jung called it the self. It's the self that we are trying to recover and
remember we talked about the Gnostic myth of the light trapped in matter. Well this is the luminae de luminae,
the light of light, the lux natura, the light drawn out of nature and condensed into a fixed form which then
becomes the universal panacea. And I'm using as many of these alchemical terms as can draw out of my memory to
give you a feeling for it. This is the universal medicine. It cures all ills, you know, it brings you riches,
fame, wealth, self-respect. It's the answer, it's what everyone is looking for and no one can find.
So this just became a consuming passion of the 15th and 16th century mind. They thought they were on the brink of
it. Along the way they were discovering stuff like distilled alcohol, phosphorous, gun powder, all of these
things were coming out of the alchemical laboratories but that was not it. They kept driving themselves onward
because they knew that this was not the real thing and they were pursuing the real thing. Then for some people it
became reassociated with this notion of the utopia that mentioned this morning in the passage that read about
the city of Hermes Trismegistus, they began to see, it's almost like the crisis which overcame Buddhism, it must
be an archetypal, and notice how rarely we've used that word here, it must be almost an archetypal stage in human
thought. Theravadin Buddhism stressed individual thought, and individual redemption through meditation on
emptiness, and then with the great reforms of Nagurdjuda(sp?), the idea of Bodhisattvic compassion was
introduced and there carries with it political freight. An obligation to society and mankind.
So, as the 15th and 16th century progressed there began to be this awareness that what was wanted was not for an
alchemist to break through, to his own personal salvation, but somehow to create an alchemical world. You get
then the notion of the multiplacio, the idea that the stone, once created, will replicate itself and be able to
change base matter into itself almost like a virus spreading through the ontological structure of matter itself
and the world will be reborn and this idea then, what was happening was that these alchemists were getting bolder
and printing was invented in Meins, near Frankfurt, in 1540, the distribution of alchemical books was changing
the character of alchemy, it was no more the solitary hermit working away in his cave or mountaintop, far away
from the minions of the church. These alchemists began to dream of banding together, of forming societies, of
creating brotherhoods that were united in the sharing of their knowledge and their purpose.
This brings us to the curious episode in history called the Rosicrucian enlightenment. Dame Frances Yates, once
again, got there first and she wrote a book called the Rosicrucian Enlightenment which traces the history of
these alchemical brotherhoods and reveals to us what they were really about and what they were about was this
dream of somehow taking the philosopher's stone, and the power, the immortality, the insight that it would bring
and making it a general utility of mankind and in the, one way of looking at modernity, have one friend who
claims that the summoning of the Holy Spirit into matter can be seen as the creation of the modern world of
electricity. That people like Helmholz(sp?) and Farraday were completing the alchemical work. It's very hard
for us to realize how mysterious the electromagnetic field seemed to the 19th century. The 19th century had
entirely imbued itself with the spirit of democratian atomism translated through Newtonian physics and they
believed that everything was little balls of hard matter winging through space. When Helmholz and Farraday and
these people began to talk about action at a distance and generating the electromagnetic field and trapping
lightning and light in jars and running it through wires, what could this be but the trapping of spiritus. What
could it be but the literal descent of the Holy Ghost into history and, you know, give ita moment's thought. For
thousands of years, electricity was something that you saw when you took an amber rod and a piece of cat fur and
went into a darkened room and stroked the cat fur and then when you would bring the amber rod close to the cat
26
fur you would see the crackle of static electricity through the cat fur. For thousands of years that's what
electricity was. Who would dream that you could light cities, that you could smelt metals, that you could
illuminate the earth with this energy and yet from the 1850s to the present, this was done. It's almost the final
literalizing of the alchemical dream.
But to go back now, digress, fear, let's go back to the climate of the 1580s and the central culprit here,
and to my mind a giant figure casting an enormous shadow over the landscape of alchemy and of modern science, is
the Englishman John Dee. John Dee united in himself the complete spirit of the Medieval Magus and the complete
spirit of the modern scientist. He invented the navigational instruments that allowed the conquest of the round
earth. When Frances Drake sailed up the coast of California he had navigational instruments that were top secret.
The French, the Spanish, must be kept away from this stuff and these were navigational instruments created by
John Dee that allowed him to locate himself anywhere on the globe. But John Dee was a man who, on a late summer
evening in Mortlag, his house in Mortlag outside of London, the angel Gabriel descended into his garden and gave
him what he called the shewstone, shew being show in Old English, and the shewstone exists to this day, you can
see it in the British Museum and what's amazing about it is it's a piece of polished absidion, it's an Aztec
mirror, is what it is. There was a ruler of the Aztecs called smoky mirror. How John Dee got this thing, we
cannot even imagine. He says he got it from an angel, nobody can really nay say that, however suspect that
Cortez, on his first return to Spain from the new world, he brought a number of objects with him that he had
collected in Central Mexico and somehow John Dee got his hands on this thing and it was for him a television
screen into the logos and he used it over a number of years to direct the foreign policy of England.
He was the confidante of Queen Elizabeth the First and he also was the most accomplished astrologer in Europe and
he used his ability to cast horoscopes as an entre into all the great houses of Europe, the kings and nobles of
Europe. He was functioning as an intelligence agent, he was a spy for the British crown insinuating himself into
these various courtly scenes and then writing back to Elizabeth in cyphers, cyphers that had previously only been
used for magical purposes. He was sending back data on the strengths of military garrisons and the placement of
fortifications and this sort of thing. This is what he was doing in the 1580s, he kept the shewstone for a number
of years and he didn't seem to be able to make much progress with it. He had other methods too, he had wax tables
and sigils but finally into his life came a very mysterious character named Edward Kelly and some accounts say
that Edward Kelly had no ears. That indicates that he had had his ears removed for being a charlatan and a
montebank. This was a common punishment in the provinces of England. So Edward Kelly was a very dubious character,
| think. One strong piece of evidence that he was a shady character was, John Dee was married to a much younger
woman named Ann Dee who by all accounts was quite a beauty and after gaining Dee's confidence as a scryer, the
person who could look into the shewstone and lay out these scenarios that the angels and the entities coming and
going in the shewstone were putting forth, Kelly revealed to Dee that the angels had instructed him to hit the
hay with Ann. This was a great crisis in their relationship. However, according to Dee's diary "and so it was
done," we read. So, hanky panky didn't begin with the Golden Dawn, believe me. In 1582 Ann Dee, John Dee, and
Edward Kelly set out for Bohemia and Rudolph, the mad king of Bohemia held sway at that time. This is another one
of those bizarre figures in the whole story of this...(tape cuts off a bit here)
...A wonder cabinet, you see, before Linaius, before modern scientific classification these great patrons of the
arts and natural sciences, they would just collect weird stuff. And that was all you could say about it. Mean,
it was rhinoceros horns, fossil amenities, broken pieces of statues from antiquity, giant insects from Southern
India, seashells, all this stuff would just be thrown together in these wundercabina, these wonder cabinets.
Rudolph was a great patron of the arts. Well, Kelly sent the word that he and Dee had perfected the alchemical
process and Rudolph immediately paid their way to Prague and patronized them very lavishly over a number of
months but then they didn't seem to be coming through and he rented, he ordered a castle put to their disposal,
in Bohemia and they still weren't able to come through. The Voynitch manuscript figures in here too because
27
Kelly's entre to Dee was that he had a manuscript in an unknown language and believe that this probably was the
Voynitch manuscript. The Voynitch manuscript turns up in the estate of Rudolph and the very month that he paid 14,
000 gold ducats for it to persons unknown, Dee, who was always writing back to the Elizabethan court hounding
them to send money, entered into his account book that they received 14,000 ducats from an unknown source.
Dee was able to talk himself out of this alchemical imprisonment but not before he had written a book called the
Hieroglyphic Monad. You have to understand the importance of this. As late as the 1920s in England in the better
schools of England, like Eton, when you studied geometry, you studied Euclid's works and Euclid's geometry was
always preceded by Dee's preface to Euclid. Until the 1920s every English school child studied this. He was a
master mathematician as well as these other things. This was how he was able to produce these navigation
instruments. So Dee, while imprisoned in Bohemia, wrote a book called the Hieroglyphic Monad in which he proposed
to prove, through a series of occult theorems, that a certain diagram, unfortunately didn't bring the
hieroglyphic monad, but it's basically the symbol of, you Know the symbol for mercury which looks like the symbol
for female but you put horns on it and then there were some adumbrations to that. By a series of theorems he
worked up this hieroglyphic monad and he initiated a couple of young men named Johan Anreae and Michael Maier
into the mysteries of the hieroglyphic monad. Then he was able to get out of Bohemia and he went back to England.
Kelly, who had made much more extravagant claims, Rudolph kept at work on the alchemical opus and Kelly became
more and more desperate to escape and one night in 1587 he crept out on the parapet of this Bohemian castle and a
roof tile slipped beneath his feet and he fell to his death and became, as far as can tell, alchemy's only true
martyr. Dee returned to England, he was now very old, he died at Mortlake in 1606. Elizabeth died in 1604,
Shakespeare was happening, Sir Philip Sidney was happening through this period. John Dee reputedly had over 6,000
books in his library. He had more books than any man in England. He had books, we have a partial catalog of his
library, he had books that do not exist now. He had Roger Bacon manuscripts because when Henry the eighth kicked
the Catholic Church out of England, the Northumberian monasteries were looted by the Earl of Northumberland and
basically Dee was allowed to pick over the loot from these monasteries and there were Roger Bacon manuscripts
which perished when Dee's library was burned by an angry mob while he was on the continent because he was
suspected of being a wizard. He was the model for Faust in the later resingence of Faust and whenever you see an
old man with a white beard and a pointed cap, this image is a referent to Dee.
Well, Elizabeth died in 1604, believe, and James the first became king of England. James was a peculiar
character. The wags of the time liked to say "Elizabeth was king and now James is queen!" Not only that, he hated
occultism, he had no patience with the whole magical court that Elizabeth had assembled around herself. Meanwhile,
in 1606, a very mysterious document began to circulate in Europe and in England called the Fama, this is the
first word in a string of Latin words, Fama, and two years later the confessio. What these were were
announcements that an alchemical brotherhood was seeking recruits. These are the primary documents of
Rosicrucianism.
Rosicrucianism was based on a fiction and a fictional person, Christian Rosencrentz, who was imagined to have
lived almost 200 years earlier, in the 1540s, and to have been a great alchemist. It was claimed that his tomb
had been recently opened and that there were books inside it which set the stage for the alchemical revolution of
the world. Notice how this occult world always tries to reach back in time to give itself validity. Christian
Rosencrentz was claimed to be the author of a series of books, the chief of which is called The Chemical Wedding.
What this was all about, believe, and the Rosacrucian enlightenment makes it fairly clear, was that Dee, during
the period that he had been in Bohemia, had set out to lay the groundwork for an alchemical revolution in Central
Europe and he had made Johan Andreae and Michael Maier his agents in this plot. And it was a plot, a plot to
28
meddle in European history and to turn the Protestant reformation toward an alchemical completion. They felt that
Luther and Has(sp?) and these people had only gone so far and that the culmination of throwing off the yoke of
the church would be the establishment of an alchemical kingdom in central Europe.
The target, then, of the attention of Michael Maier and Johan Andreae and a number of these alchemists became the
young Frederick, he's called Frederick the Elector Palatine. He was a prince of the Northern League in Germany,
he ruled in Heidleberg, and Heidleberg, as you know, is a thousand-year-old university city and believe
mentioned that the alchemical press of Theodore Debry(sp?) was operating out of Heidleberg. Heidleberg became a
magnet for all the occult thinking going on in Europe and all the Puffers and alchemists, the gold-makers, the
philosophers, the charlatans, they all converged on Heidleberg and Andreae and Maier were advisors of the young
Frederick and they steered him, by a series of political manipulations too complex to tell, toward a marriage
with the daughter of James the first of England, who was named Elizabeth, interestingly enough. So, Frederick the
Elector made Elizabeth, the daughter of James of England, his wife. Frederick here made a serious miscalculation
because he thought that if James would give the hand of his daughter in marriage that this was his way of
blessing this alchemical conspiracy. Actually, what was on James' mind is that he was about to give his son, in
marriage, to a Spanish princess of the Hapsburg line, a Catholic. In other words he was playing both sides
against each other. He was not giving the green light to an alchemical revolution at all. But, it was assumed so.
Then, in 1617, 1618, Rudolph, remember Rudolph, the emperor, he finally dies at a very ripe old age. And at that
time, the Protestant league, which was made up of these princes of these small principalities scattered across
Germany and Poland, they actually elected the emperor, it was not by right of primogenitor, but by election by
what was called the Northern League, this league of princes. Frederick and his alchemical cohorts had done their
alchemical groundwork very skillfully and they were able to engineer the election of Frederick to emperor of the
empire and he became Frederick the Elector Palatine of Bohemia and this set the stage for an episode called the
episode of the Winter King and Queen.
One of the great, after Nicholas and Pernelle Flamel, this is one of the great romantic stories of alchemy. They
moved their court from Heidleberg to Prague and all the alchemists went with and they assumed that English armies
would support them if there was any squak from the Hapsburgs and in the Winter of 1618 they ruled there and began
to lay the groundwork for the transformation of Northern Europe into an alchemical kingdom. The problem was, as
said, the faithlessness and duplicity of James the first of England. He did not support them, in spite of the
fact that the fate of his daughter hung in the balance and by May of 1619 the local Bishop of the Catholic church
was fully aroused and word had been sent to Madrid and the Hapsburgs raised an army and laid siege to Prague. In
the late Summer, the Mid Summer of 1619, the Winter King and Queen were driven from Prague, the city fell to
Catholic forces, the alchemical presses were smashed and Michael Maier, who was like the prime minister of this
scene, was murdered in an alley in Prague and the entire alchemical dream went down the drain. Frederick was
killed in the siege of the city and Elizabeth escaped to the Hague where she lived in exile for many years.
Till recently, thought that that was the end of the story but there is a coda that is very amusing, if nothing
else. In that Hapsburgian army, there was a young soldier of fortune, only 19 years old, still wet behind the
ears, knowing nothing, happily soldiering and wenching his way around Europe while he decided what to do with
himself and his name was Rene Descartes, a Frenchman. Descartes, in his later years, reminisced about his period
as a soldier in this army and like to think that it was Descartes who actually murdered Maier. One of my
ambitions is to write a play or a novel in which these two confront each other in a back alley of burning Prague
and carry on a debate about the future of Europe before Michael Maier falls to the sword of Descartes. That may
be apocryphal, but what is not apocryphal is that this Hapsburgian army, having laid siege and destroyed the
29
alchemical kingdom, began to retreat across Europe that Fall and by Mid-September was camped near the town of
Uolm in Southern Germany. By a strange coincidence, Uolm is the birthplace of Einstein some hundreds of years
later. But on the night of September 16th, Descartes had a dream and in this dream an angel appeared to him, this
is documented by his own hand, and the angel said to Descartes, "The conquest of nature is to be achieved through
measure and number." And that revelation lay the basis for modern science. Rene Descartes is the founder of the
distinction between the res verins and the res extensia, the founder of modern science, the founder of the
scientific method that created the philosophical engines that created the modern world. How many scientists,
working at their workbenches, understand that an angel chartered modern science. It's the alchemical angel which
will not die. It returns again and again to guide the destinies of nations and peoples toward an unimaginable
conclusion.
That's not the last time that this angelic intervention in the history of science has occurred. Some of you may
know the story in the 19th century of Cuclai(sp?), the German chemist who was struggling with the molecular
structure of Benzene, couldn't get it straight, and then he had a dream in which he saw the ouroboric snake take
its tail in its mouth and he awoke from that dream with the carbon ring burning in his mind. Well, the carbon
ring, the six sided heptadle(?) state of the form of the carbon ring is the basis of all organic chemistry. And
| mentioned earlier Farraday and Helmholtz and the rise of the electro magnetic field. The point I'm trying to
make is that, however rational we may assume ourselves to be, however rational we may assume modern science to be,
it is all really founded on angelic revelation, demonic intercession, and an extremely mysterious relationship
between the human mind and the world of what science calls inert matter which, from this point of view, is
revealed to be not inert at all but alive and pregnant with purpose for mankind.
The alchemical kingdom of Frederick the Elector, and then there were a series of adumbrations, of this kind of
thinking, many of you may know about freemasonry and the many freemason revolts in Bohemia and Bavaria throughout
the 16th and 17th century. Adam Weishauft and the illuminati is another effort to do this and even the royal
society founded by Newton and Hook and those people was still an effort to redeem science for the spirit. So, the
alchemical spirit lives on, it never really died, it's just that it has taken peculiar forms in our own day.
mentioned, believe, last night that when you enter into nuclear chemistry the most literal dreams of the
profane side of alchemy, the transformation of lead into gold, Has actually been achieved. It has no economic
significance because the instrumentality to do it costs tens of millions of dollars but nevertheless, yes, in our
time, lead had been changed into gold. So, that's basically what wanted to say about this. Hope that there
are questions and stuff that we can say about it.
To take you back to the Voynitch manuscript for a minute. There was something about it being a liturgical manual
of some sort, is that your opinion?
Yes. This is kind of a footnote on all of this. Remember said that Kelly's entre to Dee was that he had a
mysterious book and you can tell from what I've said already, Dee was as big a sucker for books as am. So this
book, Kelly's story was that he had gone to sleep in the ruins of a Northumbrian monastery and slept in an open
seplicar, a crypt of some sort, and when he awoke he found beneath him two things, a vial of red powder which he
said was the transmissing powder, a necessary part of the alchemical process, and a book in an unknown language
which he called the Gospel of Saint Dunstable, possibly because this monastery had been dedicated to Saint
Dunstable. Now, Arthur Dee was John Dee's son and he said that, he became an alchemist in his own right, and he
said when he was growing up he remembers that his father spent many hours puzzling over a book, as he put it, "
all covered with hieroglyphics." But Dee, who elaborated the angelologic language called Enochean, never actually
wrote or discussed the book that he had received from Kelly. It is definitely not written in Enochean. Enochean,
30
when grammatically analyzed by computers, has a curious relationship to 16th century English. But when Dee and
Kelly traveled to Europe they were talking up Roger Bacon, who was a 14th century English monk who had dabbled in
alchemy, and they claimed to have Bacon manuscripts and Rudolph became very interested in this and wanted to
obtain some of these Baconian manuscripts. Suspect that what happened is that Dee, by this point, had given up
on deciphering the Gospel of Saint Dunstable and decided that he would palm it off on the emperor as a Bacon
manuscript because he didn't want to give up a real Bacon manuscript because they were too valuable to him. So
for 14,000 gold ducats this thing changed hands and Kelly and Dee and Ann were able to pay their bills and
Rudolph had immense resources because of his position as emperor and he brought his cryptographers and
decipherers on to work on this Gospel of Saint Dunstable and got nowhere.
Then, when Rudolph died, a mysterious book was numbered among the artifacts of his estate and think we can
assume that it's this book and one of the interesting things about this book is it has pages and pages of plant
drawings. Over a 150 watercolors of plants, each carefully labeled, captioned in this unknown language. If you
know anything about decipherment, this is what a decipherer dreams of because if you have a picture of the thing
and a caption it doesn't take too much smarts to figure out what's going on. Nevertheless, this was completely
unhelpful. A third of the manuscript has pseudo astrological material, in other words what looked like drawings
of stars and stellar shells but when carefully analyzed dissolve into meaninglessness, cannot be associated with
anything, and then a third of the manuscript shows little naked ladies in what can only be described as elaborate
plumbing systems and it was thought at one time that these must be drawings of the humors of the body in the
liver, that these little naked women represented spirits moving inside the human body and then somebody else's
guess was it must show an obscure form of German hydro therapy because, you know, the Germans, if you've ever
been to Baden Baden or Marianbad or these places where people take the waters, well those places are old, old.
And all this stuff is captioned and there are even tables of contents which again you would think would yield to
decipherment and so when Rudolph died, because of the botanical material in this book, it passed to the court
botanist, a man named Marici and he got nowhere with it.
Then in the early 16th century a great alchemist and polymath, some of whose art we'll see this evening, was
Heinrich Kundrath(sp?), and Heinrich Kundrath was fascinated by artificial languages and he heard about the
Voynitch manuscript and we have a whole batch of letters from Kundrath to the keepers of the estate of the
emperor trying to obtain this manuscript, which he finally did obtain and then at that point he makes no further
mention of it in his diaries the conclusion being that he, too, could get nowhere with this thing, it just defied
decipherment. Well, in 1619, at the outbreak of the 30 year's war, and this is what forgot to mention in my
earlier discussion, this episode of the Winter King and Queen is one way of debating the 30 year's war. It's
usually considered to be the moment when a certain personage was hurled from a third story window in Prague and
then fighting broke out in the streets but really the episode of the Winter King and Queen brought the thing to a
head. Well, in 1619, to avoid being caught up in the 30 year's war, Kundrath decided to take holy orders and
become a Jesuit and so he gave his library, which was compendious, to the monastery he joined which was a
monastery in Southern Italy and there this thing sat until 1906 when a New York rare book dealer named Alfred
Voynitch bought the entire contents of this monastic library and when he got it all back to New York and
cataloged it, it was all very predictable 16th century theological and alchemical speculation except here was
this book in an unknown language and Voynitch kept it throughout his life and then when he died he gave it to
Yale and it is to this day at the Benikee rare book room at Yale.
In the 1960s the CIA became interested in it because the CIA is in the business of code making and breaking, a
huge amount of energy goes into this. If you know anything about the enigma project in WWII you know that vast
energies go into the making of unbreakable codes and so they very systematically sought out all examples of
encrypted material throughout history and just lickety-split deciphered it, one after another. All occult and
magical codes known to exist in Europe can be traced back to one person, virtually to one person, to Trithemius,
31
Bishop of Spawnheim who was the great teacher of Henry Cornelius Agrippa.
All magical codes, if you know the Trithemian method, within a few hours you can get plain text. The Voynitch
manuscript did not yield at all to this method and the CIA formed a working group that for over ten years would
invite scholars in to have a look at this and if you're interested in this, Marie D'Amperio, who was a great
Renaissance scholar, wrote a book called The Voynitch Manuscript, an Elegant Enigma in which she traces the
efforts of the CIA to figure this thing out and to figure out what it could be.
There the matter rested until about three years ago when, think his name is Leo Levertov, some kind of military
historian, one of these peculiar people who live for this stuff, he got a hold of it and he said, and
deimlperia(?) goes through all the decipherment and there were many efforts at decipherment, there was a
scholar at Yale in the twenties named Brumbra who was a very respected man who ruined himself by claiming a
complete decipherment of the Voynitch manuscript and, the way the game is played is that you say what your rules
for the decipherment were, you give the rules to a colleague and you give your colleague a page of text. If he
can't translate it with your rules then you are viewed as a deluded and misguided person and your career goes up
in flames. Well, the Brumbraian method for deciphering the manuscript had to do with confined pools of letters
where, it would get you to a pool of five or six letters but then you could freely choose which one you used and
critics of Brumbra demonstrated that you could make this thing say anything you wanted it to. Brumbra supported
Dee's claim, he claimed that it deciphered out into a Roger Bacon manuscript that described a series of riots
between the students and the black friars in 1385 at Oxford. But nobody else could make it say that or make it
say anything so Brumbra disgraced himself and ruined his career.
Then there were other efforts at decipherment which won't bore you with but along comes Leo Levatov just four
years ago and he wrote a book called The Voynitch Manuscript: A Liturgical Manual for the Catherites and his
great breakthrough, if you accept his translation, and do, know people who don't but they don't seem to have
read him as carefully as have, think the dude pretty well has it nailed to the barn door. His great
breakthrough was to realize that it's not in code. It is not an encrypted manuscript at all. What it is is it's a
synthetic alphabet, yes, it's an alphabet that, and one of the things that baffled the CIA is was they looted the
libraries of Europe and they could never find another example of what is called Voynitch script and this is just
baffling. How could there be no other example of this script. It appears that what happened was someone created a
synthetic alphabet and then in a mixture of Medieval, polyglot Flemish with a huge number of loan words from Old
French, Middle High German, and Swedish, wrote down a sacramental manual for the dying in the Catherite sect.
Now, what is the Catherite sect? You're probably familiar with something called the Albajensian(?) crusade.
This was not a crusade carried on against the infidel for the recovery of Jerusalem but rather a series of
military actions carried out by the pope against communities in Southern France in the early 1200s. These people
were Catherites. As far as we can tell, and we can't tell much because we only have descriptions of Catherites by
people who were burning them at the stake, in other words no original Catherite documents survive, we just have
what they screamed out on the rack as they were being put to death by the bishops of the church and this was a
horrific incident in European history. To give you the flavor of it, the second Albajensian crusade was
prosecuted by a general of the pope named Simone De Monforte and his lieutenants came to him, at a point, and
some of you might have visited the city of Carceson in Southern France which is a walled Medieval city in
Southern France, very beautiful, Simone De Monforte's lieutenants came to him and they said "We have cornered the
Catherites at Carceson but the problem is is that there are 6,000 Catholics within the city walls." And he said "
kill everybody, God will recognize his own." So that was the spirit in which this thing went forth, and they did,
they did.
32
So, what we do know about the Catherites is that they had a sacrament, the holiest my...Well, first let me tell
you a little bit more about them. At first it was thought that they were pretty much heterodox Christians. They
were into nudity and vegetarianism and they sound like early hippies, as far as we can tell. They got together
men and women, they took off their clothes, they bathed, whether there were orgies or not we don't know, they
were vegetarians, and the one thing that we do know is that they had a sacrament called the consolamentum and the
consolamentum was ritualized vivisection, no, that's not the word, the term escapes me, but anyway, when you were
dying, a fellow Cather would cut your wrists and open your veins in a warm bath of water and you would die in
that state, you did not die a natural death. This was called the consolamentum. What Leo Levatov is claiming is
that the Voynitch manuscript is a description, a manual, for the prefecti of the Catherite sect telling how to
properly carry out the consolamentum. See no reason to challenge it. Even with my limited knowledge of German,
once you get the vowel and letter assignments right into this weird manuscript into this weird language and
change it into English alphabetic text you can see that there's enough German there and then these lone words in
Flemish and so forth, it looks to be true.
And what emerges from this, if we accept the Voynitch manuscript as the only primary document on the Catherite
faith, is that this was not a form of heterodox Christianity at all, it is much more radical then that and this
may explain the church's fury with this group of people. It was a cult of Isis. It can be traced straight back
into the mystery religions of Eo(?) Isis in Egypt and have not seen any critical commentary on Levatov's book.
His book was published by this weird press in Rodondo Beach that specializes only in books on military
encryption. Their catalog is a revelation to see, it's amazing, and the book on the Voynitch manuscript stands
out like a sore thumb because most of it is like dictionaries of three letter words in Swahili and their
numerical transforms and stuff like that. So that's the history to date of the Voynitch manuscript and it's not
that askew of our subject because all of this heterodoxy in Europe blends together.
The presence of Theodore DeBrie as an alchemical printer in Heidleberg may be a clue because there were survivals
of this Catherite faith in the form of a heresy called the brotherhood of the free spirit. If any of you are
familiar with the altarpiece called "The Garden of Earthly Delights" by Hieronymus Bosch, it's thought that this
was created by commission for a brotherhood, a congregation of the brotherhood of the free spirit and the
brotherhood of the free spirit was always associated with some reason, we don't know why, with printers. Printers
seem to be the profession that the brotherhood favored and, like the Catherites, they practiced vegetarianism,
nudism and gathering together in a ritual bath. So, there is much still to be learned and to be teased apart in
the art history and the history of heterodox thinking in Europe of which alchemy is seen to be one facet of a
faceted gem that includes the brotherhood of the free spirit, early Freemasonry, Catherites, survivals of
Manicheism, Voagamils(sp?) in Yugoslavia, there are Vogamils Vostrian(?) graves on the Southern coast of
Thessolonica and just a whole zoo of intellectual systems that have been forgotten and overlooked. This what
meant when said we will explore the statigraphy of lost thought systems. In some cases we possess quite
complete skeletons, in the case of alchemy, what we possess in the cases of the Vogamils and the Catherites is
almost a foot bone or a tooth or a footprint but someday, with luck, new textual material will emerge and a new
understanding of the role of heterodoxy in the formation of modern thought will emerge. Questions?
The Borne and Clark(?) book on Freemasonry that's just recently been published..I've just about finished it and
this person is a Medieval English historian from Kentucky and think he's finally solved...The Freemason history
which is a very interesting history because the Masonic historians themselves have been arguing for a couple
hundred years so it's strange that this Voynitch manuscript should be all of the sudden in the last couple of
years resolved because it seems that this Freemason thing is also resolved
33
Yes, you make an interesting point. John Glavis brought me an article yesterday. We're all tied up now in this
Pluto return. I'm not an astrologer but John brought me an article that's talking about how, don't know if it's
the last time or the time before last, that the Pluto return occurred is precisely the 1490s, the period that
we're talking about when the Corpus Hermeticum was translated and we are now in a period that is astrologically
exactly equivalent to that period and the Voynitch manuscript appears to have been accepted, mean I'm willing
to accept it, you mentioned this revelation about the true nature of Freemasonry, and of course what is going on
at the moment that is askew of our subject but tremendously exciting and relevant to the idea of lost knowledge
coming to light, is that this is the golden moment in Mayan studies.
It is happening right now, day by day, minute by minute, the log jam has been broken. The Mayan glyphs are being
deciphered, no shit, and it has to do with an entirely new approach that some Russian linguists have taken and if
any of you are interested, it will never happen again so far as know, there are now, with the Mayan
decipherment, no real undeciphered languages left. The Harapan(sp?) was deciphered a few years ago but really
it wasn't that interesting because we only possess about 6,000 characters in Harapan. But the literature of the
Mayan, when you take not only the hieroglyphic, the stone texts, but when you add in the ceramic texts, why we
have a lot of Mayan material and it is being deciphered at a furious rate. If you're interested in this, Linda
Sheil has written a book called A Forest of Kings and how do envy this woman because what she is doing is
writing the first history of the Maya in a thousand years. We're not now dealing in the realm of gods and myths,
we're dealing with stuff like "on the 14th of May, 642, an army from El Charico met an army from Tikal and
triumphed and deposed three flint and placed on the throne..."it's this kind of stuff, real history. The conceits
of Mayan religion and Mayan courtly life are all coming into focus and it's very exciting. All the people who
have tried to make the Maya into some kind of Atlantean civilization should be running for cover at this point,
because the picture that emerges is not as pretty as we might wish, but, hey, know the truth and the truth will
set you free, would choose truth over illusion anytime, no matter how damaging it might be to somebody's
conceptions of these things.
And if any of you are interested in these subjects, another area where this has occurred is, some of you may know
the book by Michael Chadwick called The Decipherment of Linear Be, Linear Be is a proto-Minoan language and a
linguist at Cambridge named Michael Ventris, a genius, in the fifties took this language, there was no Rosetta
Stone, this is the amazing thing. You know what mean by a Rosetta Stone? You see, in the 19th century the great
mystery was how to read the Egyptian hieroglyphs and before they were deciphered the Egyptians were treated like
the Maya and people thought that the secrets of the universe were chiseled on those obelisks and tombs. Well then
a scholar in the grand army of Napoleon Champion, a soldier found a tablet which had a column of Demotic Greek, a
column of another language, forget which one, and a column of Egyptian hieroglyphs and they were able to
realize that it was saying the same thing three times and that opened it up for them. But that's like a crib
sheet, it's easy if you have the same text in a known language. But in the case of the Maya and in the case of
Linear Be and in the case of Haropan, there was no Rosetta Stone, well then you talk about an excruciatingly
difficult problem to solve and I'll explain how it was done with the Maya because it's so neat.
It turns out that Mayan is a rebus language, what does this mean? Do you remember when we were kids and in comic
books there would be these things where it would show a picture of an eye and then it would show a picture of a
saw going through a piece of wood and then it would show a picture of an ant and then it would show a picture of
a red rose. This is a sentence which says "I saw aunt Rose." But now notice what's going on here. It all depends
on puns that depend on a knowledge of the spoken language. If you lose the sounds of the spoken language how the
hell could you ever tell that a picture of an eye, a saw, an insect and a rose says "| saw my maternal relative
34
on my mother's side." mean, it just is impossible, it's absolutely impossible in that situation to reconstruct
meaning unless you have sounds. Well, how do you recover the sounds of a language dead a thousand years. Well,
these Soviet linguists had the good sense to go and look at living Mayan languages, of which there are 15, living
Mayan languages in the Americas and they discovered one of these dialects where, when you set Mayan hieroglyphs
in front of these people and they named what they saw, meaning came out of their mouths and that broke the log
jam and then you just rev up your computers and use all the standard tools of modern linguistics and philology
and the stuff begins to just pour out, clear as day, no problem.
So they asked the Mayans?
Yes, they had to go to a Mayan, you're right, good point, it had never occurred to them. Because always before
when showing it to Mayans they would say "what does it mean?" instead of "what do you see here?" and then what
they said what they saw there meaning came out of their mouths. It was very, very neat. It shows once again the
hubris of modern scientific methods, we tend to dismiss the aboriginal and the primitive. To turn it toward my
own favorite subject, this was the state of modern medicine, nobody would ask the native in the Amazon basin "
what plants do you use for malaria, brain tumors, shrinkage and so on and so forth, because they were just
dismissed as superstitious primitives. It was thought that the doctrine of signatures was operating. They didn't
realize how subtle and how complete human knowledge systems grow under the care of those to whom it really
matters. Is there anything that needs to be said about this?
The project of the redemption of spirit from matter turned into the project of redeeming the general society of
the time toward a utopian vision. This is working right up to the present. Millenarianism is still with us,
Marxism is the last great Millenarian faith, the belief in the worker's state. It occupies the same relationship
to these alchemical utopias as Heidegarrean existentialism has to second century Gnosticism. The poetry has gone,
the baroque imagery has been stripped away, but the impulse is still toward a perfect society where each from his
ability according to his needs and means. It lives on. Democracy is also an effort, let us not forget, an attempt
to recapture the style of 5th century Athens and we forget that this was a citystate half of whose inhabitants
were slaves and yet we are so under the spell of the utopian dream that we continue, and not without important
reason, think, to try to labor toward a just and decent world where the lion lies down with the lamb and that
was, and it remains, the alchemical dream.
... Flashbacks of my life...! Majored in history in college and the first history teacher that had was a
wonderful old man who really, now that look back on it, taught the history of ideas. My major was involved with
politics and all of this kind of thing and it's such a wonderful experience to suddenly get back to what turned
me on to history, it gets me turned on and opens my mind again, looking at some of these thoughts that I'd just
forgotten or suppressed, put down and said that's bullshit as a traditionally trained scientist and so on...
opened my eyes to the fact that we can learn from what's gone on before, the ideas are out there, we just have to
grasp them...And apply them and I, too, am interested in how we make this more meaningful for the future.
One thing that occurs to me to say, once, in one of these revelatory dialogs with the logos, asked the question,
"why me, why are you telling me this?" because my, mean, was a poor hippie, was penniless, was a
traveler, and the answer was instantaneous and it was, "because you don't believe in anything, because you don't
believe in anything" and think that that's a very pure position to hold. We're not trying to ensnare you to
abandon your Jewishness or your Presbyterianism or belief, if you believe in something then you have procluded
35
the possibility of believing in its opposite and you have hence limited your freedom. Everything is to be judged
by its efficacy, by its effectiveness in the real world and think that have a horror in all belief systems,
just don't like them. If somebody tells you he has the answer, flee from this person, they are obviously some
sort of low being who has not recognized the true size and dimension of the cosmos that we're living in and if
you can keep yourself free of encumbering beliefs then your dialog with the logos can go forward unhindered.
Sometimes when I'm in the trance of psilocybin will say to the entity, "begin to show me yourself as you are
for yourself, don't give me the scaled down, humanized version, show me your true nature and after a few moments
of this then have to raise my hand and say enough, can't handle more than that. This goes back to the
statement made yesterday or the day before about that the universe is not only stranger than we suppose, it's
stranger than we can suppose. Therefore, we are given tremendous latitude in what we can think and what we
conceive but if you begin to believe in something then you are pulled down because everything that you believe
has consequences. A perfect example, as some of you may know, when Mohammed ascended into heaven from the site c
what was to become the Mosque of Omar, from the site of the Temple of Solomon in Jerusalem, he happened to be on
horseback. Now if you believe that Mohammed ascended to heaven, imagine the theological and hermenutic problems
posed by the horse he was riding. Because it went with him. This is a perfect example of how intellectual baggage
drags us down because belief always contains absurdity. The ontological status of this horse has troubled Islamic
theologians for centuries...
If they would just let go of the whole idea complex they would be liberated from this kind of minutia. Belief
kills the spirit, spirit transcends belief. Wanted to say that.
Then somebody mentioned Bruno and Dee. Since suggested that you read Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic Tradition
it's ironic that so little time was spent on Bruno, on the other hand, recommended that you read the book so
you should be well informed about Bruno. For me, Bruno, we just didn't get into that particular historical
episode because wanted to tell you about the Rosicrucian enlightenment, but the thing to remember about Bruno
was his discovery about the infinitude of the cosmos and that by an act of unencumbered observation, mean how
many people had looked at the night sky before Bruno and they had not seen what he saw, which was infinite space
and suns hung like lamps unto the uttermost extremes of infinity. By an act of pure cognition, he was able to
destroy an entire cosmological vision that had limited and confined the human soul for millennia. That's half of
his story. The other half is that he was burned at the stake for refusing to back down from this. It's a model
for us all: trust your perceptions trust your intuition and then accept the consequences because this is what
existential validity must be.
As far as the relationship between Dee and Bruno, the relationship is that they were both derivative of the
school of magic that can be traced back to Henry Cornelius Agrippa Von Nettleshine who was another model for
Faust. Agrippa wrote De Libro Quatro De Occulta Philosophia, four books of occult philosophy, and that was the
core work for European magic. All European magic can be traced back to the Agrippan system and Agrippa was the
direct student of the Abbot Trithemius of Soawnheim that we mentioned yesterday as the source of all the magical
codes of the middle ages. If you're interested in a brilliant but fictional treatment of John Dee and Giordano
Bruno, I'd like to recommend a novel to you. It's called Aegypt, it's by John Crowley, the same gentleman who
wrote Little Big which is a wonderful novel about the magical interface between two worlds. But his book Aegypt,
fully half of the book is given over to a wonderfully rich retelling of the relationship between Bruno and Dee.
Some people have wanted to say that Dee and Bruno actually crossed physical paths in London but I've looked into
it and they missed each other by about two weeks. Bruno was setting sail for England as Dee was setting sail for
France and the Rosacrucian enlightenment episode that talked about.
36
Then someone asked about tantra and the contrast between the imaginative internalized invocation of the anima or
the animus, depending on your own sexuality, and that contrasted with something that actually happens between two
people. We didn't talk that much about the concept of the alchemical wedding, or the chemical marriage is another
way of putting it, but this is the Western resonance to the Eastern idea of tantra and it is the idea that sexual
energy, being the rawest and most accessible energy to the organism, can be channeled into a higher spirituality.
It's entirely so, the problem is that of all paths this is probably fraught with the greatest difficulty because
sexuality is such a debased coinage in the modern world. In other words, you have to make your way with great
care and great purity of intent into this. In Eastern tantra that is actually practiced in this physical manner
there is usually the admonition is that you should have no attachment to your tantrica, that the relationship
should be entirely given over to the technical details of this union and of course it has to do with the
forestalling of orgasm and the raising of energy within the organism.
In the chemical marriage, in the alchemical marriage, due honor is given to the importance and uniqueness of the
other person, in other words it isn't the idea of the temple prostitute who serves as the vessel for this process
but there's actually an effort to keep individual indentities and individual dignity, in some sense, together and
this is, the higher up the mountain you go, the steeper it becomes and when you begin to scale the heights of
alchemical or tantric sexuality the fall back into the nigredo can be shocking indeed so that's just an
admonition, it's not designed to scare you off, it's just to say that in an age as sexually obsessed as our own,
you have to do as the Ching says, "inquire of the oracle once again if you have purity of intent.
Isn't there also a healing between the two?
Yes, it's a complete alchemical system and the energy is passed between. This is probably the highest completion
that is possible. The ideal of romantic love, and don't want to digress too much into this, but the ideal of
romantic love was introduced into Europe in the 1400s and earlier at the Anjovan(sp?) court of Eleanor of
Aquatain by troubadours and this troubadour tradition can, scholarship now reveals pretty convincingly that this
is an esoteric Sufi system. It also occurs in Indian teachers such as Chitania(sp?), who is the guy that the
Hare Krishnas go back to. The radical teaching of Chitania was that you could achieve ecstasy not by sitting in
yoga, but by dancing and singing on street corners. It's now pretty clearly shown that Sufi, the penetration of
Sufi ideas into Bengal was happening at the same time that these Sufi ideas were coming across from North Africa
and into Spain and Southern France. So, it's a tremendously old and vital tradition but you have to be careful -
the romantic impulse is a real double-edged sword. It has been ever since the early 19th century because, you
know, the rise of romanticism, as that term is normally understood, meaning those movements in art and literature
of the early 19th century, the rise of romanticism was a response to the dehumanization that was going on at that
time. The rise of industrialism and the retreat into cities more massive than any that had ever been built, did
you want to say something?
| wanted to add, the question was about healing, and think there's a tremendous difference between Indian and
Tibetan tantric systems. You ought to practice in Taoism in terms of single copulation and dual copulation, in
the Taoist system self-healing is of paramount importance before you can even consider dual copulation. Dual
copulation is then begun, then again other considerations come in, but the Tibetan and Indian systems where
Dakinis and various deities are invoked in the process of their alchemical union, it's really quite different
from the Taoist system which is devoid of beliefs in gods.
37
That's a good point. You know, yesterday talked about the alchemical stages. When you have reached the albedo,
the final whitening of these processes, that final whitening is, from a higher prospective, a new nigredo and you
must always build and build again. So you have to be fairly confident that you have already realized a certain
portion of yourself before you embark upon these tantric double experiments. Because a lot of tantric text reads
very vampiratical, mean, it's all about expelling the semen and then sucking it back in and it's like an energy
war. It turns into black magic. The losing partners in this deal are just left a withered husk and this is not a
higher completion to be sought for.
You're correct, there are supposedly, whether they're myths or documented stories, about a Chinese Empress who
caused the deaths of more than a thousand men because of her vampirism.
And it was sexual in nature?
It was sexual in nature.
Just a couple of other points here. The gentleman here who had nothing to comment or wanted to sit it out
reminded me, since we were talking about the Valentinian system this morning, my favorite archon, besides Sophia
who's so interesting because of the little story about how she made the universe, but the 12th archon in the
Gnostic system is a unique entity, don't know of another religious system that has this notion. The 12th archon
in the Valentinian system is called The Watcher. That's all he does. He does not put into the system at all but
is the witness and somehow this creates a validating dimension that is very important. Just want to affirm that
the watcher is a very strong platform on which to stand. Mean, would that could learn to keep my mouth shut.
Would that we all could. So, the watcher is a good archon to keep active on your inner altar.
So, then, the future occurs three times on the list. We don't have a lot of time, but what would like to say
about it this morning is, if you extrapolate all that has been said here then you should see that, remember how
said that one view of alchemy is that the alchemist intervened in natural process in the role of a catalyst. For
those of you who aren't chemists, a catalyst is something that causes a chemical reaction that is going on anyway
to precede at a faster rate but the catalyst is not consumed in this process, it simply accelerates it. And if we
think of nature as a great alchemical furnace that continuously reproduces and brings forth wonders, then must it
not be that humanity is the yeast of the gain alchemical rarefaction and that human history is the process of
catalyzing the alchemical condensation. If we look back into nature, before the advent of speaking and writing
human beings in the last 15,000 years, what we see are very leisurely processes. The speciation of a single plant
from another can occupy 50 or 60 thousand years, it never happens more quickly than that. And the grinding down
of glaciers from the poles, these are processes that take hundreds and thousands of years.
With the advent of human beings, an entirely new ontos of being, an entirely new category of becoming is
introduced into the entire cosmos, as far as we know, because we cannot verify that there are other
self-reflecting beings in the universe and this new ontos of becoming is what call epigenetic, as opposed to
38
genetic. All other change in the living world, in the world of bios, of zoa, occurs through genetic change,
random modification of the genome which is then subject to random selection. But with the advent of speech and
writing, epigenetic, means outside of genetics, epigenetic processes become possible and time accelerates. One
way of thinking about what is happening in this cosmos is that it is a gradual conquest of dimensionality by
becoming, or process, we hardly have a word inclusive enough.
The earliest forms of life were probably slimes on certain kinds of clays, self-replicating molecular systems and
then certain portions of this chemistry became light sensitive and then there was the sense of the division of
light and darkness which generated the notion of here and there on some tremendously basic level within these
early organisms. Once you have the concept of here and there, motility, the ability to move, the cilia that dot
the surface of protozans and stuff like this are elaborated and a new dimension enters the picture, the dimension
of time, because notice that a journey from here to there is a journey from now to then. And then, as more
refined perceptual apparatus arose, and more refined systems of moving animal bodies arose, a steady conquest of
dimensionality occurred. The movement of animals onto the land and so forth.
Well then, at the advent of memory, and memory must be mediated by language except at a very crude, instinctual
level, memory is a time binding function. It's a way of somehow taking the past and calling up it's essential
properties so that they are co-present with the given moment of experience. It's one thing at the level of the
song and dance of pre-literate peoples but once you begin to chisel stone and write books then you're into the
epigenetic domain in a big way. And once you cross the threshold into the world of electronic media and that sort
of thing, once you achieve powered flight, once you can hurl instruments outside of the solar system, these are
time binding functions and the alchemical intent, recall, was to accelerate nature's intent toward perfection and
the alchemists all believed that nature was growing toward a state of unity and perfection, that given millions
and millions of years, everything would turn to gold, everything would find its way toward the Platonian one.
So, now we live in a world that appears to be on the brink of its own death or extinction and the reason we make
that assumption is that our bridges are burning behind us. We see no way back to the world of the hunting and
gathering pastoralists of the high Paleolithic of the Saharan grasslands. We see no way back to the Gothic piety
of Europe with over 30 million people in it. Our bridges are burning and our religions, Islam, Judaism,
Christianity, the major Western religions persistently insist that we are caught in a tightening spiral of ever
increasing speed that is carrying us toward an unimaginable confrontation with something which they call God, the
second coming, the messiah, you name it. As cool-headed a rationalist as Albert Toynbee, when he sat down to
write a study of history, he finally had to face the question, "what is history for?" And the best he could come
up with is "history must be about the entry of God into the domain of three-dimensional space."
Well, we don't know what God is, let's not call it God, let's call it the philosopher's stone, let's call it the
Sophic Hydrolith, and believe that the chaos of our world, the apocalyptic intuition that informs our religions
and our dreams is because ahead of us in time, and now not that far ahead of us in time, is something, taking a
page from the mathematical concern called dynamics, we can call an attractor. The attractor lies ahead of us in
time. The universal process is not driven by a downward cascade of Cartesian causuistry(?) that's the
scientific notion and it leads to a universe of entropy and heat death millions of years in the future but what
we see around us is a continuing and accelerating complexification as human beings, machines, eco systems, the
solar system itself is beginning to knit itself into a tighter and tighter organization. Believe that alchemy
provides the best metaphors for understanding this. Nature is the great alchemist par excellence and we, as its
minions through history, are accelerating the condensation of being toward the unimaginable so that in my system,
my way of thinking, there's ultimately a semitary(?) break with ordinary history and call it all kinds of
39
different things, but here this morning, the transcendent other.
The transcendent other casts an enormous shadow across the lower dimensional landscape of time. The stirring of
the earliest life forms in the Devonian seas caught the call and every step that has been taken since then has
been ever quicker, ever quicker toward the transcendental other, it beckons us and history is haunted by this
thing. History is the shock wave of eschatology. History is a process that lasts, let's be generous, 25,000 years,
the wink of an eye in geological time, and in that 25,000 years religious rise and fall, governmental systems,
teachers come and go and there is a sense of being caught in a whirlpool that is spinning us toward fusion with
the unimaginable. This is why the skies of Earth are haunted by flying saucers, they aren't coming from other
solar systems, they are sintillas, remember this alchemical term - sparks - they are sintillas being thrown off
the alchemical quintessence which lies like a great attractor at the end of time and the purpose of science and
techni and electronic media and information transfer and all of this stuff is to knit us together, to dissolve
our boundaries and to bring us to a point of singularity where language fails, where we lean over meanings edge
and feel the dizziness of things unsaid.
And this lies now, believe, within our lifetimes, within the lifetimes of most of us, this is actually going to
break through. I'm like one of those people carrying a sign that says "repent for the end is near." It's as nutty
a position as you can possibly hold. That's why suspect it has a reasonable chance of being dead on. So, that
is the point of talking about alchemy and this melding, the production of the quintessent and all that. It is
because we are a gnat's eyelash away from a full confrontation with the transcendent other. Our dreams are
haunted by it, our reveries are filled with it. If we take a psychedelic drug, it's revealed before us in all its
splendor. This is the force that is pulling us inexorably toward completion.
| remember once in a psilocybin trance expressed concern about the state of the world and the nous spoke, the
logos spoke, and it said "no big deal, this is what it's like when a species prepares to depart for the stars."
This is the, we are in the birth canal of a planetary birthing. And as you know, if you come upon a birth in
progress, you would never dream that this is the culmination of a natural process. It looks like a catastrophe of
some sort. There is moaning and groaning and screaming and thrashing and blood is being shed and there is a
feeling that the walls are closing in and yet it is inscripted into each of us as a microcosmic reflection of the
completion of human history. And not only human history, because we are simply the hands and eyes of all life,
all process on this planet.
The Gnostics believe that the Earth is like an egg and that a moment will come in which the egg must be split
asunder. Love to quote the Grateful Dead, "you can't go back and you can't stand still. If the thunder don't
get you then the lightning will." That is what we are being funnelled toward, that is the message of alchemy.
That is the quintessence of the human enterprise, the biological enterprise. Like to recall the Irish toast "
may you be alive at the end of the world. And we have a real crack at it. It's not a pessimistic vision. It's
the most optimistic vision that one can suppose and think that's where I'd like to leave it this morning.