I AM BORN.



Whether I shall turn out to be the hero of my own life,
or whether that station will be held by anybody else, these
pages must show. To begin my life with the beginning of my
life, I record that I was born (as I have been informed and
believe) on a Friday, at twelve o'clock at night. It was
remarked that the clock began to strike, and I began to cry,
simultaneously.

In consideration of the day and hour of my birth, it was
declared by the nurse, and by some sage women in the neigh-
borhood who had taken a lively interest in me several months
before there was any possibility of our becoming personally
acquainted, first, that I was destined to be unlucky in life ;
and secondly, that I was privileged to see ghosts and spirits ;
both these gifts inevitably attaching, as they believed, to all
unlucky infants of either gender, born towards the small hours
on a Friday night.

I need say nothing here, on the first head, because nothing
can show better than my history whether that prediction was
verified or falsified by the result. On the second branch of
the question, I will only remark, that unless I ran through
that part of my inheritance while I was still a baby, I have
not come into it yet. But I do not at all complain of having
been kept out of this property; and if anybody else should

VOL. I — 1 1



2 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

be in the present enjoyment of it, he is heartily welcome to
keep it.

I was born with a caul, which was advertised for sale, in the
newspapers, at the low price of fifteen guineas. Whether sea-
going people were short of money about that time, or were
short of faith and preferred cork-jackets, I don't know ; all I
know is, that there was but one solitary bidding, and that was
from an attorney connected with the bill-broking business,
who offered two pounds in cash, and the balance in sherry,
but declined to be guaranteed from drowning on any higher
bargain. Consequently the advertisement was withdrawn at
a dead loss t— for as to sherry, my poor dear mother's own
sherry was in the market then — and ten years afterwards
the caul was put up in a raffle down in our part of the coun-
try, to fifty members at half-a-crown a head, the winner to
spend five shillings. I was present myself, and I remember
to have felt quite uncomfortable and confused, at a part of
myself being disposed of in that way. The caul was won, I
recollect, by an old lady with a hand-basket, who, very reluc-
tantly, produced from it the stipulated five shillings, all in
halfpence, and twopence halfpenny short — as it took an
immense time and a great waste of arithmetic, to endeavor
without any effect to prove to her. It is a fact which will be
long remembered as remarkable down there, that she was
never drowned, but died triumphantly in bed, at ninety-two.
I have understood that it was, to the last, her proudest boast,
that she never had been on the water in her life, except upon
a bridge ; and that over her tea (to which she was extremely
partial) she, to the last, expressed her indignation at the
impiety of mariners and others, who had the presumption to
go " meandering " about the world. It was in vain to repre-
sent to her that some conveniences, tea perhaps included,
resulted from this objectionable practice. She always re-
turned, with greater emphasis and with an instinctive knowl-
edge of the strength of her objection, "Let us have no
meandering."

iSTotf to meander myself, at present, I will go back to my
birth.

I was born at Blunderstone, in Suffolk, or "thereby," as



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 3

they say in Scotland. I was a posthumous child. My father's
eyes had closed upon the light of this world six months, when
mine opened on it. There is something strange to me, even
now, in the reflection that he never saw me ; and something
stranger yet in the shadowy remembrance that I have of my
first childish associations with his white gravestone in the
churchyard, and of the indefinable compassion I used to feel
for it lying out alone there in the dark night, when our little
parlor was warm and bright with fire and candle, and the
doors of our house were — almost cruelly, it seemed to me
sometimes — bolted and locked against it.

An aunt of my father's, and consequently a great-aunt of
mine, of whom I shall have more to relate by and by, was the
principal magnate of our family. Miss Trotwood, or Miss
Betsey, as my poor mother always called her, when she suffi-
ciently overcame her dread of this formidable personage to
mention her at all (which was seldom), had been married to a
husband younger than herself, who was very handsome, except
in the sense of the homely adage, " handsome is, that hand-
some does " — for he was strongly suspected of having beaten
Miss Betsey, and even of having once, on a disputed question
of supplies, made some hasty but determined arrangements to
throw her out of a two pair of stairs' window. These evidences
of an incompatibility of temper induced Miss Betsey to pay
him off, and effect a separation by mutual consent. He went
to India with his capital, and there, according to a wild legend
in our family, he was once seen riding on an elephant, in com-
pany with a Baboon ; but I think it must have been a Baboo
— or a Begum. Anyhow, from India, tidings of his death
reached home, within ten years. How they affected my aunt,
nobody knew ; for immediately upon the separation, she took
her maiden name., again, bought a cottage in a hamlet on the
sea-coast a long way off, established herself there as a single
woman with one servant, and was understood to live se-
cluded, ever afterwards, in an inflexible retirement.

My father had once been a favorite of hers, I believe ; but
she was mortally affronted by his marriage, on the ground that
my mother was " a wax doll." She had never seen my mother,
but she knew her to be not yet twenty. My father and Miss



4 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

Betsey never met again. He was double my mother's age
when he married, and of but a delicate constitution. He died
a year afterwards, and, as I have said, six months before I
came into the world.

This was the state of matters, on the afternoon of, what
I may be excused for calling, that eventful and important
Friday. I can make no claim therefore to have known, at that
time, how matters stood ; or to have any remembrance, founded
on the evidence of my own senses, of what follows.

My mother was sitting by the fire, but poorly in health, and
very low in spirits, looking at it through her tears, and de-
sponding heavily about herself and the fatherless little stranger,
who was already welcomed by some grosses of prophetic pins,
in a drawer up stairs, to a world not at all excited on the
subject of his arrival ; my mother, I say, was sitting by the
fire, that bright, windy March afternoon, very timid and sad,
and very doubtful of ever coming alive out of the trial that
was before her, when, lifting her eyes as she dried them, to
the window opposite, she saw a strange lady coming up the
garden.

My mother had a sure foreboding at the second glance, that
it was Miss Betsey. The setting sun was glowing on the
strange lady, over the garden-fence, and she came walking up
to the door with a fell rigidity of figure and composure of
countenance that could have belonged to nobody else.

When she reached the house, she gave another proof of her
identity. My father had often hinted that she seldom con-
ducted herself like any ordinary Christian ; and now, instead
of ringing the bell, she came and looked in at that identical
window, pressing the end of her nose against the glass to that
extent, that my poor dear mother used to say it became per-
fectly flat and white in a moment.

She gave my mother such a turn, that I have always been
convinced I am indebted to Miss Betsey for having been born
on a Friday.

My mother had left her chair in her agitation, and gone
behind it in the corner. Miss Betsey, looking round the
room, slowly and inquiringly, began on the other side, and
carried her eyes on, like a Saracen's Head in a Dutch clock,





until they reached my mother. Then she made a frown and a
gesture to my mother, like one who was accustomed to be
obeyed, to come and open the door. My mother went.

" Mrs. David Copperfield, I think," said Miss Betsey ; the
emphasis referring, perhaps, to my mother's mourning weeds,
and her condition.

" Yes," said my mother, faintly.

"Miss Trotwood," said the visitor. "You have heard of
her, I dare say ? "

My mother answered she had had that pleasure. And she
had a disagreeable consciousness of not appearing to imply
that it had been an overpowering pleasure.

"Now you see her," said Miss Betsey. My mother bent her
head, and begged her to walk in.

They went into the parlor my mother had come from, the
fire in the best room on the other side of the passage not
being lighted — not having been lighted, indeed, since my
father's funeral ; and when they were both seated, and Miss
Betsey said nothing, my mother, after vainly trying to restrain
herself, began to cry.

"Oh tut, tut, tut !" said Miss Betsey, in a hurry. "Don't
do that ! Come, come ! "

My mother couldn't help it notwithstanding, so she cried
until she had had her cry out.

"Take off your cap, child," said Miss Betsey, "and let me
see you."

My mother was too much afraid of her to refuse compliance
with this odd request, if she had any disposition to do so.
Therefore she did as she was told, and did it with such nervous
hands that her hair (which was luxuriant and beautiful) fell
all about her face.

"Why, bless my heart!" exclaimed Miss Betsey. "You
are a very Baby ! "

My mother was, no doubt, unusually youthful in appearance
even for her years ; she hung her head, as if it were her fault,
poor thing, and said, sobbing, that indeed she was afraid she
was but a childish widow, and would be but a childish mother
if she lived. In a short pause which ensued, she had a fancy
that she felt Miss Betsey touch her hair, and that with no



6 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

ungentle hand ; but, looking at her, in her timid hope, she
found that lady sitting with the skirt of her dress tucked up,
her hands folded on one knee, and her feet upon the fender,
frowning at the fire.

"In the name of Heaven 2 " said Miss Betsey, suddenly,
" why Rookery ? "
, " Do you mean the house, ma'am ? " asked my mother.

"Why Bookery?" said Miss Betsey. "Cookery would
have been more to the purpose, if you had had any practical
ideas of life, either of you."

"The name was Mr. Copperfield's choice," returned nij-
mother. "When he bought the house, he liked to think that
there were rooks about it."

The evening wind made such a disturbance just now, among
some tall old elm trees at the bottom of the garden, that
neither my mother nor Miss Betsey could forbear glancing
that way. As the elms bent to one another, like giants who
were whispering secrets, and after a few seconds of such repose,
fell into a violent flurry, tossing their wild arms about, as if
their late confidences were really too wicked for their peace
of mind, some weather-beaten ragged old rooks'-nests, burden-
ing their higher branches, swung like wrecks upon a stormy
sea.

" Where are the birds ? n asked Miss Betsey.

" The — ? " My mother had been thinking of something
else.

"The rooks — what has become of them?" asked Miss
Betsey.

" There have not been any since* we have lived here," said
my mother. "We thought — Mr. Copperfield thought — it
was quite a large rookery ; but the nests were very old ones,
and the birds have deserted them a long while."

" David Copperfield all over ! " cried Miss Betsey. " David
Copperfield from head to foot ! Calls a house a rookery when
there's not a rook near it, and take the birds on trust, because
he sees the nests !"

"Mr. Copperfield," returned my mother, "is dead, and if
you dare to speak unkindly of him to me — "

My poor dear mother, I suppose, had some momentary in-



OF DAVID COPPEEFIELD. 7

tention of committing an assault and battery upon my aunt,
who could easily have settled her with one hand, even if my
mother had been in far better training for such an encounter
than she was that evening. But it passed with the action of
rising from her chair ; and she sat down again very meekly,
and fainted.

When she came to herself, or when Miss Betsey had restored*
her, whichever it was, she found the latter standing at the
window. The twilight was by this time shading down into
darkness ; and dimly as they saw each other, they could not
have done that without the aid of the fire.

" Well ? " said Miss Betsey, coming back to her chair, as if
she had only been taking a casual look at the prospect ; " and
when do you expect — "

" I am all in a tremble," faltered my mother. " I don't
know what's the matter. I shall die, I am sure ! "

"No, no, no," said Miss Betsey. "Have some tea."

" Oh dear me, dear me, do you think it will do me any
good? " cried my mother, in a helpless manner.

"Of course it will," said Miss Betsey. "It's nothing but
fancy. What do you call your girl ? "

" I don't know that it will be a girl, yet, ma'am," said my
mother, innocently.

"Bless the Baby ! " exclaimed Miss Betsey, unconsciously
quoting the second sentiment of the pincushion in the drawee
up stairs, but applying it to my mother instead of me, "I
don't mean that. I mean your servant-girl."

" Peggotty," said my mother.

" Peggotty ! " repeated Miss Betsey, with some indignation.
"Do you mean to say, child, that any human being has gone
into a Christian church, and got herself named Peggotty ? "

"It's her surname," said my mother, faintly. "Mr. Copper-
field called her by it, because her Christian name was the
same as mine."

" Here ! Peggotty ! " cried Miss Betsey, opening the parlor-
door. "Tea. Your mistress is a little unwell. Don't dawdle."

Having issued this mandate with as much potentiality as if
she had been a recognized authority in the house ever since it
had been a house, and having looked out to confront the



8 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

amazed Peggotty coming along the passage with a candle at
the sound of a strange voice, Miss Betsey shut the door again,
and sat down as before : with her feet on the fender, the skirt
of her dress tucked up, and her hands folded on one knee.

"You were speaking about its being a girl," said Miss
Betsey. " I have no doubt it will be a girl. I have a presenti-
' ment that it must be a girl. Now child, from the moment of
the birth of this girl — "

" Perhaps boy," my mother took the liberty of putting in.

" I tell you I have a presentiment that it must be a girl,"
returned Miss Betsey. "Don't contradict. Prom the moment
of this girl's birth, child, I intend to be her friend. I intend
to be her godmother, and I beg you'll call her Betsey Trot-
wood Copperfield. There must be no mistakes in life with this
Betsey Trotwood. There must be no trifling with her affec-
tions, poor dear. She must be well brought up, and well
guarded from reposing any foolish confidences where they are
not deserved. I must make that my care."

There was a twitch of Miss Betsey's head, after each of
these sentences, as if her own old wrongs were working within
her, and she repressed any plainer reference to them by strong
constraint. So my mother suspected, at least, as she observed
her by the low glimmer of the fire : too much scared by Miss
Betsey, too uneasy in herself, and too subdued and bewildered
altogether, to observe anything very clearly, or to know what
to say.

"And was David good to you, child ? " asked Miss Betsey,
when she had been silent for a little while, and these motions
of her head had gradually ceased. " Were you comfortable
together ? "

" We were very happy," said my mother. " Mr. Copperfield
was only too good to me."

"What, he spoilt you, I suppose ? " returned Miss Betsey.

" Por being quite alone and dependent on myself in this
rough Avorld again, yes, I fear he did indeed," sobbed my
mother.

" Well ! Don't cry ! " said Miss Betsey. " You were not
equally matched, child — if any two people caji be equally



OF D'AVID COPPERFIELD. 9

matched — and s I asked tlie question. You were an orphan,
weren't you ? "
"Yes."

"And a governess ? "

" I Avas nursery-governess in a family where Mr. Copperfield
came to visit. Mr. Copperfield was very kind to me, and took
a great deal of notice of me, and paid me a good deal of atten-
tion, and at last proposed to me. And I accepted him. And
so we were married," said my mother, simply.

" Ha ! Poor Baby ! " mused Miss Betsey, with her frown
still bent upon the fire. " Do you know anything ? "
" I beg your pardon, ma'am," faltered my mother.
" About keeping house, for instance," said Miss Betsey.
"Not much, I fear," returned my mother, "Not so much as
I could wish. But Mr. Copperfield was teaching me — "

("Much he knew about it himself!") said Miss Betsey, in
a parenthesis.'

"And I hope I should have improved, being very anxious

to learn, and he very patient to teach, if the great misfortune
of his death " — my mother broke down again here, and could
get no farther.

"Well, well!" said Miss Betsey.

"I kept my housekeeping-book regularly, and balanced

it with Mr. Copperfield every night," cried my mother, in
another burst of distress, and breaking down again.

" Well, well ! " said Miss Betsey. " Don't cry any more."

« And I am sure 'we never had a word of difference

respecting it, except when Mr. Copperfield objected to my
threes and fives being too much like each other, or to my put-
ting curly tails to my sevens and nines," resumed my mother,
in another burst, and breaking down again.

"You'll make yourself ill," said Miss Betsey, "and you
know that will not be good either for you or for my god-
daughter. Come ! You mustn't do it ! "

This argument had some share in quieting my mother,
though her increasing indisposition perhaps had a larger one.
There was an interval of silence, only broken by Miss Betsey's
occasionally ejaculating "Ha ! " as she sat with her feet upon
the fender.



10 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

u David had bought an annuity for himself with his money,
I know," said she, by and by. " What did he do for you ? "

" Mr. Copperfield," said my mother, answering with some
difficulty, "was so considerate and good as to secure the
reversion of a part of it to me."

"How much? " asked Miss Betsey.

" A hundred and five pounds a year," said my mother.

" He might have done worse," said my aunt.

The word was appropriate to the moment. My mother was
so much worse that Peggotty, coming in with the teaboard
and candles, and seeing at a glance how ill she was, — as Miss
Betsey might have done sooner if there had been light enough,
— conveyed her up stairs to her own room with all speed ; and
immediately despatched Ham Peggotty, her nephew, who had
been for some days past secreted in the house, unknown to my
mother, as a special messenger, in case of emergency, to fetch
the nurse and doctor.

Those allied powers were considerably astonished, when
they arrived within a few minutes of each other, to find an
unknown lady of portentous appearance sitting before the
fire, with her bonnet tied over her left arm, stopping her ears
with jewellers' cotton. Peggotty knowing nothing about her, and
my mother saying nothing about her, she was quite a mystery
in the parlor ; and the fact of her having a magazine of jewel-
lers* cotton in her pocket, and sticking the article in her ears
in that way, did not detract from the solemnity of her presence.

The doctor having been up stairs and come down again,
and having satisfied himself, I suppose, that there was a
probability of this unknown lady and himself having to sit
there, face to face, for some hours, laid himself out to be polite
and social. He was the meekest of his sex, the mildest of
little men. He sidled in and out of a room, to take up the less
space. He walked as softly as the Ghost in Hamlet, and more
slowly. He carried his head on one side, partly in modest
depreciation of himself, partly in modest propitiation of
everybody else. It is nothing to say, that he hadn't a word
to throw at a dog. He couldn't have thrown a word at a mad
dog. He might have offered him one gently, or half a one,
or a fragment of one ; for he spoke as slowly as he walked*,



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 11

but he wouldn't have been rude to him, and he couldn't have
been quick with him, for any earthly consideration.

Mr. Chillip, looking mildly at my aunt, with his head on.
one side, and making her a little bow, said, in allusion to the
jewellers' cotton, as he softly touched his left ear :

" Some local irritation, ma'am ? "

"What!" replied my aunt, pulling the cotton out of one
ear like a cork.

Mr. Chillip was so alarmed by her abruptness — as he tola!
my mother afterwards — that it was a mercy he didn't lose
his presence of mind. But he repeated, sweetly :

" Some local irritation, ma'am ? "

"Nonsense!" replied my aunt, and corked herself, again,
at one blow.

Mr. Chillip could do nothing after this, but sit and look at
her feebly, as she sat and looked at the fire, until he was
called up stairs again. After some quarter of an hour's
absence, he returned.

"Well?" said my aunt, taking the cotton out of the ear
nearest to .him.

"Well, ma'am," returned Mr. Chillip, "we are — we are
progressing slowly, ma'am."

« Ya — a — ah ! " said my aunt, with a perfect shake on the
contemptuous interjection. And corked herself as before.

Really — really — as Mr. Chillip told my mother, he was
almost shocked; speaking in a professional point of view
alone he was almost shocked. But he sat and looked at her,
notwithstanding, for nearly two hours, as she sat looking at
the fire, until he was again called out. After another absence,
he again returned.

" Well ? " said my aunt, taking out the cotton on that side
again.

"Well, ma'am," returned Mr. Chillip, "we are — we are pro-
gressing slowly, ma'am."

« Ya — a — ah ! " said my aunt. With such a snarl at him,
that Mr. Chillip absolutely could not bear it. It was really
calculated to break his spirit, he said afterwards. He pre-
ferred to go and sit upon the stairs, in the dark and a strong
draught, until he was again sent for.



12 THE PERSONAL HISTOEY AND EXPERIENCE

Ham Peggotty, who went to the national school, and was a
very dragon at his catechism, and who may therefore be
regarded as a credible witness, reported next day, that hap-
pening to peep in at the parlor-door an hour after this, he was
instantly descried by Miss Betsey, then walking to and fro
in a state of agitation, and pounced upon before he could make
his escape. That there were now occasional sounds of feet and
voices overhead which he inferred the cotton did not exclude,
from the circumstance of his evidently being clutched by
the lady as a victim on whom to expend her superabundant
agitation when the sounds were loudest. That, marching him
constantly up and down by the collar (as if he had been taking
too much laudanum), she, at those times, shook him, rumpled
his hair, made light of his linen, stopped his ears as if she
confounded them with her own, and otherwise touzled and
maltreated him. This was in part confirmed by his aunt, who
saw him at half-past twelve o'clock, soon after his release, and
affirmed that he was then as red as I was.

The mild Mr. Chillip could not possibly bear malice at such
a time, if at any time. He sidled into the parlor as soon as he
was at liberty, and said to my aunt in his meekest manner :

"Well, ma'am, I am happy to congratulate you."

" What upon ? " said my aunt, sharply.

Mr. Chillip was fluttered again, by the extreme severity of
my aunt's manner; so he made her a little bow, and gave her
a. little smile, to mollify her.

" Mercy on the man, what's he doing ! " cried my aunt,
impatiently. " Can't he speak ? "

" Be calm, my dear ma'am," said Mr. Chillip, in his softest
accents. " There is no longer any occasion for uneasiness,
ma'am. Be calm."

It has since been considered almost a miracle that my aunt
didn't shake him, and shake what he had to say, out of him.
She only shook her own head at him, but in a way that made
him quail.

"Well, ma'am," resumed Mr. Chillip, as soon as he had
courage, " I am happy to congratulate you. All is now over,
ma'am, and well over."



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD.



13



During the five minutes or so that Mr. Chillip devoted to
the delivery of this oration, my aunt eyed him narrowly.

"How is she?" said my aunt, folding her arms with her
bonnet still tied on one of them.

"Well, ma'am, she will soon be quite comfortable, I hope,"
returned Mr. Chillip. " Quite as comfortable as we can expect
a young mother to be, under these melancholy domestic cir-
cumstances. There cannot be any objection to your seeing
her presently, ma'am. It may do her good."

"And she. How is she?" said my aunt, sharply.

Mr. Chillip laid his head a little more on one side, and
looked at my aunt like an amiable bird.

" The baby," said my aunt. " How is she ? "

"Ma'am," returned Mr. Chillip, "I apprehended you had
known. It's a boy."

My aunt said never a word, but took her bonnet by the
strings, in the manner of a sling, aimed a blow at Mr. Chillip's
head with it, put it on bent, walked out, and never came back.
She vanished like a discontented fairy ; or like one of those
supernatural beings whom it was popularly supposed I was
entitled to see; and never came back any more.

No. I lay in my basket, and my mother lay in her bed;
but Betsey Trotwood Copperfield was for ever in the land of
dreams and shadows, the tremendous region whence I had so
lately travelled; and the light upon the window of our room
shone out upon the earthly bourne of all such travellers, and
the mound above the ashes and the dust that once was he,
without whom I had never been.



14 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE



CHAPTER II.

I OBSERVE.

The first objects that assume a distinct presence before me,
as I look far back, into the blank of my infancy, are my mother
with her pretty hair and youthful shape, and Peggotty with
no shape at all, and eyes so dark that they seemed to darken
their whole neighborhood in her face, and cheeks and arms so
hard and red that I wondered the birds didn't peck her in
preference to apples.

I believe I can remember these two at a little distance apart,
dwarfed to my sight by stooping down or kneeling on the
floor, and I going unsteadily from the one to the other. I
have an impression on my mind which I cannot distinguish
from actual remembrance, of the touch of Peggotty's fore-
finger as she used to hold it out to me, and of its being rough-
ened by needlework, like a pocket nutmeg-grater.

This may be fancy, though I think the memory of most of
us can go farther back into such times than many of us sup-
pose ; just as I believe the power of observation in numbers
of very young children to be quite wonderful for its closeness
and accuracy. Indeed, I think that most grown men who are
remarkable in this respect, may with greater propriety be said
not to have lost the faculty, than to have acquired it 3 the
rather, as I generally observe such men to retain a certain fresh-
ness, and gentleness, and capacity of being pleased, which are
also an inheritance they have preserved from their childhood.

I might have a misgiving that I am u meandering " in stop-
ping to say this, but that it brings me to remark that I build
these conclusions, in part upon my own experience of myself ;
and if it should appear from anything I may set down in this
narrative that I was a child of close observation, or that as a
man I have a strong memory of my childhood, I undoubtedly
lay claim to both of these characteristics.



OF DAVID GOPPEBFIELD. 15

Looking back, as I was saying, into the blank of my infancy,
the first objects I can remember as standing out by themselves
from a confusion of things, are my mother and Peggotty.
What else do I remember ? Let me see.

There comes out of the cloud, our house — not new to me,
but quite familiar, in its earliest remembrance. On the ground-
floor is Peggotty's kitchen, opening into a back- yard; with a
pigeon-house on a pole, in the centre, without any pigeons in
it; a great dog-kennel in a corner, without any dog; and a
quantity of fowls that look terribly tall to me, walking about,
in a menacing and ferocious manner. There is one cock who
gets upon a post to crow, and seems to take particular notice
of me as I look at him through the kitchen window, who makes
me shiver, he is so fierce. Of the geese outside the side-gate
who come waddling after me with their long necks stretched
out when I go that way, I dream at night : as a man environed
by wild Beasts might dream of lions.

Here is along passage — what an enormous perspective I
make of it ! —leading from Peggotty's kitchen to the front-
door. A dark store-room opens out of it, and that is a place
to be run past at night ; for I don't know what may be among
those tubs and jars and old tea-chests, when there is nobody
in there with a dimly-burning light, letting a mouldy air come
out at the door, in which there is the smell of soap, pickles,
pepper, candles, and coffee, all at one whiff. Then there are
the two parlors : the parlor in which we sit of an evening, my
mother and I and Peggotty — for Peggotty is quite our com-
panion, when her work is done and we are alone — and the
best parlor where we sit on a Sunday ; grandly, but not so
comfortably. There is something of a doleful air about that
room to me, for Peggotty has told me — I don't know when,
but apparently ages ago — about my father's funeral, and the
company having their black cloaks put on. One Sunday night
my mother reads to Peggotty and me in there, how Lazarus was
raised up from the dead. And I am so frightened that they
are afterwards obliged to take me out of bed, and show me the
quiet churchyard out of the bedroom window, with the dead
all lying in their graves at rest, below the solemn moon.

~ There is nothing half so green that I know anywhere, as



16 THE PERSON AL HISTOBY AND EXPERIENCE

the grass of that churchyard; nothing half so shady as its
trees ; nothing half so quiet as its tombstones. The sheep are
feeding there, when I kneel up, early in the morning, in my
little bed in a closet within my mother's room, to look out at
it ; and I see the red light shining on the sun-dial, and think
within myself, " Is the sun-dial glad, I wonder, that it can
tell the time again ? "

Here is our pew in the church. What a high-backed pew !
With a window near it, out of which our house can be seen,
and is seen many times during the morning's service, by Peg-
gotty, who likes to make herself as sure as she can that it's
not being robbed, or is not in flames. But though Peggotty's
eye wanders, she is much offended if mine does, and frowns to j
me, as I stand upon the seat, that I am to look at the clergy-
man. But I can't always look at him — I know him without
that white thing on, and I am afraid of his wondering why I
stare so, and perhaps stopping the service to inquire — and
what am I to do ? It's a dreadful thing to gape, but I must
do something. I look at my mother, but she pretends not to
see me. I look at a boy in the aisle, and he makes faces at
iiie. I look at the sunlight coming in at the open door
through the porch, and there I see a stray sheep — I don't
mean a sinner, but mutton — half making up his mind to come
into the church. I feel that if I looked at him any longer, I
might be tempted to say something out loud ; and what would
become of me then ! I look up at the monumental tablets on
the wall, and try to think of Mr. Bodgers, late of this parish,
and what the feelings of Mrs. Bodgers must have been, when
affliction sore, long time Mr. Bodgers bore, and physicians
were in vain. I wonder whether they called in Mr. Chillip,
and he was in vain ; and if so, how he likes to be reminded of
it once a week. I look from Mr. Chillip, in his Sunday neck-
cloth, to the pulpit ; and think what a good place it would be
to play in, and what a castle it would make, with another boy
coming up the stairs to attack it, and having the velvet
cushion with the tassels thrown down on his head. In time
my eyes gradually shut up; and, from seeming to hear the
clergyman singing a drowsy song in the heat, I hear nothing,



OF DAVID C0PPERF1ELD. 17

until I fall off the seat with a crash, and am taken out, more
dead than alive, by Peggotty,

And now I see the outside of our house, with the latticed
bedroom windows standing open to let in the sweet-smelling
air, and the ragged old rooks 5 - nests still dangling in the elm-
trees at the bottom of the front garden. Now I am in the
garden at the back, beyond the yard where the empty pigeon-
house and dog-kennel are — a very preserve of butterflies, as
I remember it, with a high fence, and a gate and padlock ;
where the fruit clusters on the trees, riper and richer than
fruit has ever been since, in any other garden, and where my
mother gathers some in a basket, while I stand by, bolting
furtive gooseberries, and trying to look unmoved. A great
wind rises, and the summer is gone in a moment. We are
playing in the winter twilight, dancing about the parlor.
When my mother is out of breath and rests herself in an
elbow-chair, I watch her winding her bright curls round her
fingers and straightening her waist, and nobody knows better
than I do that she likes to look so well, and is proud of being
so pretty.

That is among my very earliest impressions. That, and a
sense that we were both a little afraid of Peggotty, and sub-
mitted ourselves in most things to her direction, were among
the first opinions — if they may be so called — that I ever
derived from what I saw.

Peggotty and I were sitting one night by the parlor fire,
alone. I had been reading to Peggotty about crocodiles. I
must have read very perspicuously, or the poor soul must have
been , deeply interested, for I remember she had a cloudy
impression, after I had done, that they were a sort of vege-
table. I was tired of reading, and dead sleepy ; but having
leave, as a high treat, to sit up until my mother came home
from spending the evening at a neighbor's, I would rather
have died upon my post (of course) than have gone to bed.
I had reached that stage of sleepiness when Peggotty seemed
to swell and grow immensely large. I propped my eyelids
open with my two forefingers, and looked perseveringly at her
as she sat at work ; at the little bit of wax-candle she kept for
her thread — how old it looked, being so wrinkled in all direc-
vol. i — 2



18 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

tions ! — at the little house with a thatched roof, where the
yard-measure lived ; at her work-box with a sliding lid, with a
view of St. Paul's Cathedral (with a pink dome) painted on
the top ; at the brass thimble on her finger ; at herself, whom
I thought lovely. I felt so sleepy, that I knew if I lost sight
of anything, for a moment, I was gone.

" Peggotty," says I, suddenly, " were you ever married ? "

" Lord, Master Davy ! " replied Peggotty. " What's put
marriage in your head ! "

She answered with such a start, that it quite awoke me.
And then she stopped in her work, and looked at me, with her
needle drawn out to its thread's length.

" But were you ever married, Peggotty ? " says I. " You
are a very handsome woman, an't you ? "

I thought her in a different style from my mother, certainly ;
but of another school of beauty, I considered her a perfect
example. There was a red velvet footstool in the best parlor,
on which my mother had painted a nosegay. The ground-
work of that stool, and Peggotty's complexion, appeared to me
to be one and the same thing. The stool was smooth, and
Peggotty was rough, but that made no difference.

" Me handsome, Davy ! " said Peggotty. " Lawk, no, my
dear ! But what put marriage in your head ? "

" I don't know ! — You mustn't marry more than one person
at a time, may you, Peggotty ? "

" Certainly not," says Peggotty, with the promptest decision.

" But if you marry a person, and the person dies, why then
you may marry another person, mayn't you, Peggotty ? "

"You may," says Peggotty, "if you choose, my dear.
That's a matter of opinion."

" But what is your opinion, Peggotty ? " said I.

I asked her and looked curiously at her, because she looked
so curiously at me.

" My opinion is," said Peggotty, taking her eyes from me,
after a little indecision, and going on with her work, " that I
never was married myself, Master Davy, and that I don't
expect to be. That's all I know about the subject."

"You an't cross, I suppose, Peggotty, are you?" said I,
after sitting quiet for a minute.



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 19

I really thought she was, she had been so short with me;
but I was quite mistaken : for she laid aside her work (which
was a stocking of her own) and opening her arms wide, took
my curly head within them, and gave it a good squeeze. I
know it was a good squeeze, because, being very plump, when-
ever she made any little exertion after she was dressed, some
of the buttons on the back of her gown flew off. And I recol-
lect two bursting to the opposite side of the parlor, while she
was hugging me. '

"Now let me hear some more about the Crorkmdills, said
Peggotty, who was not quite right in the name yet, " for I
an't heard half enough."

I couldn't quite understand why Peggotty looked so queer
or why she was so ready to go back to the crocodiles. How-
ever, we returned to those monsters, with fresh wakefulness
on my part, and we left their eggs in the sand for the sun to
hatch ; and we ran away from them, and baffled them by con-
stantly turning, which they were unable to do quickly, on
account of their unwieldy make ; and we went into the water
after them, as natives, and put sharp pieces of timber down
their throats ; and in short we ran the whole crocodile gaunt-
let. I did, at least ; but I had my doubts of Peggotty, who
was thoughtfully sticking her needle into various parts of her
face and arms, all the time.

We had exhausted the crocodiles, and begun with the alliga-
tors, when the garden-bell rang. We went out to the door ;
and there was my mother, looking unusually pretty, I thought,
and with her a gentleman with beautiful black hair and whis-
kers, who had walked home with us from church last Sunday.
As my mother stooped down on the threshold to take me in
her arms and kiss me, the gentleman said I was a more highly
privileged little fellow than a monarch — or something like
that ; for my later understanding comes, I am sensible, to my

aid here.

" What does that mean ? " I asked him, over her shoulder.

He patted me on the head ; but somehow, I didn't like him
or his deep voice, and I was jealous that his hand should touch
my mother's in touching me — which it did. I put it away as
well as I could.



20 THE PERSONAL HISTOBT AND EXPERIENCE

" Oh Davy ! " remonstrated my mother.

" Dear boy ! " said the gentleman. " I cannot wonder at his
devotion ! "

I never saw such a beautiful color on my mother's face
before. She gently chid me for being rude ; and, keeping me
close to her shawl, turned to thank the gentleman for taking
so much trouble as to bring her home. She put out her hand
to him as she spoke, and, as he met it with his own, she glanced,
I thought, at me.

"Let us say ' good night/ my fine boy," said the gentleman,
when he had bent his head — I saw him ! — over my mother's
little glove.

" Good night ! " said I.

" Come ! Let us be the best friends in the world ! " said the
gentleman, laughing. " Shake hands ! "

My right hand was in my mother's left, so I gave him the
other.

" Why that's the wrong hand, Davy ! " laughed the gentle-
man.

My mother drew my right hand forward, but I was resolved,
for my former reason, not to give it him, and I did not. I
gave him the other, and he shook it heartily, and said I was a
brave fellow, and went away.

At this minute I see him turn round in the garden, and give
us a last look with his ill-omened black eyes, before the door
was shut.

Peggotty, who had not said a word or moved a finger, secured
the fastenings instantly, and we all went into the parlor. My
mother, contrary to her usual habit, instead of coming to the
elbow-chair by the fire, remained at the other end of the room,
and sat singing to herself.

— "Hope you have had a pleasant evening, ma'am/' said
Peggotty, standing as stiff as a barrel in the centre of the
room, with a candlestick in her hand.

u Much obliged to you, Peggotty/' returned my mother, in a
cheerful voice, "I have had a very pleasant evening."

"A stranger or so makes an agreeable change," suggested
Peggotty.

" A very agreeable change, indeed," returned my mother.





Peggotty continuing to stand motionless in the middle of
the room, and my mother resuming her singing, I fell asleep,
though I was not so sound asleep but that I could hear voices,
without hearing what they said. When I half awoke from
this uncomfortable doze, I found Peggotty and my mother
both in tears, and both talking.

"Not such a one as this, Mr. Copperfield wouldn't have
liked," said Peggotty. « That I say, and that I swear ! "

" Good Heavens ! " cried my mother, " you'll drive me mad !
Was ever any poor girl so ill-used by her servants as I am !
Why do I do myself the injustice of calling myself a girl ?
Have I never been married, Peggotty ? "

" God knows you have, ma'am," returned Peggotty.

"Then how can you dare," said my mother — "yon know I
don't mean how can you dare, Peggotty, but how can you have
the heart — to make me so uncomfortable and say such bitter
things to me, when you are well aware' that I haven't, out of
this place, a single friend to turn to ! "

"The more's the reason," returned Peggotty, "for saying
that it won't do. No ! That it won't do. No ! No price
could make it do. No!"— I thought Peggotty would have
thrown the candlestick away, she was so emphatic with it.

"How can you be so aggravating," said my mother, shed-
ding more tears than before, "as to talk in such an unjust
manner! How can you go on as if it was all settled and
arranged, Peggotty, when I tell you over and over again, you
cruel thing, that beyond the commonest civilities nothing has
passed! You talk of admiration. What am I to do ? If
people are so silly as to indulge the sentiment, is it my fault ?
What am I to do, I ask you ? Would you wish me to shave
my head and black my face, or disfigure myself with a burn,
or a scald, or something of that sort ? I dare say you would,
Peggotty. I dare say you'd quite enjoy it."

Peggotty seemed to take this aspersion very much to heart,
I thought.

" And my dear boy," cried my mother, coming to the elbow-
chair in which I was, and caressing me, " my own little Davy !
Is it to be hinted to me that I am wanting in affection for my
precious treasure, the dearest little fellow that ever was ! "



22 THE PERSONAL HISTOBY AND EXPERIENCE

" Nobody never went and hinted no such a thing," said
Peggotty.

" You did, Peggotty ! " returned my mother. " You know
you did. What else was it possible to infer from what you
said, you unkind creature, when you know as well as I do,
that on his account only last quarter I wouldn't buy ur^self a
new parasol, though that old green one is frayed the whole
way up, and the fringe is perfectly mangy. You know it is,
Peggotty. You can't deny it." Then, turning affectionately
to me, with her cheek against mine, " Am I a naughty mamma
to you, Davy? Am I a nasty, cruel, selfish, bad mamma?
Say I am, my child ; say c yes/ dear boy, and Peggotty will
love you, and Peggotty's love is a great deal better than mine,
Davy. " I don't love you at all, do I ? "

At this, we all fell a-crying together. I think I was the
loudest of the party, but I am sure we were all sincere about
it. I was quite heart-broken myself, and am afraid that in
the first transports of wounded tenderness I called Peggotty
a "Beast." That honest creature was in deep affliction, I
remember, and must have become quite buttonless on the
occasion ; for a little volley of those explosives went off, when,
after having made it up with my mother, she kneeled down by
the elbow-chair, and made it up with me.

We went to bed greatly dejected. My sobs kept waking
me, for a long time ; and when one very strong sob quite
hoisted me up in bed, I found my mother sitting on the cover-
let, and leaning over me. I fell asleep in her arms, after that,
and slept soundly.

Whether it was the following Sunday when I saw the gen-
tleman again, or whether there was any greater lapse of time
before he re-appeared, I cannot recall. I don't profess to be
clear about dates. But there he was, in church, and he walked
home with us afterwards. He came in, too, to look at a famous
geranium we had, in the parlor-window. It did not appear to
me that he took much notice of it, but before he went he asked
my mother to give him a bit of the blossom. She begged him
to choose it for himself, but he refused to do that — I could
not understand why — so she plucked it for him ? and gave it
into his hand. He said he would never, never, part with it





any more ; and I thought he must be quite a fool not to know
that it would fall to pieces in a day or two.

Peggotty began to be less with us, of an evening, than she
had always been. My mother deferred to her very much —
more than usual, it occurred to me — and we were all three
excellent friends ; still we were different from what we used
to be, and were not so comfortable among ourselves. Some-
times I fancied that Peggotty perhaps objected to my mother's
wearing all the pretty dresses she had in her drawers, or to
her going so often to visit at that neighbor's ; but I couldn't,
to my satisfaction, make out how it was.

Gradually, I became used to seeing the gentleman with the
black whiskers. I liked him no better than at first, and had
the same uneasy jealousy of him ; but if I had any reason for
it beyond a child's instinctive dislike, and a general idea that
Peggotty and I could make much of my mother without any
help, it certainly was not the reason that I might have found
if I had been older. No such thing came into my mind, or
near it. I could observe, in little pieces, as it were ; but as to
making a net of a number of these pieces, and catching any-
body in it, that was, as yet, beyond me.

One autumn morning I was with my mother in the front
garden, when Mr. Murdstone — I knew him by that name now
— came by, on horseback. He reined up his horse to salute
my mother, and said he was going to Lowestoft to see some
friends who were there with a yacht, and merrily proposed to
take me on the saddle before him if I would like the ride.

The air was so clear and pleasant, and the horse seemed to
like the idea of the ride so much himself, as he stood snorting
and pawing at the garden-gate, that I had a great desire to go.
bo I was sent up stairs to Peggotty to be made spruce ; and in
uhe meantime Mr. Murdstone dismounted, and, with his horse's
uridle drawn over his arm, walked slowly up and down on the
outer side of the sweetbriar fence, while my mother walked
slowly up and down on the inner to keep him company. I
recollect Peggotty and I peeping out at them from my little
window ; I recollect how closely they appeared to be examin-
ing the sweetbriar between them, as they strolled along ; and
how, from being in a perfectly angelic temper, Peggotty turned



24 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

cross in a moment, and brushed my hair the wrong way, exces-
sively hard.

Mr. Murdstone and I were soon off, and trotting along on
the green turf by the side of the road. .He held me quite
easily with one arm, and I don't think I was restless usually ;
but I could not make up my mind to sit in front of him with-
out turning my head sometimes, and looking up in his face.
He had that kind of shallow black eye — I want a better word
to express an eye that has no depth in it to be looked into — -
which, when it is abstracted, seems from some peculiarity of
light to be disfigured, for a moment at a time, by a cast. Sev-
eral times when I glanced at him, I observed that appearance
with a sort of awe, and wondered what he was thinking about
so closely. His hair and whiskers were blacker and thicker,
looked at so near, than even I had given them credit for being.
A squareness about the lower part of his face, and the dotted
indication of the strong black beard he shaved close every day,
reminded me of the wax-work that had travelled into our
neighborhood some half-a-year before. This, his regular eye-
brows, and the rich white, and black, and brown, of his com-
plexion — confound his complexion, and his memory ! — made
me think him, in spite of my misgivings, a very handsome man.
I have no doubt that my poor dear mother thought him so too.

We went to an hotel by the sea, where two gentlemen were
smoking cigars in a room by themselves. Each of them was
lying on at least four chairs, and had a large rough jacket on.
In a corner was a heap of coats and boat-cloaks, and a flag,
all bundled up together.

They both rolled on to their feet in an untidy sort of man-
ner when we came in, and said " Halloa, Murdstone ! We
thought you were dead ! "
. " Not yet," said Mr. Murdstone.

" And who's this shaver ? " said one of the gentlemen, tak-
ing hold of me.

" That's Davy," returned Mr. Murdstone.

"Davy who ? n said the gentleman. " Jones ? "

" Copperfield," said Mr. Murdstone.

"What! Bewitching Mrs. Copperfield's incumbrance?
cried the gentleman. "The pretty little widow ? "





" Quinion," said Mr. Murdstone, " take care, if you please.,
Somebody's sharp."

"Who is ?" asked the gentleman, laughing.

I looked up, quickly ; being curious to know.

" Only Brooks of Sheffield/' said Mr. Murdstone.

I was quite relieved to find it was only Brooks of Sheffield ;
for, at first, I really thought it was I.

There seemed to be something very comical in the reputar
tion of Mr. Brooks of Sheffield, for both the gentlemen laughed
heartily when he was mentioned, and Mr. Murdstone was a
good deal amused also. After some laughing, the gentleman
whom he had called Quinion, said :

" And what is the opinion of Brooks of Sheffield, in refer-
ence to the projected business ? "

"Why, I don't know that Brooks understands much about
it at present," replied Mr. Murdstone ; " but he is not generally
favorable, I believe."

There was more laughter at this, and Mr. Quinion said h&
would ring the bell for some sherry in which to drink to
Brooks. This he did ; and when the wine came, he made me
have a little, with a biscuit, and, before I drank it, stand up
and say " Confusion to Brooks of Sheffield ! " The toast was
received with great applause, and such hearty laughter that it
made me laugh too; at which they laughed the more. In
short, we quite enjoyed ourselves.

* — We walked about on the cliff after that, and sat on the
grass, and looked at things through a telescope — I could
make out nothing myself when it was put to my eye, but I
pretended I could — and then we came back to the hotel to an
early dinner. All the time we were out, the two gentlemen
smoked incessantly — which, I thought, if I might judge from
the smell of their rough coats, they must have been doing
ever since the coats had first come home from the tailor's.
I must not forget that we went on board the yacht, where
they all three descended into the cabin, and were busy with
some papers. I saw them quite hard at work, when I looked
down through the open skylight. They left me, during this
time, with a very nice man with a very large head of red hair
and a very small shiny hat upon it, who had got a cross-barred



26 THE PERSONAL HISTOBT AND EXPERIENCE

shirt or waistcoat on, with u Skylark " in capital letters across
the chest. I thought it was his name ; and that as he lived on
board ship and hadn't a street-door to put his name on, he put
it there instead ; but when I called him Mr. Skylark, he said
it meant the vessel.

I observed all day that Mr. Murdstone was graver and
steadier than the two gentlemen. They were very gay and
careless. They joked freely with one another, but seldom with
him. It appeared to me that he was more clever and cold
than they were, and that they regarded him with something
of my own feeling. I remarked that once or twice when Mr.
Quinion was talking, he looked at Mr. Murdstone sideways, as
if to make sure of his not being displeased ; and that once ;
when Mr. Passnidge (the other gentleman) was in high spirits,
he trod upon his foot, and gave him a secret caution with his eyes,
to observe Mr. Murdstone, who was sitting stern and silent. Nor j
do I recollect that Mr. Murdstone laughed at all that day, except
at the Sheffield joke — and that, by the by, was his own.

We went home early in the evening. It was a very fine
evening, and my mother and he had another stroll by the
sweet-briar, while I was sent in to get my tea. When he was
gone, my mother asked me all about the day I had had, and
what they had said and done. I mentioned what they had
said about her, and she laughed, and told me they were impu-
dent fellows who talked nonsense — but I knew it pleased her.
I knew it quite as well as I know it now. I took the oppor-
tunity of asking if she was at all acquainted with Mr. Brooks
of Sheffield, but she answered No, only she supposed he must
be a manufacturer in the knife and fork way.

Can I say of her face — altered as I have reason to remem-
ber it, perished as I know it is — that it is gone, when here
it comes before me at this instant, as distinct as any face that
I may choose to look on in a crowded street ? Can I say
of her innocent and girlish beauty, that it faded, and was no
more, when its breath falls on my cheek now, as it fell that
night ? Can I say she ever changed, when my remembrance
brings her back to life, thus only; and, truer to its loving
youth than I have been, or man ever is, still holds fast what
it cherished then ?



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 27

I write of her just as she was when I had gone to bed after
this talk, and she came to bid me good night. She kneeled
down playfully by the side of the bed, and laying her chin
upon her hands, and laughing, said :

" What was it they said, Davy ? Tell me again. I can't
believe it."

" c Bewitching — ' " I began.

My mother put her hands upon my lips to stop me.

" It was never bewitching," she said, laughing. " It never
could have been bewitching, Davy. Now I know it wasn't ! "

"Yes it was. c Bewitching Mrs. Copperfield,' " I repeated,
stoutly. " And ' pretty.' '-

" No, no, it was never pretty. Not pretty," interposed my
mother, laying her fingers on my lips again.

" Yes it was. { Pretty little widow.' '* ,

" What foolish, impudent creatures ! " cried my mother,
laughing and covering her face. "What ridiculous men!
An't they ? Davy dear — "

"Well, ma."

"Don't tell Peggotty ; she might be angry with them. I
am dreadfully angry with them myself ; but I would rather
Peggotty didn't know."

I promised, of course ; and we kissed one another over and
over again, and I soon fell fast asleep.

It seems to me, at this distance of time, as if it were the
next day when Peggotty broached the striking and adventur-
ous proposition I am about to mention ; but it was probably
about two months afterwards.

We were sitting as before, one evening (when my mother
was out as before), in company with the stocking and the
yard measure, and the bit of wax, and the box with Saint
Paul's on the lid, and the crocodile book, when Peggotty,
after looking at me several times, and opening her mouth as
if she were going to speak, without doing it — which I thought
was merely gaping, or I should have been rather alarmed —
said coaxingly :

"Master Davy, how should you like to go along with me
and spend a fortnight at my brother's at Yarmouth?
Wouldn't that be a treat ? "



28 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" Is your brother an agreeable man, Peggotty ? " 1
inquired, provisionally.

" Oh what an agreeable man he is ! " cried Peggotty, hold-
ing up her hands. "Then there's the sea; and the boats
and ships ; and the fishermen ; and the beach ; and Am to
play with — "

Peggotty meant her nephew Ham, mentioned in my first
chapter; but she spoke of him as a morsel of English
Grammar.

I was flushed by her summary of delights, and replied that
it would indeed be a treat, but what would my mother say ?

"Why then I'll as good as bet a guinea," said Peggotty,
intent upon my face, " that she'll let us go. I'll ask her, if
you like, as soon as ever she comes home. There now ! "

"But what's she to* do while we're away ? " said I, putting
my small elbows on the table to argue the point. " She can't
live by herself."

If Peggotty were looking for a hole, all of a sudden, in the
heel of that stocking, it must have been a very little one
indeed, and not worth darning.

" I say ! Peggotty ! She can't live by herself, you know."

" Oh, bless you ! " said Peggotty, looking at me again at
last. " Don't you know ? She's going to stay for a fortnight
with Mrs. Grayper. Mrs. Grayper's going to have a lot of
company."

Oh ! If that was it, I was quite ready to go. I waited,
in the utmost impatience, until my mother came home from
Mrs. Grayper's (for it was that identical neighbor), to
ascertain if we could get leave to carry out this great idea.
Without being nearly so much surprised as I had expected,
my mother entered into it readily ; and it was all arranged
that night, and my board and lodging during the visit were
to be paid for.

The day soon came for our going. It was such an early
day that it came soon, even to me, who was in a fever of
expectation, and half afraid that an earthquake or a fiery
mountain, or some other great convulsion of nature, might
interpose to stop the expedition. We were to go in a carrier's
cart, which departed in the morning after breakfast. I would



OF DAVID GOTPERFIELD. . 29

have given any money to have been allowed to wrap myself
up over-night, and sleep in my hat and boots.

It touches me nearly now, although I tell it lightly, to
recollect how eager I was to leave my happy home ; to think
how little I suspected what I did leave for ever.

I am glad to recollect that when the carrier's cart was at
the gate, and my mother stood there kissing me, a grateful
fondness for her and for "Ehe old place I had never turned my
back upon before, made me cry. I am glad to know that my
mother cried too, and that I felt her heart beat against mine.

I am glad to recollect that when the carrier began to move,
my mother ran out at the gate, and called to him to stop, that
she might kiss me once more. I am glad to dwell upon the
earnestness and love with which she lifted up her face to
mine, and did so.

As we left her standing in the road, Mr. Murdstone came up
to where she was, and seemed to expostulate with her for
being so moved. I was looking back round the awning of the
cart, and wondered what business it was of his. Peggotty, .
who was also looking back on the other side, seemed anything
but satisfied; as the face she brought back into the cart
denoted.

I sat looking at Peggotty for some time, in a reverie on this
supposititious case : whether, if she were employed to lose me
like the boy in the fairy tale, I should be able to track my way
home again by the buttons she would shed.



30 . THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE



CHAPTER IIL

I HAVE A CHANGE.

The carrier's horse was the laziest horse in the world, I
should hope, and shuffled along, with his head down, as if he
liked to keep the people waiting to whom the packages were
directed. I fancied, indeed, that he sometimes chuckled au-
dibly over this reflection, but the carrier said he was only
troubled with a cough.

The carrier had a way of keeping his head down, like his
horse, and of drooping sleepily forward as he drove, with one
of his arms on each of his knees. I say "drove," but it struck
me that the cart would have gone to Yarmouth quite as well
without him, for the horse did all that; and as to conversation,
he had no idea of it but whistling.

Peggotty had a basket of refreshments on her knee, which
would have lasted us out handsomely, if we had been going to
London by the same conveyance. We ate a good deal, and
slept a good deal. Peggotty always went to sleep with her
chin upon the handle of the basket, her "hold of which never
relaxed ; aud I could not have believed unless I ha<jl heard her
do it, that one defenceless woman could have snored so much.

We made so many deviations up and down lanes, and were
such a long time delivering a bedstead at a public-house, and
calling at other places, that I was quite tired, and very glad,
when we saw Yarmouth. It looked rather spongy and soppy,
I thought, as I carried my eye over the great dull waste that
lay across the river; and I could not help wondering, if the
world were really as round as my geography-book said, how any
part of it came to be so flat. But I reflected that Yarmouth
might be situated at one of the poles ; which would account
for it.

As we drew a little nearer, and saw the whole adjacent
prospect lying a straight low line under the sky, I hinted to




o

(3
W
a.






00



OF DAVID COPPEJRFIELD. 31

Peggotty that a mound or so might have improved it ; . and
also that if the land had been a little more separated from the
sea, and the town and the tide had not been quite so much
mixed up, like toast and water, it would have been nicer. But
Peggotty said, with greater emphasis than usual, that we must
take things as we found them, and that for her part, she was
proud to call herself a Yarmouth Bloater.

When we got into the street (which was strange enough to
me) ; and smelt the fish, and pitch, and oakum, and tar, and
saAV the sailors walking about, and the carts jingling up and
down over the stones, I felt that I had done so busy a place an
injustice ; and said as much to Peggotty, who heard my expres-
sions of delight with great complacency, and told me it was
well kn,pwn (I suppose to those who had the good fortune to
be born Bloaters) that Yarmouth was, upon the whole, the
finest place in the universe.

" Here's my Am ! " screamed Peggotty, " growed out of
knowledge ! "

He was waiting for us, in fact, at the public-house; and
asked me how I found myself, like an old acquaintance. I
did not feel, at first, that I knew him as well as he knew me,
because he had never come to our house since the night I was
born, and naturally he had the advantage of me. But our
intimacy was much advanced by his taking me on his back to
carry me home. He was, now, a huge, strong fellow of six
feet high, broad in proportion, and round-shouldered ; but with
a simpering boy's face and curly light hair that gave him quite
a sheepish look. He was dressed in a canvas jacket, and a
pair of such very stiff trousers that they would have stood
quite as well alone, without any legs in them. And you
couldn't so properly have said he wore a hat, as that he
was covered in a-top, like an old building, with something
pitchy.

Ham carrying me on his back and a small box of ours under
his arm, and Peggotty carrying another small box of ours, we
turned down lanes bestrewn with bits of chips and little hil-
locks of sand, and went past gas-works, rope-walks, boat-build-
ers 3 yards, shipwrights' yards, ship-breakers' yards, caulkers'
yards, riggers' lofts, smiths' forges, and a great litter of such



32 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIEXCE

places, until we came out upon tlie dull waste I had already
seen at a distance ; when Ham said,

" Yon's our house, Mas'r Davy ! *

I looked in all directions, as far as I could stare over tht
wilderness, and away at the sea, and away at the river, but nc
house could I make out. There was a black barge, or some
other kind of superannuated boat, not far off, high and dry on
the ground, with an iron funnel sticking out of it for a chim-
ney and smoking very cosily 3 but nothing else in the way of
a habitation that was visible to me.

" That's not it ? " said L " That ship-looking thing ? »

"That's it, Mas'r Davy," returned Ham.

If it had been Aladdin's palace, roc's egg and all, I suppose
I coilld not have been more charmed with the romantic idea
of living in it. There was a delightful door cut in the side,
and it was roofed in, and there were little windows in it 3 but
the wonderful charm of it was, that it was a real boat which
had no doubt been upon the water hundreds of times, and
which had never been intended to be lived in, on dry land.
That was the captivation of it to me. If it had ever been
meant to be lived in. I might have thought it small, or incon-
venient, or lonely ; but never having been designed for any
such use, it became a perfect abode.

It was beautifully clean inside, and as tidy as possible.
There was a table, and a Dutch clock, and a chest of drawers,
and on the chest of drawers there was a tea-tray with a paint-
ing on it of a lady with a parasol, taking a walk with a mili-
tary-looking child who was trundling a hoop. The tray was
kept from tumbling down, by a Bible : and the tray, if it had
tumbled down, would have smashed a quantity of cups and
saucers and a teapot, that were grouped around the book. On
the walls there were some common colored pictures, framed
and glazed, of scripture subjects ; such as I have never seen
since in the hands of pedlers, without seeing the whole inte-
rior of Peggotty's brother's house again, at one view. Abraham
in red going to sacrifice Isaac in blue, and Daniel in yellow
cast into a den of green lions, were the most prominent of
these. Over the little mantel-shelf, was a picture of the Sarah
Jane lugger, built at Sunderland, with a real little wooden










33



stern stuck on to it ; a work of art, combining composition
with carpentry, which I considered to be one of the most en-
viable possessions that the world could afford. There were
some hooks in the beams of the ceiling, the use of which I did
not divine then; and some lockers and boxes and conveniences
of that sort, which served for seats and eked out the chairs.

All this, I saw in the first glance after I crossed the thresh-
old—childlike, according to my theory — and then Peggotty
opened a little door and showed me my bedroom. It was the
completest and most desirable bedroom ever seen— m the
stern of the vessel ; with a little window, where the rudder
used to go through ; a little looking-glass, just the right height
for me, nailed against the wall, and framed with oyster-
shells 5 a little bed, which there was just room enough to get
into; and a nosegay of seaweed in a blue mug on the table.
The walls were whitewashed as white as milk, and the patch-
work counterpane made my eyes qnite ache with its bright-
ness. One thing I particularly noticed in this delightful house,
was the smell of fish; which was so searching, that when I
took out my pocket-handkerchief to wipe my nose, I found it
smelt exactly as if it had wrapped up a lobster. On my impart-
ing this discovery in confidence to Peggotty, she informed me
that her brother dealt in lobsters, crabs, and crawfish; and I
afterwards found that a heap of these creatures, in a state ^ of
wonderful conglomeration with one another, and never leaving
off pinching whatever they laid hold of, were usually to be
found in a little wooden outhouse where the pots and kettles

were kept.

We were welcomed by a very civil woman in a white apron,
whom I had seen courtesying at the door when I was on Ham's
back, about a quarter of a mile off. Likewise by a most beau-
tiful little girl (or I thought her so) with a necklace of blue
beads on, who wouldn't let me kiss her when I offered to, but
ran away and hid herself. By and by, when we had dined m
a sumptuous manner off boiled dabs, melted butter, and pota-
toes, with a chop for me, a hairy man with a very good-natured
face came home. As he called Peggotty "Lass," and gave her
a hearty smack on the cheek, I had no doubt, from the general
propriety of her conduct, that he was her brother ; and so he

VOL. I — 3



34 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

turned out — being presently introduced to me as Mr. Peg-
gotty, the master of the house.

" Glad to see you, sir," said Mr. Peggotty. " You'll find us
rough, sir, but you'll find us ready."

I thanked him and replied that I was sure I should be
happy in such a delightful place.

" How's your ma, sir ? " said Mr. Peggotty. " Did you
leave her pretty jolly ? "

I gave Mr. Peggotty to understand that she was as jolly as
I could wish, and that she desired her compliments — which
was a polite fiction on my part.

u I'm much obleeged to her, I'm sure," said Mr. Peggotty.
" Well, sir, if you can make out here, for a f ortnut, 'long Svi'
her," nodding at his sister, "and Ham, and little Em'ly, we
shall be proud of your company."

Having done the honors of his house in this hospitable
manner, Mr. Peggotty went out to wash himself in a kettleful
of hot water, remarking that " cold would never get his muck
off." He soon returned, greatly improved in appearance;
but so rubicund, that I couldn't help thinking his face had
this in common with the lobsters, crabs, and crawfish, — that
it went into the hot water very black, and came out very red.

After tea, when the door was shut and all was made snug
(the nights being cold and misty now), it seemed to me the
most delicious retreat that the imagination of man would con-
ceive. To hear the wind getting up out at sea, to know that
the fog was creeping over the desolate flat outside, and to look
at the fire, and think that there was no house near but this
one, and this one a boat, was like enchantment. Little Em ; ly
had overcome her shyness, and was sitting by my side upon
the lowest and least of the lockers, which was just large enough
for us two, and just fitted into the chimney corner. Mrs.
Peggotty with the white apron, was knitting on the opposite
side of the fire. Peggotty fit her needle-work was as much at
home with Saint Paul's and the bit of wax-candle, as if they
had never known any other roof. Ham, who had been giving
me my first lesson in all-fours, was trying to recollect a scheme
of telling fortunes with the dirty cards, and was printing off
fishy impressions of his thumb on all the cards he turned.





4

Mr. Peggotty was smoking his pipe. I felt it was a time for
conversation and confidence.

" Mr. Peggotty ! " says I.

" Sir," says he.

" Did you give your son the name of Ham, because you lived
in a sort of ark ? "

Mr. Peggotty seemed to think it a deep idea, but answered :

"No, sir. I never giv him no name."

" Who gave him that name, then ? " said I, putting question
number two of the catechism to Mr. Peggotty.

" Why, sir, his father giv it him," said Mr. Peggotty.

" I thought you were his father ! "

"My brother Joe was his father," said Mr. Peggotty.

" Dead, Mr. Peggotty ? " I hinted, after a respectful pause.

" Drowndead," said Mr. Peggotty.

I was very much surprised that Mr. Peggotty was not
Ham's father, and began to wonder whether I was mistaken
about his relationship to anybody else there. I was so curious
to know, that I made up my mind to have it out with Mr.
Peggotty.

" Little Em'ly," I said, glancing at her. " She is your
daughter, isn't she, Mr. Peggotty ? "

" No, sir. My brother-in-law, Tom, was her father."

I couldn't help it. " — Dead, Mr. Peggotty ? " I hinted,
after another respectful silence.

" Drowndead," said Mr. Peggotty.

I felt the difficulty of resuming the subject^, but had not got
to the bottom of it yet, and must get to the bottom somehow.

So I said :

" Haven't you any children, Mr. Peggotty ? "

"No, master," he answered, with a short laugh. "I'm a
bacheldore."

" A bachelor ! " I said, astonished. " Why, who's that, Mr.
Peggotty ? " Pointing to the person in the apron who was
knitting.

" That's Missis Gummidge," said Mr. Peggotty.

" Gummidge, Mr. Peggotty ? "

But at this point Peggotty — I mean my own peculiar
Peggotty — made such impressive motions to me not to ask



36 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

any more questions, that I could only sit and look at all the
silent company, until it was time to go to bed. Then, in the
privacy of my own little cabin, she informed me that Ham
and Em'ly were an orphan nephew and niece, whom my host
had at different times adopted in their childhood, when they
were left destitute ; and that Mrs. Gum midge was the widow
of his partner in a boat, who had died very poor. He was but
a poor man himself, said Peggotty, but as good as gold and
as true as steel — those were her similes. The only subject,
she informed me, on which he ever showed a violent temper
or swore an oath, was this generosity of his ; and if it were
ever referred to by any one of them, he struck the table a
heavy blow with his right hand (had split it on one such oc-
casion), and swore a dreadful oath that he would be "Gormed"
if he didn't cut and run for good, if it was ever mentioned
again. It appeared, in answer to my inquiries, that nobody
had the least idea of the etymology of this terrible verb pas-
sive to be gormed ; but that they all regarded it as constitu-
ting a most solemn imprecation.

I was very sensible of my entertainer's goodness, and
listened to the women's going to bed in another little crib
like mine at the opposite end of the boat, and to him and Ham
hanging up two hammocks for themselves on the hooks I had
noticed in the roof, in a very luxurious state of mind, en-
hanced by my being sleepy. As slumber gradually stole
upon me, I heard the wind howling out at sea and coming on
across the flat so fiercely, that I had a lazy apprehension of
the great deep rising in the night. But I bethought myself
that I was in a boat, after all; and that a man like Mr.
Peggotty was not a bad 'person to have on board if anything
did happen.

Nothing happened, however, worse than morning. Almost
as soon as it shone upon the oyster-shell frame of my mirror
I was out of bed, and out with little Em'ly, picking up stones
upon the beach.

"You're quite a sailor, I supppose ? " I said to Em'ly. I
don't know that I supposed anything of the kind, but I felt
it an act of gallantry to say something ; and a shining sail
close to us made such a pretty little image of itself, at the



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 37

moment, in her bright eye, that it came into my head to say
this.

" No," replied Em'ly, shaking her head, " Tm afraid of the

sea."

"Afraid!" I said, with a becoming air of boldness, and
looking very big at the mighty ocean. " I ain't ! "

" Ah ! but it's cruel," said Em'ly. " I have seen it very
cruel to some of our men. I have seen it tear a boat as big
as our house all to pieces."

" I hope it wasn't the boat that — "

" That father was drownded in ? " said Em'ly. "No. Not
that one, I never see that boat."

" Nor him ? " I asked her.

Little Em'ly shook her head. " Not to remember ! "

Here was a coincidence ! I immediately went into an expla-
nation how I had never seen my own father ; and how my
mother and I had always lived by ourselves in the happiest
state imaginable, and lived so then, and always meant to live
so; and how my father's grave was in the churchyard near
our house,' and shaded by a tree, beneath the boughs of
which I had walked and heard the birds sing many a pleasant
morning. But there was some differences between Em'ly's
orphanhood and mine, it appeared. She h?id lost her mother
before her father ; and where her father's grave was no one
knew, except that it was somewhere in the depths of the
sea.

"Besides," said Em'ly, as she looked about for shells and
pebbles, " your father was a gentleman and your mother is a
lady ; and my father was a fisherman and my mother was
a fisherman's daughter, and my uncle Dan is a fisherman."

"Dan is Mr. Peggotty, is he ? " said I.

"Uncle Dan — yonder," answered Em'ly, nodding at the
boat-house.

"Yes. I mean him. He must be very good, I should
think ? "

" Good ? " said ' Em'ly. " If I was ever to be a lady, I'd
give him a sky-blue coat with diamond buttons, nankeen trou-
sers, a red velvet waistcoat, a cocked hat, a large gold watch,
a silver pipe, and a box of money.'*



38 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

I said I had* no doubt that Mr. Peggotty well deserved
these treasures. I must acknowledge that I felt it difficult to
picture him quite at his ease in the raiment proposed for him
by his grateful little niece, and that I was particularly doubt?
ful of the policy of the cocked hat ; but I kept these senti-
ments to myself.

" Little Em'ly had stopped and looked up at the sky in her
enumeration of these articles, as if they were a glorious vision.
We went on again, picking up shells and pebbles.

" You would like to be a lady ? " I said.

Em'ly looked at me, and laughed and nodded "yes."

"I should like- it very much. We would all be gentlefolks
together, then. Me, and uncle, and Ham, and Mrs. Gum-
midge. We wouldn't mind then, when there come stormy
weather. — iSTot for our own sakes, I mean. We would for the
poor fishermen's, to be sure, and we'd help 'em with money
when they come to any hurt."

This seemed to me to be a very satisfactory and therefore
not at all improbable picture. I expressed my pleasure in the
contemplation of it, and little Em'ly was emboldened to say,
shyly,

" Don't you think you are afraid of the sea, now ? "

It was quite enough to reassure me, but I have no doubt if
I had seen a moderately large wave come tumbling in, I should
have taken to my heels, with an awful recollection of her
drowned relations. However, I said "No," and I added,
" You don't seem to be, either, though you say you are ; " —
for she was walking much too near the brink of a sort of old
jetty or wooden causeway we had strolled upon, and I was
afraid of her falling over.

"I'm not afraid in this way," said little Em'ly. "But I
wake when it blows, and tremble to think of Uncle Dan and
Ham, and believe I hear 'em crying out for help. That's why
I should like so much to be a lady. But I'm not afraid in
this way. ;Not a bit. Look here ! "

She started from my side, and ran along a jagged timber
which protruded from the place we stood upon, and overhung
the deep water at some height, without the least defence.
The incident is so impressed on my remembrance, that if I



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 39

were a draughtsman I could draw its form here, I daresay,
accurately as it was that day, and little Em'ly springing
forward to her destruction (as it appeared to me), with a look
that I have never forgotten, directed far out to sea.

The light, bold, fluttering little figure turned and came back
safe to me, and I soon laughed at my fears, and at the cry I
had uttered ; fruitlessly in any case, for there was no one near.
But there have been times since, in my manhood, many times
there have been, when I have thought, Is it possible, among
the possibilities of hidden things, that in the sudden rashness
of the child and her wild look so far off, there was any
merciful attraction of her into danger, any tempting her
towards him permitted on the part of her dead father, that
her life might have a chance of ending that day. There has
been a time since when I have wondered whether, if the life
before her could have been revealed to me at a glance, and so
revealed as that a child could fully comprehend it, and if her
preservation could have depended on a motion of my hand, I
ought to have held it up to save her. There has been a time
since — I do not say it lasted long, but it has been — when I
have asked myself the question, Would it have been better
for little Em'ly to have had the waters close above her head
that morning in my sight ; and when I have answered Yes.

This may be premature. I have set it down too soon, per-
haps. But let it stand.

We strolled a long way, and loaded ourselves with things
that we thought curious, and put some stranded star-fish
carefully back into the water — I hardly know enough of the
race at this moment to be quite certain whether they had
reason to feel obliged to us for doing so, or the reverse —and
then made our way home to Mr. Peggotty's dwelling. We
stopped under the lee of the lobster-outhouse to exchange an
innocent kiss, and went into breakfast glowing with health
and pleasure.

"Like two young mavishes," Mr. Peggotty said. I knew
this meant, in our local dialect, like two young thrushes, and
received it as a compliment.

Of course I was in love with little Em'ly. I am sure I
loved that baby quite as truly, quite as tenderly, with greater



40 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

purity and more disinterestedness, than can enter into the best
love of a later time of life, high and ennobling as it is. I am
sure my fancy raised up something round that blue-eyed mite
of a child, which etherealized, and made a very angel of her.
If, any sunny forenoon, she had spread a little pair of wings
and flown away before my eyes, I don't think I should have
regarded it as much more than I had had reason to expect.

We used to walk about that dim old flat at Yarmouth in a
loving manner, hours and hours. The days sported by us,
as if Time had not grown up himself yet, but were a child
too, and always at play. I told Em'ly I adored her, and that
unless she confessed she adored mc I should be reduced to the
necessity of killing myself with a sword.- She said she did,
and I have no doubt she did.

As to any sense of inequality, or youthfulness, or other
difficulty in bur way, little Em'ly and I had no such trouble,
because we had no future. We made no more provision for
growing older, than we did for growing younger. We were
the admiration of Mrs. Gummidge and Peggotty, who used to
whisper of an evening when we sat, lovingly, on our little
locker side by side, " Lor ! wasn't it beautiful ! " Mr. Peggotty
smiled at us from behind his pipe, and Ham grinned all the
evening and did nothing else. They had something of the
sort of pleasure in us, I suppose, that they might have had in
a pretty toy, or a pocket model of the Colosseum.

I soon found out that Mrs. Gummidge did not always make
herself so agreeable as she might have been expected to do,
under the circumstances of her residence with Mr. Peggotty.
Mrs. Gummidge's was rather a fretful disposition, and she
whimpered more sometimes than was comfortable for other
parties in so small an establishment. I was very sorry for
her ; but there were moments when it would have been more
agreeable, I thought, if Mrs. Gummidge had had a convenient
•apartment of her own to retire to, and had stopped there until
her spirits revived.

Mr. Peggotty went occasionally to a public house called
The Willing Mind. I discovered this, by his being out on the
second or third evening of our visit, and by Mrs. Gummidge's
looking up at the Dutch clock, between eight and nine, and



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 41

saying he was there, and that, what was more, she had known
in the morning he would go there. •

Mrs. Gummidge had been in a low state all day, and had
burst into tears in the forenoon, when the fire smoked. "I
am a lone lorn crcetur'," were Mrs. Gummidge's words, when
that unpleasant occurrence took place, "and everythink goes
contrairy with me."

" Oh, it'll soon leave off," said Peggotty — I again mean our
Peggotty — "and besides, you know, it's not more disagreeable
to you than to us."

u l feel it more/' said Mrs. Gummidge.

It was a very cold day, with cutting blasts of wind. Mrs.
Gummidge's peculiar corner of the fireside seemed to me to be-
the warmest and snuggest in the place, as her chair was cer-
tainly the easiest, but it didn't suit her that day at all. She
was constantly complaining of the cold, and of its occasioning
a visitation in her back which she called "the creeps." At
last she shed tears on that subject, and said again that she was
"a lone lorncreetur' and everythink went contrairy with her."

"It is certainly very cold," said Peggotty. "Everybody
must feel it so."

"I feel it more than other people," said Mrs. Gummidge.

So at dinner ; when Mrs. Gummidge was always helped
immediately after me, to whom the preference was given as a
visitor of distinction. The fish were small :.nd bony, and the
potatoes were a little burnt. We all acknowledged that we
felt this something of a disappointment ; but Mrs. Gummidge
said she felt it more than we did, and shed tears again, and
made that former declaration with great bitterness.

Accordingly, when Mr. Peggotty came home about nine
• o'clock, this unfortunate Mrs. Gummidge was knitting in her
corner in a very wretched and miserable condition. Peggotty
had been working cheerfully. Ham had been patching up a
great pair of water-boots ; and I, with little Em'ly by my side,
had been reading to them. Mrs. Gummidge had never made
any other remark than a forlorn sigh, and had never raised
her eyes since tea.

"Well, Mates," said Mr. Peggotty, taking his seat, "and
how are you ? "



42 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" We all said something, or looked something, to welcome
him, except j\Its. Gummidge, who only shook her head over
her knitting.

" What's ainiss," said Mr. Peggotty, with a clap of his hands.
" Cheer up, old Mawther ! " (Mr. Peggotty meant old girl.)

Mrs. Gummidge did not appear to be able to cheer up.
She took out an old black silk handkerchief and wiped her
eyes ; but instead of putting it in her pocket, kept it out, and
wiped them again, and still kept it out, ready for use.

"What's amiss, dame ? " said Mr. Peggotty.

" ^Nothing," returned Mrs. Gummidge. "You've come from
The Willing Mind, Dan'l ? "

" Why yes, I've took a short spell at The Willing Mind to-
night," said Mr. Peggotty.

" Fm sorry I should drive you there," said Mrs. Gummidge.

" Drive ! I don't want no driving," returned Mr. Peggotty,
with an honest laugh. " I only go too ready."

"Very ready," said Mrs. Gummidge, shaking her head, and
wiping her eyes. " Yes, yes, very ready. I am sorry it should
be along of me that you're so ready."

" Along o' you ? It an't along o' you ! " said 3Ir. Peg-
gotty. ¥ Don't ye believe a bit on it."

"Yes, yes, it is," cried Mrs. Gummidge. "'I know what
I am. I know that I am a lone lorn creetur' and not only
that everythink goes contrairy with me, but that I go con-
trairy with everybody. Yes, yes. I feel more than other
people do, and I show it more. It's my misfortun'."

I really couldn't help thinking, as I sat taking in all this,
that the misfortune extended to some other members of that
family besides Mrs. Gummidge. But Mr. Peggotty made no
such retort, only answering with another entreaty to Mrs.
Gummidge to cheer up.

"I an't what I could wish myself to be," said Mrs. Gum-
midge. " I am far from it. I know what I am. My troubles
has made me contrair}^ I feel my troubles, and they make
me contrairy. I wish I didn't feel 'em, but I do. I wish I
could be hardened to 'em, but I an't. I make the house un-
comfortable. I don't wonder at it. I've made your sister so
all day, and Master Davy."



OF DAVID C0PPERF1ELD. 43

Here I was suddenly melted, and roared out "No, you
haven't, Mrs. Gummidge," in great mental distress.

"It's far from right that I should do it," said Mrs. Gum-
midge. " It an't a fit return. I had better go into the house
and die. I am a lone lorn creetur ; , and had much better not
make myself contrairy here. If thinks must go contrairy with
me, and I must go contrairy myself, let me go contrairy in my
parish. Dan'l, I'd better go into the Louse, and die and be a
riddance ! "

Mrs. Gummidge retired with these vords, and betook her-
self to bed. When she was gone, Mr. Peggotty, who had not
exhibited a trace of any feeling but the prof oundest sympathy,
looked round upon us, and nodding his head with a lively
expression of that sentiment still animating his face, said in
a whisper :

" She's been thinking of the old 'un ! "

I did not quite understand what old one Mrs. Gummidge
was supposed to have fixed her mind upon, until Peggotty,
on seeing me to bed, explained that it was the late Mr. Gum-
midge ; and that her brother always took that for a received
truth on such occasions, and that it always had a moving effect
upon him. Some time after he^ was in his hammock that night,
I heard him myself repeat to Ham, " Poor thing ! She's been
thinking of the old 'un ! " And whenever Mrs. Gummidge
was overcome in a similar manner during the remainder of
our stay (which happened some few times), he always said
the same thing in extenuation of the circumstance, and always
with the tenderest commiseration.

So the fortnight slipped away, varied by nothing but the
variation of the tide, which altered Mr. Peggotty's times of
going out and coming in, and altered Ham's engagements
also. When the latter was unemployed, he sometimes walked
with us to show us the boats and ships, and once or twice he
took us for a row. 1 don't know why one slight set of impres-
sions should be more particularly associated with a place than
another, though I believe this obtains with most people, in
reference especially to the associations of their childhood. I
never hear the name, or read the name, of Yarmouth, but I
am reminded of a certain Sunday morning on the beach, the



44 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

bells ringing for church, little Ein'ty leaning on my shoulder,
Ham lazily dropping stones into the water, and the sun, away
at sea, just breaking through the heavy mist, and showing us
the ships, like their own shadows.

At last the day came for going home. I bore up against
the separation from Mr. Peggotty and Mrs. Gummidge, but
my agony of mind at leaving little Em'ly was piercing. We
went arm-in-arm to the public-house where the carrier put up,
and I promised, on the road, to write to her. (I redeemed
that promise afterwards, in characters larger than those in
which apartments are usually announced in manuscript, as
being to let.) We were greatly overcome at parting; and if
ever, in my life, I have had a void made in my heart, I had
one made that day.

ISTow, all "the time I had been on my visit, I had been un-
grateful to my home again, and had thought little or nothing
about it. But I was no sooner turned towards it, than my
reproachful young conscience seemed to point that way with
a steady finger; and I felt, all the more for the sinking of
m} r spirits, that it was my nest, and that my mother was my
comforter and friend.

This gained upon me as we w.ent along ; so that the nearer
we drew, and the more familiar the objects became that we
passed, the more excited I was to get there, and to run into
her arms. But Peggotty, instead of sharing in these trans-
ports, tried to check them (though very kindly), and looked
confused and out of sorts.

Blunderstone Bookery would come, however, in spite of her,
when the carrier's horse pleased — and did. How well I
recollect it, on a cold gray afternoon, with a dull sky, threat-
ening rain ! -

The door opened, and I looked, half laughing and half cry-
ing in my pleasant agitation, for my mother. It was not she,
but a strange servant.

" Why, Peggotty ! " I said, ruefully, "isn't she come home ? "

"Yes, yes, Master Davy," said Peggotty. "She's come
home. Wait a bit, Master Davy, and I'll — Pll tell you some-
thing."

Between her agitation, and her natural awkwardness in get-





ting out of the cart, Peggotty was making a most extraordinary
festoon of herself, but I felt too blank and strange to tell her
so. When she had got down, she took me by the hand ; led
me, wondering, into the kitchen ; and shut the door.

"Peggotty!" said I, quite frightened. "What's the mat-
ter ? "

"Nothing's the matter, bless you, Master Davy dear!" she
answered, assuming- an air of sprightliness.

" Something's the matter, I'm sure. Where's mamma ? "
" Where's mamma, Master Davy ? " repeated Peggotty.
"Yes. Why hasn't she come out to the gate, and what
have we come in here for? Oh, Peggotty!" My eyes were
full, and I felt as if I were going to' tumble down.

"Bless the precious boy!" cried Peggotty, taking hold of
me. " What is it ? Speak, my pet ! "

« Not dead, too ! Oh, she's not dead, Peggotty ? "
Peggotty cried out No ! with an astonishing volume of
voice ; and then sat down, and began to pant, and said I had
given her a turn.

I gave her a hug to take away the turn, or to give her
another turn in the right direction, and then stood before her,
looking at her in anxious inquiry.

"You see, dear, I should have told you before now," said
Peggotty, "but I hadn't an opportunity. I ought to have
made it, perhaps, but I couldn't azackly " — that was always
the substitute for exactly, in Peggotty's militia of words —
" bring my mind to it."

" Go on, Peggotty," said I, more frightened than before.
"Master Davy," said Peggotty, untying her bonnet with a
shaking hand, and speaking in a breathless sort of way.
" What do you think ? You have got a Pa ! "

I trembled, and turned white. Something — I don't know
what, or how — connected with the grave in the churchyard,
and the raising of the dead, seemed to strike me like an un-
wholesome wind.

"A new one ? " said Peggotty.
" A new one ? " I repeated.

Peggotty gave a gasp, as if she were swallowing something
that was very hard, and, putting out her hand, said :



46 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

u Corae and see him."

" I don't want to see him."

— " And your mamma/' said Peggotty.

I ceased to draw back, and we went straight to the best
parlor, where she left me. On one side of the fire, sat my
mother; on the other, Mr. Murdstone. My mother dropped
her work, and arose hurriedly, but timidly I thought.

"Now, Claxa, my dear," said Mr. Murdstone. "Kecollect!
control yourself, always control yourself! Davy boy, how do
you do ? "

I gave him my hand. After a moment of suspense, I went
and kissed my mother : she kissed me, patted me gently on
the shoulder, and sat down again to her w r ork. I could not
look at her, I could not look at him, I knew quite well that
he was looking at us both ; and I turned to the window and
looked out there, at some shrubs that were drooping their
heads in the cold.

As soon as I could creep away, I crept up stairs. My old
dear bedroom was changed, and I was to lie a long way off. I
rambled down stairs to find anything that was like itself, so
altered it all seemed ; and roamed into the yard. I very soon
started back from there, for the empty dog-kennel was filled
up with a great dog — deep-mouthed and black-haired like
Him — and he was very angry at the sight of me, and sprung
out to get at me.







CHAPTER IV.

I FALL IZSTTO DISGRACE.

If the room to which my bed was removed, were a sentient
thing that could give evidence, I might appeal to it at this
day — who sleeps there now, I wonder ! — to bear witness for
me what a heavy heart I carried to it. I went up there,
hearing the dog in the yard bark after me all the way while I
climbed the stairs; and, looking as blank and strange upon
the room as the room looked upon me, sat down with my
small hands crossed, and thought.

I thought of the oddest things. Of the shape of the room,
of the cracks in the ceiling, of the paper on the wall, of the
flaws in the window glass making ripples and dimples on the
prospect, of the washing-stand being rickety on its three legs,
and having a discontented something about it, which reminded
me of Mrs. Grummidge under the influence of the old one. I
was crying all the time, but, except that I was conscious of
being cold and dejected, I am sure I never thought why I
cried. At last in my desolation I began to consider that I was
dreadfully in love with little Em'ly, and had been torn away
from her to come here, where no one seemed to want me, or to
care about me, half so much as she did. This made such a
very miserable piece of business of it, that I rolled myself up
in a corner of the counterpane, and cried myself to sleep.

I was awoke by somebody saying " Here he is ! " and uncov-
ering my hot head. My mother and Peggotty had come to look
for me, and it was one of them who had done it.

"Davy," said my mother. "What's the matter ? "

I thought it very strange that she should ask me, and
answered, " Nothing." I turned over on my face, I recollect, to
hide my trembling lip, which answered her with greater truth.

"Davy/' said my mother. "Davy, my child ! "

I dare say no words she could have uttered, would have



48 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

affected me so much, then, as her calling me her child. I hid
my tears in the bedclothes, and pressed her from me with my
hand, when she would have raised me up.

" This is your doing, Peggotty, you cruel thing ! " said my
mother. " I have no doubt at all about it. " How can you rec-
oncile it to your ^conscience, I wonder, to prejudice my own
boy against me, or against anybody who is dear to me ? What
do you mean by it, Peggotty ? "

Poor Peggotty lifted up her hands and eyes, and only an-
swered, in a sort of paraphrase of the grace I usually repeated
after dinner, "Lord forgive you, Mrs. Copperfleld, and for
what you have said this minute, may you never be truly
sorry ! "

"It's enough to distract me," cried my mother. "In my
honeymoon, too, when my most inveterate enemy might re-
lent, one would think, and not envy me a little peace of mind
and happiness. Davy, you naughty boy ! Peggotty, you savage
creature ! Oh, dear me ! " cried my mother, turning from one
of us to the other, in her pettish wilful manner, "what a
troublesome world this is, when one has the most right to
expect it to be as agreeable as possible V"

I felt the touch of a hand that I knew was neither hers nor
Peggotty's, and slipped to my feet at the bed-side. It was
Mr. Murdstone's hand, and he kept it on my arm as he said :

" What's this ? Clara, my love, have you forgotten ? —
Firmness, my dear ! "

" I am very sorry, Edward," said my mother. " I meant to
' be very good, but I am so uncomfortable."

" Indeed ! " he answered. " That's a bad hearing, so soon,
Clara."

" I say it's very hard I should be made so now," returned
my mother, pouting ; "and it is — very hard — isn't it ? "

He drew her to him, whispered in her ear, and kissed her.
I knew as well, when I saw my mother's head lean down upon
his shoulder, and her arm touch his neck — I knew as well
that he could mould her pliant nature into any form he chose,
as I know, now, that he did it.

"Go you below, my love," said Mr. Murdstone. "David
and I \ T ill come down, together. My friend," turning a dark-



OF DAVID COPPEEFIELD. 49

ening face on Peggotty, when he had watched my mother out,
and dismissed her with a nod and a smile: "do you know
your mistress's name ? "

" She has been my mistress a long time, sir/' answered Peg-
gotty. "I ought, to know it."

"That's true/' he answered. "But I thought I heard you,
as I came up stairs, address her by a name that is not
hers. She has taken mine, you know. Will you remem-
ber that ? "

Peggotty, with some uneasy glances at me, courtesied her-
self out of the room without replying ; seeing, I suppose, that
she was expected to go, and had no excuse for remaining.
When we two were left alone, he shut the door, and sitting on
a chair, and holding me standing before him, looked steadily
into my eyes. I felt my own attracted, no less steadily, to
his. As I recall our being opposed thus, face to face, I seem
again to hear my heart beat fast and high.

"David/' he said, making his lips thin, by pressing them
together, "if I have an obstinate horse or dog to deal with,
what do you think I do ? "

"I don't know."

"I beat him."

I had answered in a kind of breathless whisper, but I felt,
in my silence, that my breath was shorter now.

" I make him wince and smart. I say to myself, ' I'll con-
quer that fellow ; ' and if it were to cost him all the blood he
had, I should do it. What is that upon your face ? "

"Dirt," I said.

He knew it was the mark of tears as well as I. But if he
had asked the question twenty times, each time with twenty
blows, I believe my baby heart would have burst before I
would have told him so.

" You have a good deal of intelligence for a little fellow,"
he said, with a grave smile that belonged to him, " and you
understood me very well, I see. Wash that face, sir, and
come down with me."

He pointed to the washing-stand, which I had made out to
be like Mrs. Gummidge, and motioned me with his head to
obey him directly. I had little doubt then, and I have less

VOL, I — 4



50 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

doubt now, that he would have knocked rne down without the
least compunction, if I had hesitated.

"Clara, my dear," he said, when I had done his bidding,
and he walked me into the parlor, with his hand still on my
arm ; " you will not be made uncomfortable any more, I hope.
We shall soon improve our youthful humors."

God help me, I might have been improved for my whole
life, I might have been made another creature perhaps for
life, by . a kind word at that season. A word of encourage-
ment and explanation, of pity for my childish ignorance, of
welcome home, of reassurance to me that it was home, might
have made me dutiful to him in my heart henceforth, instead
of in my hypocritical outside, and might have made me
respect instead of hate him. I thought my mother was
sorry to see me standing in the room so scared and strange, and
that, presently, when I stole to a chair, she followed me with
her eyes more sorrowfully still — missing, perhaps, some free-
dom in my childish tread — but the word was not spoken, and
the time for it was gone.

We dined alone, we three together. He seemed to be very
fond of my mother — I am afraid I liked him none the better
for that — and she was very fond of him. I gathered from
what they said, that an elder sister of his was coming to stay
with them, and that she was expected that evening. I am not
certain whether I found out then or afterwards, that, without
being actively concerned in any business, he had some share
in, or some annual charge upon the profits of, a wine-merchant's
house in London, with which his family had been connected
from his great-grandfather's time, and in which his sister
had a similar interest ; but I may mention it in this place,
whether or no.

After dinner, when we were sitting by the fire, and I was
meditating an escape to Peggotty without having the hardi-
hood to slip away, lest it should offend the master of the
house, a coach drove up to the garden-gate, and he went out
to receive the visitor. My mother followed him. I was
timidly following her, when she turned round at the parlor-
door, in the dusk, and taking me in her embrace as she had
been used to do, whispered me to love my new father and be



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 51

obedient to him. She did this hurriedly and secretly, as if it
were wrong, but 'tenderly ; and, putting out her hand behind
her, held mine in it, until we came near to where he was
standing in the garden, where she let mine go, and drew hers
through his arm.

It was Miss Murdstone who was arrived, and a gloomy-
looking lady she was ; dark, like her brother, whom she
greatly resembled in face and voice ; and with very heavy eye-
brows, nearly meeting over her large nose, as if, being disabled
by the wrongs of her sex from wearing whiskers, she had
carried them to that account. She brought with her two
uncompromising hard black boxes, with her initials on the
lids in hard brass nails. When she paid the coachman she
took her money out of a hard steel purse, and she kept the
purse in a very jail of a bag which hung upon her arm by a
heavy chain, and shut up like a bite. I had never, at that
time, seen such a metallic lady altogether as Miss Murdstone
was.

She was brought into the parlor with many tokens of
welcome, and there formally recognized my mother as a new
and near relation. Then she looked at me, and said :

" Is that your boy, sister-in-law ? "

My mother acknowledged me.

" Generally speaking," said Miss Murdstone, " I don't like
boys. How d y ye do, boy ? "

Under these encouraging circumstances, I replied that I was
very well, and that I hoped she was the same ; with such an
indifferent grace, that Miss Murdstone disposed of me in two
words :

"Wants manner ! "

Having uttered which with great distinctness, she begged
the favor of being shown to her room, which became to me
from that time forth a place of awe and dread, wherein the
two black boxes were never seen open or known to be left
unlocked, and where (for I peeped in once or twice when she
was out) numerous little steel fetters and rivets, with which
Miss Murdstone embellished herself when she was dressed,
generally hung upon the looking-glass in formidable array.

As well as I could make out, she had come for good, and



52 THE PEE SON AL HISTOBY AND EXPERIENCE

had no intention of ever going again. She began to "help"
my mother next morning, and was in and out of the store-
closet all day, putting things to rights, and making havoc in
the old arrangements. Almost the first remarkable thing I
observed in Miss Murdstone was, her being constantly haunted
by a suspicion that the servants had a man secreted somewhere
on the premises. Under the influence of this delusion, she
dived into the coal-cellar at the most untimely hours, and
scarcely ever opened the door of a dark cupboard, without
clapping it to again, in the belief that she had got him.

Though there was nothing very airy about Miss Murdstone,
she was a perfect Lark t in point of getting up. She was up
(and, as I believe to this hour, looking for that man) before
anybody in the house was stirring. Peggotty gave it as her
opinion that she even slept with one eye open ; but I could
not concur in this idea ; for I tried it myself after hearing the
suggestion thrown out, and found it couldn't be done.

On the very first morning after her arrival she was up and
ringing her bell at cock-crow. When my mother came down
to breakfast and was going to make the tea, Miss Murdstone
gave her a kind of peck on the cheek, which was her nearest
approach to a kiss, and said :

"Xow, Clara, my dear, I am come here, you know, to relieve
you of all the trouble I can. You're much too pretty and
thoughtless " — my mother blushed but laughed, and seemed
not to dislike this character — " to have any duties imposed
upon you that can be undertaken by me. If you'll be so good
as give me your keys, my dear, I'll attend to all this sort of
thing in future."

From that time, Miss Murdstone kept the keys in her own
little jail all day, and under her pillow all night, and my
mother had no more to do with them than I had.

My mother did not suffer her authority to pass from her
without a shadow of protest. One night when Miss Murdstone
had been developing certain household plans to her brother, of
which he signified his approbation, my mother suddenly began
to cry, and said she thought she might have been consulted.

" Clara ! " said Mr. Murdstone, sternly. " Clara ! I wonder
at you."



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELB. 53

" Oh, it's very well to say you wonder, Edward ! " cried my
mother, "and it's very well for you to talk about firmness, but
you wouldn't like it yourself."

Firmness, I may observe, was the grand quality on which
both Mr. and Miss Murdstone took their "stand. However I
might have expressed my comprehension of it at that time, if
[ had been called upon, I nevertheless did clearly comprehend
in my own way, that it was another name for tyranny ; and for
a certain gloomy, arrogant, devil's humor, that was in them
both. The creed, as I should state it now, was this. Mr.
Murdstone was firm ; nobody in his world was to be so firm as
Mr. Murdstone, nobody else in his world was to be firm at all,
for everybody was to be bent to his firmness. Miss Murdstone
was an exception. She might be firm, but only by relationship,
and in an inferior and tributary degree. My mother was
another exception. She might be firm, and must be; but only
in bearing their firmness, and firmly believing there was no
other firmness upon earth.

"It's very hard," said my mother, "that in my own

house — "

" My own house ? " repeated Mr. Murdstone. " Clara ! "

" Our own house, I mean," faltered my mother, evidently
frightened — "I hope you must know what I mean, Edward —
it's very hard that in your own house I may not have a word
to say about domestic matters. I am sure I managed very
well before we were married. There's evidence," said my
mother, sobbing ; "ask Peggotty if I didn't do very well when
I wasn't interfered with ! "

"Edward," said Miss Murdstone, "let there be an end of
this. I go to-morrow."

"Jane Murdstone," said her brother, "be silent ! How dare
you to insinuate that you don't know my character better than
your words imply ? "

" I am sure," my poor mother went on, at a grievous disad-
vantage, and with many tears, " I don't want anybody to go.
I should be very miserable and unhappy if anybody was to go.
I don't ask much. I am not unreasonable. I only want to be
consulted sometimes. I am very much obliged to anybody
who assists me, and I only want to be consulted as a mere



5-1 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

form, sometimes. I thought you were pleased, once, with ray
being a little inexperienced and girlish, Edward — I am sur(
you said so — but you seem to hate me for it now, you are so
severe."

" Edward," said Miss Murdstone, again, "let there be an
end of this. I go to-morrow."

"Jane Murdstone," thundered Mr. Murdstone. "Will you
be silent ? How dare you ? "

Miss Murdstone made a jail-delivery of her pocket handker-
chief, and held it before her eyes.

"Clara," he continued, looking at my mother, "you sur-
prise me ! You astound me ! Yes, I had a satisfaction in the
thought of marrying an inexperienced and artless person, and
forming her character, and infusing into it some amount of
that firmness end decision of which it stood in need. But
w T hen Jane Mure stone is kind enough to come to my assistance
in this endeavor, and to assume for my sake, a condition some-
thing like a housekeeper's, and when she meets with a base
return — "

" Oh, pray, pray, Edward," cried my mother, " don't accuse
me of being ungrateful. I am sure I am not ungrateful. Xo
one ever said I was before. I have many faults, but not that.
Oh, don't, my dear ! "

"When Jane Murdsfcone meets, I say," he went on, after
waiting until my mother was silent, " with a base return, that
feeling of mine is chilled and altered."

" Don't my love, say that ! " implored my mother, very pite-
ously. " Oh, don't, Edward ! I can't bear to hear it. What-
ever I am, I am affectionate. I know I am affectionate. I
wouldn't say it, if I w r asn't certain that I am. Ask Peggotty.
I am sure she'll tell you Fm affectionate."

"There is no extent ot mere weakness, Clara," said Mr.
Murdstone in reply, "that can have the least waight with me.
You lose breath."

" Pray let us be friends," said my mother, " I couldn't live
under coldness or unkindness. I am so sorry. I have a great
many defects, I know, and it's very good of you, Edward, with
your strength of mind, to endeavor to correct them for me.
Jane, I don't object to anything. I should be quite broken-



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 55

hearted if you thought of leaving — " My mother was too
much overcome to go on.

" Jane Murdstone," said Mr. Murdstone to his sister, " any
harsh words between us are, I hope, uncommon. It, is not
my fault that so unusual an occurrence has taken place to-
night. I was betrayed into it by another. Nor is it your
fault. You were betrayed into it by another. Let us both
try to forget it. And as this," he added, after these magnan-
imous words, "is not a fit scene for the boy — David go to
bed!"

I could hardly find the door, through the tears that stood
in my eyes. I was so sorry for my mother's distress ; but I
groped my way out, and groped my way up to my room in the
dark, without even having the heart to say good night to Peg-
gotty, or to get a candle from her. When her coming up to
look for me, an hour or so afterwards, awoke me, she said that
my mother had gone to bed poorly, and that Mr. and Miss
Murdstone were sitting alone.

Going down next morning rather earlier than usual, I paused
outside the parlor door, on hearing my mother's voice. She
was very earnestly and humbly entreating Miss Murdstone's
pardon, which that lady granted, and a perfect reconciliation
took place. I never knew my mother afterwards to give an
opinion on any matter, without first appealing to Miss Murd-
stone, or without having first ascertained by some sure means,
what Miss Murdstone's opinion was ; and I never saw Miss
Murdstone, when out of temper (she was infirm that way),
move her hand towards her bag as if she were going to take
out the keys and offer to resign them to my mother, without
seeing that my mother was in a terrible fright.

The gloomy taint that was in the Murdstone blood, dark-
ened the Murdstone religion, which was austere and wrathful.
I have thought, since, that its assuming that character was a
necessary consequence of Mr. Murdstone's firmness, which
wouldn't allow him to let anybody off from the utmost weight
of the severest penalties he could find any excuse for. Be this
as it may, I well remember the tremendous visages with which
we used to go to church, and the changed air of the place.
Again, the dreaded Sunday comes round, and I file into the



0$ THE PERSONAL HISTOBY AND EXPERIENCE

old pew first, like a guarded captive brought to a condemned
service. Again, Miss Murdstone, in a black velvet gown, that
looks as if it had been made out of a pall, follows close upon
me ; then my mother ; then her husband. There is no Peggotty
now, as in the old time. Again, I listen to Miss Murdstone
mumbling the responses, and emphasizing all the dread words
with a cruel relish. Again, I see her dark eyes roll round the
church when she says " miserable sinners," as if she were call-
ing all the congregation names. Again, I catch rare glimpses
of my mother, moving her lips timidly between the two, with
one of them muttering at each ear like low thunder. Again,
I wonder with a sudden fear, whether it is likely that our good
old clergyman can be wrong, and Mr. and Miss Murdstone
right, and that all the angels in Heaven can be destroying
angels. Again, if I move a finger or relax a muscle of my
face, Miss Murdstone pokes me with her prayer-book, and
makes my side ache.

Yes, and again, as we walk home, I note some neighbors
looking at my mother, and at me, and whispering. Again, as
the three go on, arm-in-arm, and I linger behind alone, I fol-
low some of those looks, and wonder if my mother's step be
really not so light as I have seen it, and if the gaiety of her
beauty be really almost worried away. Again, I wonder
whether any of the neighbors call to mind, as I do, how we
used to walk home together, she and I ; and I wonder stupidly
about that, all the dreary dismal day.

There had been some talk on occasions of my going to
boarding-school. Mr. and Miss Murdstone had originated it,
and my mother had of course agreed with them. Nothing,
however, was concluded on the subject yet. In the meantime
I learnt lessons at home.

Shall I ever forget those lessons ! They were presided over
nominally by my mother, but really by Mr. Murdstone and
his sister, who were always present, and found them a favor-
able occasion for giving my mother lessons in that miscalled
firmness, which was the bane of both our lives. I believe I
was kept at home for that purpose. I had been apt enough
to learn, and willing enough, when my mother and I had
lived alone together. I can faintly remember learning the



OF DAVID COPPEJRFIELD. 57

alphabet at her knee. To this day, when I look upon the
fat black letters in the primer, the puzzling novelty of their
shapes, and the easy good-nature of and Q and S, seem to
present themselves again before me as they used to do. But
they recall no feeling of disgust or reluctance. On the con-
trary, I seem to have walked along a path of flowers as far as
the crocodile-book, and to have been cheered by the gentleness
of my mother's voice and manner all the way. But these
solemn lessons which succeeded those, I remember as the
death-blow at my peace, and a grievous daily drudgery and
misery. They were very long, very numerous, very hard —
perfectly unintelligible, some of them, to me — and I was gene-
rally as much bewildered by them as I believe my poor mother
was herself.

Let me remember how it used to be, and bring one morning
back again.

I come into the second-best parlor after breakfast, with my
books, and an exercise-book, and a slate. My mother is ready
for me at her writing-desk, but not half so ready as Mr.
Murdstone in his easy-chair by the window (though he pre
tends to be reading a book), or as Miss Murdstone, sittinr
near my mother stringing steel beads. The very sight oi
these two has such an influence over me, that I begin to feel
the words I have been at infinite pains to get into my head,
all sliding away, and going I don't know where. I wonder
where they do go, by the by ?

I hand the first book to my mother. Perhaps it is a gram-
mar, perhaps a history, or geography. I take a last drowning
look at the page as I give it into her hand, and start off aloud
at a racing pace while I have got it fresh. I trip over a word.
Mr. Murdstone looks up. I trip over another word. Miss
Murdstone looks up. . I redden, tumble over half-a-dozen words,
and stop. I think my mother would show me the book if she
dared, but she does not dare, and she says softly :

" Oh, Davy, Davy ! "

"Now, Clara," says Mr. Murdstone, "be firm with the boy.
Don't say <Oh, Davy, Davy!' That's childish. He knows
his lesson, or he does not know it."

"He does not know it," Miss Murdstone interposes, awfully.



58 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" I am really afraid he does not," says my mother.

"Then you see, Clara/' returns Miss Murdstone, "you should
just give him the book back, and make him know it."

"Yes, certainly," says my mother; "that is Avhat I intend
to do, my dear Jane. Now, Davy, try once more, and don't be
stupid."

I obey the first clause of the injunction by trying once
more, but am not so successful with the second, for I am very
stupid. I tumble down before I get to the old place, at a
point where I was all right before, and stop to think. But
I can't think about the lesson. I think of the number of
yards of net in Miss Murdstone's cap, or of the price of Mr.
Murdstone's dressing-gown, or any such ridiculous problem
that I have no business with, and don't want to have anything
at all to do with. Mr. Murdstone makes a movement of im-
patience which I have been expecting for a long time. Miss
Murdstone does the same. My mother glances submissively
at them, shuts the book, and lays it by as an arrear to be
worked out when my other tasks are done.

There is a pile of these arrears very soon, and it swells
like a rolling snow-ball. The bigger it gets, the more stupid
i" get. The case is so hopeless, and I feel that I am wallow-
ing in such a bog of nonsense, that I give up all idea of
getting out, and abandon myself to my fate. The despairing
way in which my mother and I look at each other, as I
blunder on, is truly melancholy. But the greatest effect in
these miserable lessons is when my mother (thinking nobody
is observing her) tries to give me the cue by the motion of her
lips. At that instant, Miss Murdstone, who has been lying in
wait for nothing else all along, says in a deep warning voice :

"Clara!"

My mother starts, colors, and smiles - faintly. Mr. Murd-
stone comes out of his chair, takes the book, throws it at me,
or boxes my ears with it, and turns me out of the room by the
shoulders.

Even when the lessons are done, the worst is yet to happen,
in the shape of an appalling sum. This is invented for me,
and delivered to me orally by Mr. Murdstone, and begins.
"If I go into a cheesemonger's shop, and buy five thousand





double-Gloucester cheeses at f ourpence-halfpenny each, present
payment " — at which I see Miss Murdstone secretly overjoyed.
I pour over these cheeses without any result or enlightenment
until dinner-time ; when, having made a Mulatto of myself by
getting the dirt of the slate into the pores of my skin, I have
a slice of bread to help me out with the cheeses, and am con-
sidered in disgrace for the rest of the evening.

It seems to me, at this distance of time, as if my unfortu-
nate studies generally took this course. I could have done
very well if I had been without the Murds tones j but the
influence of the Murdstones upon me was like the fascination
of two snakes on a wretched young bird. Even when I did
get through the morning with tolerable credit, there was not
much gained but dinner; for Miss Murdstone never could
endure to see me untasked, and if I rashly made any show of
being unemployed, called her brother's attention to me by
saying, " Clara, my dear, there's nothing like work — give your
boy an exercise ; " which caused me to be clapped down to some
new labor there and then. As to any recreation with other
children of my age, T had very little of that ; for the gloomy
theology of the Murdstones made all children out to be a
swarm of little vipers (though there was a child once set in
the midst of the Disciples), and held that they contaminated
one another.

The natural result of this treatment, continued, I suppose,
for some six months or more, was to make me sullen, dull, and
dogged. I was not made the less so, by my sense of being
daily more and more shut out and alienated from my mother.
I believe I should have been almost stupefied but for one cir-
cumstance.

It was this. My father had left a small collection of books
in a little room up stairs, to which I had access (for it adjoined
my own) and which nobody else in our house ever troubled.
From that blessed little room, Roderick Random, Peregrine
Pickle, Humphrey Clinker, Tom Jones, The Vicar of Wake-
field, Don Quixote, Gil Bias, and Robinson Crusoe, came out, a
glorious host, to keep me company. They kept alive my fancy,
and my hope of something beyond that place and time, —
they, and the Arabian Nights, and the Tales of the Genii, —



60 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

and did ine no harm ; for whatever harm was in some of them
was not there for me ; / knew nothing of it. It is astonishing
to me now, how I found time, in the midst of my porings and
blunderings over heavier themes, to read those books as I did.
It is curious to me how I could ever have consoled myself
under my small troubles (which were great troubles to me),
by impersonating my favorite characters in them — as I did —
and by putting Mr. and Miss Murdstone into all the bad ones
— which I did too. I have been Tom Jones (a child's Tom
Jones, a harmless creature) for a week together. I have sus-
tained my own idea of Eoderick Eandom for a month at a
stretch, I verily believe. I had a greedy relish for a few vol-
umes of Voyages and Travels — I forget what, now — that
were on those shelves ; and for days and days I can remember
to have gone about my region of our house, armed with the
centre-piece out of an old set of boot-trees — the perfect
realization of Captain Somebody, of the Eoyal British Navy,
in danger of being beset by savages, and resolved to sell his
life at a great price. The Captain never lost dignity, from
having his ears boxed with the Latin Grammar. I did ; but
the Captain was a Captain and a hero, in despite of all the
grammars of all the languages in the world, dead or alive.

This was my only and my constant comfort. When I think
of it, the picture always rises in my mind, of a summer
evening, the boys at play in the churchyard, and I sitting on my
bed, reading as if for life. Every barn in the neighborhood,
every stone in the church, and every foot of the churchyard,
had some association of its own, in my mind, connected with
these books, and stood for some locality made famous in them.
I have seen Tom Pipes go climbing up the church-steeple ; I
have watched Strap, with the knapsack on his back, stopping
to rest himself upon the wicket-gate ; and I know that Com-
modore Trunnion held that club with Mr. Pickle, in the parlor
of our little village alehouse.

The reader now understands as well as I do, what I was
when I came to that point of my youthful history to which I
am now coming again.

One morning when I went into the parlor with my books,
I found my mother looking anxious, Miss Murdstone looking



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 61

firm, and Mr. Murdstone binding something round the bottom
of a cane — a lithe and limber cane, which he left off binding
when I came in, and poised and switched in the air.

" I tell you, Clara," said Mr. Murdstone, " I have been often
flogged myself."

" To be sure ; of course," said Miss Murdstone.

" Certainly, my dear Jane," faltered my mother, meekly.
" But — but do you think it did Edward good ? "

" Do you think it did Edward harm, Clara ? " asked Mr.
Murdstone, gravely.

" That's the point ! " said his sister.

To this my mother returned, " Certainly, my dear Jane,"
and said no more.

I felt apprehensive that I was personally interested in this
dialogue, and sought Mr. Murdstone's eye as it lighted on
mine.

" oSTow, David," he said — and I saw that cast again, as he
.said it — "you must be far more careful to-day than usual."
He gave the cane another poise, and another switch ; and hav-
ing finished his preparation of it, laid it down beside him, with
an expressive look, and took up his book.

This was a good freshener to my presence of mind, as a
beginning. I felt the words of my lessons slipping off, not
one by one, or line by line, but by the entire page. I tried to
lay hold of them ; but they seemed, if I may so express it, to
have put skates on, and to skim away from me with a smooth-
ness there was no checking.

We began badly, and went on worse. I had come in, with
an idea of distinguishing myself rather, conceiving that I was
very well prepared ; but it turned out to be quite a mistake.
Book after book was added to the heap of failures, Miss Murd-
stone being firmly watchful of us all the time. And when we
came at last to the five thousand cheeses (canes he made it
that day, I remember), my mother burst out crying.

" Clara ! " said Miss Murdstone. in her warning voice.

"I am not quite well, my dear Jane, I think," said my
mother.

I saw him wink, solemnly, at his sister, as he rose and said,
taking up the cane :



62 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AXD EXPERIENCE

"Why, Jane, we can hardly expect Clara to bear, with per-
fect firmness, the worry and torment that David has occasioned
her to-day. That would be stoical. Clara is greatly strength-
ened and improved, but we can hardly expect so much from
her. David, you and I will go up stairs, boy."

As he took me out at the door, my mother ran towards us.
Miss Murdstone said, " Clara ! are you a perfect fool ? " and
interfered. I saw my mother stop her ears then, and I heard
her crying.

He walked me up to my room slowly and gravely — I am
certain he had a delight in that formal parade of executing
justice — and when we got there, suddenly twisted my head
under his arm.

"Mr. Murdstone! Sir!" I cried to him. "Don't! Pray
don't beat me ! I have tried to learn, sir, but I can't learn
while you and Miss Murdstone are by. I can't indeed ! "

" Can't you, indeed, David ? " he said. " We'll try that."

He had my head as in a vice, but I twined round him
somehow, and stopped him for a moment, entreating him not
to beat me. It was only for a moment that I stopped him,
for he cut me heavily an instant afterwards, and in the same
instant I qaught the hand with which he held me in my mouth,
between my teeth, and bit it through. It sets my teeth on
edge to think of it.

He beat me then, as if he would have* beaten me to death.
Above all the noise we made, I heard them running up the
stairs, and crying out — I heard my mother crying out — and
Peggotty. ' Then he was gone ; and the door was locked out-
side; and I was lying, fevered and hot, and torn, and sore,
and raging in my puny way, upon the floor.

How well I recollect, when I became quiet, what an unnat-
ural stillness seemed to reign through the whole house ! How
well I remember, when my smart and passion began to cool,
how wicked I began to feel !

I sat listening for a long while, but there was not a sound.
I crawled up from the floor, and saw my face in the glass, so
swollen, red, and ugly that it almost frightened me. My
stripes were sore and stiff, and made me cry afresh, when I
moved; but they were nothing to the guilt I felt. It lay





heavier on my breast than if I had been a most atrocious crim-
inal; I dare say.

It had begun to grow dark, and I had shut the window (I
had been lying, for the most part, with my head upon the sill,
by turns crying, dozing, and looking listlessly out), when the
key was turned, and Miss Murdstone came in with some bread
and meat, and milk. These she put down upon the table with-
out a word, glaring at me the while with exemplary firmness,
and then retired, locking the door after her.

.Long after it was dark I sat there, wondering whether any-
body else would come. When this appeared improbable for
that night, I undressed, and went to bed j and, there I began
to Avonder fearfully what would be done to me. Whether it
was a criminal act that I had committed ? Whether I should
be taken into custody, and sent to prison ? Whether I was at
all in danger of being hanged ?

I never shall forget the waking, next morning ; the being
cheerful and fresh for the first moment, and then the being
weighed down by the stale and dismal oppression of remem-
brance. Miss Murdstone reappeared before I was out of bed ;
told me, in so many words, that I was free to walk in the gar-
den for half an hour and no longer ; and retired, leaving the
door open, that I might avail myself of that permission.

I did so, and did so every morning of my imprisonment,
which lasted five days. If I could have seen my mother alone,
I should have gone down on my knees to her and besought her
forgiveness ; but I saw no one, Miss Murdstone excepted, dur-
ing the whole time — except at evening prayers in the parlor ;
to which I was escorted by Miss Murdstone after everybody
else was placed; where I was stationed, a young outlaw, all
alone by myself near the door ; and whence I was solemnly
conducted by my jailer, before any one arose from the devo-
tional posture. I only observed that my mother was as far off
from me as she could be, and kept her face another way so
that I never saw it j and that Mr. Murdstone's hand was bound
up in a large linen wrapper.

The length of those five days I can convey no idea of to any
one. They occupy the place of years in my remembrance.
The way in which I listened to all the incidents of the house



64 THE PERSONAL UISTOIIY AND EXPERIENCE






that made themselves audible to me ; the ringing of bells, the
opening and shutting of doors, the murmuring of voices, the
footsteps on the stairs ; to any laughing, whistling, or singing,
outside, which seemed more dismal than anything else to me
in my solitude and disgrace — the uncertain pace of the hours,
especially at night, when I would wake thinking it was morn-
ing, and find that the family were not yet gone to bed, and
that all the length of night had yet to come — the depressed
dreams and nightmares I had — the return of day, noon, after-
noon, evening, when the boys played in the churchyard, and I
watched them from a distance within the room, being ashamed
to show myself at the window lest they should know I was a
prisoner — the strange sensation of never hearing myself speak
— the fleeting intervals of something like cheerfulness, which
came with eating and drinking, and went away with it — the
setting in of rain one evening, with a fresh smell, and its com-
ing down faster and faster between me and the church, until
it and gathering night seemed to quench me in gloom, and
fear, and remorse — all this appears to have gone round and
round for years instead of days, it is so vividly and strongly
stamped on my remembrance.

On the last night of my restraint, I was awakened by hear-
ing my own name spoken in a whisper. I started up in bed,
and putting out my arms in the dark, said :

'" Is that you, Peggotty ? "

There was no immediate answer, but presently I heard my
name again, in a tone so very mysterious and awful, that I
think I should have gone into a fit, if it had not occurred to me
that it must have come through the keyhole.

I groped my way to the door, and putting my own lips to
the keyhole, whispered :

" Is that you, Peggotty, dear ? v

" Yes, my own precious Davy," she replied. "Be as soft
as a mouse, or the Cat'll hear us."

I understood this to mean Miss Murdstone, and was sensible
of the urgency of the case ; her room being close by.

"How's mamma, dear Peggotty? Is she very angry with
me?"

I could hear Peggotty crying softly on her side of the key-



OF I) AVID COPPERFIELD. 65

hole, as I was doing on mine, before she answered, "No. Not
very."

" What is going to be done with me, Peggotty, dear ? Do
you know ? "

"School. Near London," was Peggotty's answer. I was
obliged to get her to repeat it, for she spoke it the $rst time
quite down my throat, in consequence of my having forgotten
to take my mouth away from the keyhole and put my ear
there ; and though her words tickled me a good deal, I didn't
hear them.

"When Peggotty?"

¥ To-morrow."

"Is that the reason why Miss Murdstone took the clothes
out of my drawers ? " which she had done, though I have for-
gotten to mention it.

" Yes," said Peggotty. " Box."

" Sha'n't I see mamma ? "

"Yes," said Peggotty. "Morning."

Then Peggotty fitted her mouth close to the keyhole, and
delivered these words through it with as much feeling and
earnestness as a keyhole has ever been the medium of com-,
municating, I will venture to assert : shooting in each broken
little sentence in a convulsive little burst of its own.

" Davy, dear. If I ain't ben azackly as intimate with you.
Lately, as I used to be. It ain't because I don't love you.
Just as well and more, my pretty poppet. It's because 1
thought it better for you. And for some one else besides.
Davy, my darling, are you listening ? Can you hear ? "

"Ye — ye — ye — yes, Peggotty!" I sobbed.

"My own!" said Peggotty, with infinite compassion.
" What I want to say, is. That you must never forget me.
Por I'll never forget you. And I'll take as much care of your
mamma, Davy. As ever I took of you. And I won't leave her.
The day may come when she'll be glad to lay her poor head.
On her stupid, cross old Peggotty's arm again. And I'll write
to you, my dear. Though I ain't no scholar. And I'll — I'll
— " Peggotty fell to kissing the keyhole, as she couldn't kiss
me.

" Thank you, dear Peggotty ! " said I. " Oh, thank you !

VOL, I — 6



66 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

Thank yon ! Will you promise me one thing, Peggotty ?
"Will you write and tell Mr. Peggotty and little Eir.'ly and
Mrs. Gummidge and Hara, that I am not so bad as they might
suppose, and that I sent 'em all my love — especially to little
Em'ly ? Will you, if you please, Peggotty ? "

The kind soul promised, and we both of us kissed the key-
hole with the greatest affection — I patted it with my hand, I
recollect, as if it had been her honest face — and parted.
From that night there grew up in my breast, a feeling for
Peggotty which I cannot very well define. She did not replace
my mother ; no one could do that; but she came into a vacancy
in my heart, which closed upon her, ,and I felt towards her
something I have never felt for any other human being. It
was a sort of comical affection, too ; and yet if she had died, I
cannot think what I should have done, or how I should have
acted out the tragedy it would have been to me.

In the morning Miss Murdstone appeared as usual, and told
me I was going to school ; which was not altogether such news
to me as she supposed. She also informed me that when I
was dressed, I was to come down stairs into the parlor, and
have my breakfast. There, I found my mother, very pale and
with red eyes : into whose arms I ran, and begged her pardon
from my suffering soul.

"Oh, Davy!" she said. "That you could hurt any one I
love ! Try to be better, pray to be better ! I forgive you ;
but I am so grieved, Davy, that you should have such bad
passions in your heart."

They had persuaded her that I was a wicked fellow, and she
was more sorry for that, than for my going away. I felt it
sorely. I tried to eat my parting breakfast, but my tears
dropped upon my bread-and-butter, and trickled into my tea.
I saw my mother look at me sometimes, and then glance at the
watchful Miss Murdstone, and then look down, or look away.

"Master Copperfield's box there?" said Miss Murdstone,
when wheels were heard at the gate.

I looked for Peggotty, but it was not she ; neither she nor
Mr. Murdstone appeared. My former acquaintance, the car-
rier, was at the door ; the box was taken out to his cart and
lifted in.






OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 67

" Clara ! " said Miss Murdstone, in her warning note.

" Keady, my dear Jane," returned my mother. c< Good by,
Davy. You are going for your own good. Good by, my
child. You will come home in the holidays, and be a better
boy."

" Clara ! " Miss Murdstone repeated.

" Certainly, my dear Jane," replied my mother, who was
holding me. " I forgive you, my dear boy. God bless you* ! "

" Clara ! " Miss Murdstone repeated.

Miss Murdstone was good enough to take me out to the
cart, and to say on the way that she hoped I would repent,
before I came to a bad end ; and then I got into the cart, and
the lazy horse walked off with it.



68 THE PEBSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE



CHAPTER V.

I AM SENT AWAY FROM HOME.






We might have gone about half a mile, and my pocket-
handkerchief was quite wet through, when the carrier stopped
short.

Looking out to ascertain for what, I saw, to my amazement,
Peggotty burst from a hedge and climb into the cart. She
took me in both her arms, and squeezed me to her stays until
the pressure on my nose was extremely painful, though I.
never thought of that till afterwards when I found it very
tender. Not a single word did Peggotty speak. Releasing
one of her arms, she put it down in her pocket to the elbow,
and brought out some paper bags of cakes which she crammed
into my pockets, and a purse which she put into my hand, but
not one word did she say. After another and a final squeeze
with both arms, she got down from the cart, and ran away ;
and my belief is, and has always been, without a solitary
button on her gown. I picked up one, of several that were
rolling about, and treasured it as a keepsake for a long time.

The carrier looked at me, as if to inquire if she were com-
ing back. I shook my head, and said I thought not. u Then
come up," said the carrier to the lazy horse, who came up
accordingly.

Having by this time cried as much as I possibly could, I
began to think it was of no use crying any more, especially as
neither Eoderick Random, nor that Captain in the Royal
British Navy had ever cried, that I could remember, in trying
situations. The carrier seeing me in this resolution, proposed
that my pocket-handkerchief should be spread upon the horse's
back to dry. I thanked him and assented ; and particularly
small it looked, under those circumstances.

I had now leisure to examine the purse. It was a stiff
leather purse, with a snap, and had three bright shillings in





it, which Peggotty had evidently polished up with whitening,
for my greater delight. But its most precious contents were
two half-crowns folded together in a bit of paper, on which
was written, in my mother's hand, "For Davy. With my
love." I was so overcome by this, that I asked the carrier to
be so good as reach me my pocket-handkerchief again, but he
said he thought I had better do without it ; and I thought I
really had ; so I wiped my eyes on my sleeve and stopped my-
self.

For good, too ; though, in consequence of my previous emo-
tions, I was still occasionally seized with a stormy sob. After
we had jogged on for some little time, I asked the carrier if
•he was going all the way.

" All the way where ? " inquired the carrier,

" There," I said.

"Where's there?" inquired the carrier.

"Near London," I said.

"Why that horse," said the carrier, jerking the rein to
point him out, " would be deader than pork afore he got over
half the ground."

" Are you only going to Yarmouth then ? " I asked.

"That's about it," said the carrier. "And there I shall
take you to the stage-cutch, and the stage-cutch that'll take
you to — wherever it is."

As this was a great deal for the carrier (whose name was
Mr. Barkis) to say — he being, as I observed in a former
chapter, of a phlegmatic temperament, and not at all conver-
sational — I offered him a cake as a mark of attention, which
he ate at one gulp, exactly like an elephant, and which made
no more impression on his big face than it would have done
on an elephant's.

"Did she make 'em, now ? " said Mr. Barkis, always leaning
forward, in his slouching way, on the footboard of the cart
with an arm on each knee.

" Peggotty, do you mean, sir ? "

" Ah ! " said Mr. Barkis. " Her."

"Yes. She makes all our pastry and does all our cooking."

" Do she though ? " said Mr. Barkis.

He made up his mouth as if to whistle, but he didn't



7U THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

whistle. He sat looking at the horse's ears, as if he saw
something new there; and sat so, for a considerable time.
By and by, he said :

" Eo sweethearts, I b'lieve ? "

" Sweetmeats did you say, Mr. Barkis ? " For I thought he
wanted something else to eat, and had pointedly alluded to
that description of refreshment.

" Hearts," said Mr. Barkis. " Sweethearts ; no person walks
with her ! "

"WithPeggotty ?"

"Ah!" he said. "Her."

"Oh, no. She never had a sweetheart."

" Didn't she though ! " said Mr. Barkis.

Again he made up his mouth to whistle, and again he didn't
whistle, but sat looking at the horse's ears.

" So she makes," said Mr. Barkis, after a long interval of
reflection, " all the apple parsties, and doos all the cooking, do
she?"

I replied, that such was the fact.

"Well. I'll tell you what," said Mr. Barkis. "P'raps you
might be writin' to her ? "

"I shall certainly write to her," I rejoined.

"Ah!" he said, slowly turning his eyes towards me.
" Well ! If you was writin' to her, p'raps you'd recollect to
say that Barkis was willin' ; would you ? "

" That Barkis is willing," I repeated, innocently. " Is that
all the message ? "

"Ye — es," he said, considering. "Ye — es. Barkis is
willin'."

"But you will be at Blunderstone again to-morrow, Mr.
Barkis," I said, faltering a little at the idea of my being far
away from it then, " and could give your own message so much
better."

As he repudiated this suggestion, however, with a jerk of
his head, and once more confirmed his previous request by
saying, with profound gravity, " Barkis is willin'. That's the
message," I readily undertook its transmission. While I was
waiting for the coach in the hotel at Yarmouth that very
afternoon, I proo-ured a sheet of paper and an inkstand, and



OF DAVID COPPEEFIELD. 71

wrote a note to Peggotty which ran thus : " My dear Peggotty.
I have come here safe. Barkis is willing. My love to
mamma. Yours affectionately. P.S. He says he particularly
wants you to know — Barkis is willing"

When I had taken this commission on myself prospectively,
Mr. Barkis relapsed into perfect silence ; and I, feeling quite
worn out by all that had happened lately, lay down on a sack
in the cart and fell asleep. I slept soundly until we got to
Yarmouth ; which was so entirely new and strange to me in
the inn-yard to which we drove, that I at once abandoned a
latent hope I had had of meeting with some of Mr. Peggotty's
family there, perhaps even with little Em'ly herself.

The coach was in the yard, shining very much all over, but
without any horses to it as yet; and it looked in that state as
if nothing was more unlikely than its ever going to London.
I was thinking this, and wondering what would ultimately
become of my box, which Mr. Barkis had put down on the
yard-pavement by the pole (he having driven up the yard to
turn his cart), and also what would ultimately become of me,
when a lady looked out of a bow-window where some fowls
and joints of meat were hanging up, and said :

" Is that the little gentleman from Blunderstone ? "

" Yes, ma'am," I said.

" What name ? "

* Copperfield, ma'am," I said.

" That won't do," returned the lady. " Nobody's dinner is
paid for here, in that name."

u Is it Murdstone, ma'am ? " I said.

" If you're Master Murdstone," said the lady, " why do you
go and give another name, first ? "

I explained to the lady how it was, who then rang a bell,
and called out, " William ! show the coffee-room ! " Upon
which a waiter came running out of a kitchen on the opposite
side of the yard to show it, and seemed a good deal surprised
when he found he was only to show it to me.

It was a large long room with some large maps in it. I
doubt if I could have felt much stranger if the maps had been
real foreign countries, and I cast away in the middle of them.
I felt it was taking a liberty to sit down, with my cap in my



72 THE FEB SON AL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

hand, on the corner of the chair nearest the door ; and when
the waiter laid a cloth on purpose for me, and put a set of
castors on it, I think I must have turned red all over with
modesty.

He brought me some chops, and vegetables, and took the
covers off in such a bouncing manner that I was afraid I must
have given him some offence. But he greatly relieved my
mind by putting a chair for me at the table, and saying very
affably, " Now, six-foot ! come on ! "

I thanked him, and took my seat at the board ; but found
it extremely difficult to handle my knife and fork with any-
thing like dexterity, or to avoid splashing myself with the
gravy, while he was standing opposite, staring so hard, and
making me blush in the most dreadful manner every time I
caught his eye. After watching me into the second chop, he said :

" There's half a pint of ale for you. Will you have it now ? "

I thanked him and said " Yes." Upon which he poured it
out of a jug into a large tumbler, and held it up against the
light, and made it look beautiful.

"My eye ! " he said. "It seems a good deal, don't it ? "

"It does seem a good deal," I answered, with a smile. For,
it was quite delightful to me to find him so pleasant. He was
a twinkling-eyed, pimple-faced man, with his hair standing
upright all over his head; and as he stood with one arm
a-kimbo, holding up the glass to the light with the other hand,
he looked quite friendly.

"There was a gentleman here yesterday," he said — "a
stout gentleman, by the name of Topsawyer — perhaps you
know him ? "

"No," I said, "I don't think — "

"In breeches and gaiters, broad-brimmed hat, gray coat,
speckled choker," said the waiter.

"No," I said bashfully, "I haven't the pleasure — "

"He came in here." said the waiter, looking at the light
through the tumbler, "ordered a glass of this ale — would
order it — I told him not — drank it, and fell dead. It was
too old for him. It oughtn't to be drawn, that's the fact."

I was very much shocked to hear of this melancholy acci-
dent, and said I thought I had better have some water.







' *^' w* ■* ""'^^^wi^^^^^y^^te-^?*^^^^'" 3




THE FRIENDLY WAITER AND 1.






OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 73

" Why, you see," said the waiter, still looking at the light
through the tumbler, with one of his eyes shut up, "our peo-
ple don't like things being ordered and left. It offends 'em.
But jPII drink it, if you like. Fm used to it, and use is every-
thing. I don't think it'll hurt me, if I throw my head back,
and take it off quick. Shall I ? "

I replied that he would much oblige me by drinking it, if
he thought he could do it safely, but by no means otherwise.
When he did throw his head back, and take it off quick, I had
a horrible fear, I confess, of seeing him meet the fate of the
lamented Mr. Topsawyer, and fall lifeless on the carpet. But
it didn't hurt him. On the contrary, I thought he seemed the
fresher for it.

" What have we got here ? " he said, putting a fork into my
dish. "Not chops?"

"Chops," I said.

" Lord bless my soul ! " he exclaimed, " I didn't know they
were chops. Why a chop's the very thing to take off the bad
effects of that beer ! Ain't it lucky ? "

So he took a chop by the bone in one hand, and a potato in
the other, and ata away with a very good appetite, to my
extreme satisfaction. He afterwards took another chop, and
another potato; and after that another chop and another
potato. When we had done, he brought me a pudding, and
having set it before me, seemed to ruminate, and to become
absent in his mind for some moments.

" How's the pie ? " he said, rousing himself.

"It's a pudding," I made answer.

" Pudding ! " he exclaimed. " Why, bless me, so it is.
What ! " looking at it nearer. " You don't mean to say it's a
batter-pudding ! "

"Yes, it is indeed."

" Why, a batter-pudding," he said, taking up a table-spoon,
" is my favorite pudding ! Ain't that lucky ? Come on, little
'un, and let's see who'll get most."

The waiter certainly got most. He entreated me more than
once to come in and win, but what with his table-spoon to my
tea-spoon, his despatch to my despatch, and his appetite to my
appetite, I was left far behind at the first mouthful, and had



74 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

no chance with. him. I never saw any one enjoy a pudding so
much, I think ; and he laughed, when it was all gone, as if his
enjoyment of it lasted still.

Finding him so very friendly and companionable, it was
then that I asked for the pen and ink and paper, to write to
Peggotty. He not only brought it immediately, but was good
enough to look over me while I wrote the letter. When I had
finished it, he asked me where I was going to school.

I said, "Near London," which was all I knew.

"Oh, my eye!" he said, looking very low-spirited, "I am
sorry for that."

" Why ? " I asked him.

" Oh, Lord ! " he said, shaking his head, " that's the school
where they broke the boy's ribs — two ribs — a little boy he
was. I should say he was — let jne see — how old are you,
about ? "

I told him between eight and nine.

m That's just his age," he said. " He was eight years and
six months old when they broke his first rib ; eight years and
eight months old when they broke his second, and did for
him."

I could not disguise from myself, or from the waiter, that
this was an uncomfortable coincidence, and inquired how it
was done. His answer was not cheering to my spirits, for it
consisted of two dismal words, " With whopping."

The blowing of the coach-horn in the yard was a seasonable
diversion, which made me get up and hesitatingly inquire, in
the mingled pride and diffidence of having a purse (which I
took out of my pocket), if there were anything to pay.

"There's a sheet of letter-paper," he returned. "Did you
ever buy a sheet of letter-paper ? "

I could not remember that I ever had.

" It's dear," he said, " on account of the duty. Threepence.
That's the way we are taxed in this country. There's nothing
else, except the waiter. Never mind the ink. /lose by that."

" What should you — what should I — how much ought I to
— what would it be right to pay the waiter, if you please ? " I
stammered, blushing.

" If I hadn't a family, and that family hadn't the cow-pock/'



OF DAVID COPPER FIELD. 75

said the waiter, " I wouldn't take a sixpence. If I didn't sup-
port a aged pairing and a lovely sister/' — hero the waiter was
greatly agitated — "I wouldn't take a farthing. If I had a
good plact?, and was treated well here, I should beg acceptance
of a trifle, instead of taking of it. But I live on broken wit-
ties — and I sleep on the coals " — here the waiter burst into
tears.

I was very much concerned for his misfortunes, and felfc
that any recognition short of ninepence would be mere brutal-
ity and hardness of heart. Therefore I gave him one of my
three bright shillings, which he received with much humility
and veneration, and spun up with his thumb, directly after-
wards, to try the goodness of.

It was a little disconcerting to me, to find, when I was
being helped up behind the coach, that I was supposed to have
eaten all the dinner without any assistance. I discovered this,
from overhearing the lady in the bow-window, say to the
guard, " Take care of that child, George, or he'll burst ! " and
from observing that the women-servants who were about the
place came out to look and giggle at me as a young phenome-
non. My unfortunate friend the waiter, who had quite recov-
ered his spirits, did not appear to be disturbed by this, but
joined in the general admiration without being at all confused.
If I had any doubt of him, I suppose this half-awakened it ;
but I am inclined to believe that with the simple confidence of
a child, and the natural reliance of a child upon superior years
(qualities I am very sorry any children should prematurely
change for worldly wisdom), I had no serious mistrust of him
on the whole, even then.

I felt it very hard, I must own, tQ be made, without deserv-
ing it, the subject of jokes between the coachman and guard
as to the coach drawing heavy behind, on account of my sitting
there, and as to the greater expediency of my travelling by
wagon. The story of my supposed appetite getting wind
among the outside passengers, they were merry upon it like-
wise, and asked me whether I was going to be paid for, at
school, as two brothers or three, and whether I was contracted
for, or went upon the regular terms ; with other pleasant
questions. But the worst of it was, that I knew I should be



76 THE PERSONAL H1ST0EY AND EXPERIENCE

ashamed to eat anything, when an opportunity offered, and
that, after a rather light dinner, I should remain hungry all
night — for I had left my cakes behind, at the hotel, in my
hurry.- My apprehensions were realized. When wp stopped
for supper I couldn't muster courage to take any, though I
should have liked it very much, but sat by the fire and said
I didn't want anything. This did not save me from more
jokes, either ; for a husky-voiced gentleman with a rough face,
who had been eating out of a sandwich-box nearly all the way,
except when he had been drinking out of a bottle, said I was
like a boa-constrictor who took enough at one meal to last him
a long time ; after which he actually brought a rash out upon
himself with boiled beef.

We had started from Yarmouth at three o'clock in the after-
noon, and we were due in London about eight next morning.
It was Midsummer weather, and the evening was very pleasant.
When we passed through a village, I pictured to myself what
the insides of the houses were like, and what the inhabitants
were about ; and when boys came running after us, and got up
behind and swung there for a little way, I wondered whether
their fathers were alive, and whether they were happy at
home. I had plenty to think of, therefore, besides my mind
running continually on the kind of place I was going to —
which was an awful speculation. Sometimes, I remember, I
resigned myself to thoughts of home and Peggotty; and to
endeavoring, in a confused blind way, to recall how I had felt,
and what sort of boy I used to be, before I bit Mr. Murdstone :
which I couldn't satisfy myself about by any means, I seemed
to have bitten him in such a remote antiquity.

The night was not so pleasant as the evening, for it got
chilly; and being put between two gentlemen (the rough-
faced one and another) to prevent my tumbling off the coach,
I was nearly smothered by their falling asleep, and completely
blocking me up. They squeezed me so hard sometimes, that
I could not help crying put " Oh, if you please ! " — which
they didn't like at all, because it woke them. Opposite me
was an elderly lady in a great fur cloak, who looked in the
dark more like a haystack than a lady, she was wrapped up to
such a degree. This lady had a basket with her, and she*



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 77

hadn't known what to do with it for a long time, until she
found . that on account of my legs being short, it would go
underneath me. It cramped and hurt me so, that it'made me
perfectly miserable ; but if I moved in the least, and made a
glass that was in the basket rattle against something else (as
it was sure to do), she gave me the cruellest poke with her
foot, and said, " Come, don't you fidget. Your bones are young
enough, I'm sure ! "

At last the sun rose, and then my companions seemed to
sleep easier. The difficulties under which they had labored
all night, and which had found utterance in the most terrific
gasps and snorts, are not to be conceived. As the sun got
higher, their sleep became lighter, and so they gradually one
by one awoke. I recollect being very much surprised by the
feint everybody made, then, of not having been to sleep at all,
and by the uncommon indignation with which every one
repelled the charge. I labor under the same kind of astonish-
ment to this day, having invariably observed that of all human
weaknesses, the one to which our common nature is the least
disposed to confess (I cannot imagine why) is the weakness of
having gone to sleep in a coach.

What an amazing place London was to me when I saw it
in the distance, and how I believed all the adventures of all
my favorite heroes to be constantly enacting and re-enacting
there, and how I vaguely made it out in my own mind to be
fuller of wonders and wickedness than all the cities of the
earth, I need not stop here to relate. We approached it by
degrees, and got, in due time, to the inn in the Whitechapel
district, for which we were bound. I forget whether it was
the Blue Bull or the Blue Boar ; but I know it was the Blue
Something, and that its likeness was painted up on the back
of the coach.

The guard's eye lighted on me as he was getting down, and
he said at the booking-office door : •

" Is there anybody here for a yoongster booked in the name
of Murdstone, from Bloonderstone, Sooffolk, to be left till
called for ? '»

Nobody answered.



78 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" Try Copperfield, if you please, sir/' said I, looking help-
lessly down.

" Is there anybody here for a yoongster, booked in the name
of Murdstone, from Bloonderstone, Sooffolk, but owning to
the name of Copperfield, to be left till called for ? " said the
guard. " Come ! Is there anybody ? "

No. There was nobody. I looked anxiously around; but
the inquiry made no impression on any of the bystanders, if
I except a man in gaiters, with one eye, who suggested that
they had better put a brass collar round my neck, and tie me
up in the stable.

A ladder was brought, and I got down after the lady, who
was like a haystack : not daring to stir, until her basket was
removed. The coach was clear of passengers by that time,
the luggage was very soon cleared out, the horses had been
taken out before the luggage, and now the coach itself was
wheeled and backed off by some hostlers, out of the way.
Still, nobody appeared, to claim the dusty youngster from
Blunderstone, Suffolk.

More solitary than Robinson Crusoe, who had nobody to
look at him, and see that he was solitary, I went into the
booking-office, and, by invitation of the clerk on duty, passed
behind the counter, and sat down on the scale at which they
weighed the luggage. Here, as I sat looking at the parcels,
packages, and books, and inhaling the smell of stables (ever
since associated with that morning), a. procession of most
tremendous considerations began to march through my mind.
Supposing nobody should ever fetch me, how long would they
consent to keep me there ? Would they keep me long enough
to spend seven shillings ? Should I sleep at night in one of
those wooden binns, with the other luggage, and wash myself
at the pump in the yard in the morning; or should I be
turned out every night, and expected to come again to be left
till called for, when the office opened next day ? Supposing
there was no mistake in the case, and Mr. Murdstone had
devised this plan to get rid of me, what should I do ? If they
allowed me to remain there until my seven shillings were
spent, I couldn't hope to remain there when I began to starve.
That would obviously be inconvenient and unpleasant to the





customers, besides entailing on the Blue Whatever-it-was, the
risk of funeral expenses. If I started off at once, and tried
to walk back home, how could I ever find iny way, how could
I ever hope to walk so far, how could I make sure of any one
but Peggotty, even if I got back ? If I found out the nearest
proper authorities, and offered myself to go for a soldier, or a
sailor, I was such a little fellow that it was most likely they
wouldn't take me in. These thoughts, and a hundred other
such thoughts, turned me burning hot, and made me giddy
with apprehension and dismay. I was in the height of my
fever when a man entered and whispered to the clerk, who
presently slanted me off the scale, and pushed me over to him,
as if I were weighed, bought, delivered, and paid for.

As I went out of the office, hand - in hand with this new
acquaintance, I stole a look at him. He was a gaunt, sallow
young man, with hollow cheeks, and a chin almost as black as
Mr. Murdstone's ; but there the likeness ended, for his
whiskers were shaved off, and his hair, instead of being
glossy, was rusty and dry. He was dressed in a suit of black
clothes which were rather rusty and dry too, and rather short
in the sleeves and legs; and he had a white neckerchief on,
that was not over-clean. I did not, and do not, suppose that
this neckerchief was all the linen he wore, but it was all he
showed or gave any hint of.

"You're the new boy ? " he said.

"Yes, sir/' I said.

I supposed I was. I didn't know.

"I'm one of the masters at Salem House," he said.

I made him a bow and felt very much overawed. I was so
ashamed to allude to a common-place thing like my box, to a
scholar and a master at Salem House, that we had gone some
little distance from the yard before I had the hardihood to
mention it. We turned back on my humbly insinuating that
it might be useful to me hereafter ; and he told the clerk that
the carrier had instructions to call for it at noon.

"If you please, sir," I said, when we had accomplished
about the same distance as before, " is it far ? "

" It's down by Blackheath," he said.

"Is that far, sir ? " I diffidently asked,



80 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

"It's a good step/' he said. "We shall go by the stage-
coach. It's about six miles."

I was so faint and tired, that the idea of holding out for six
tniles more, was too much for me. I took heart to tell him
that I had had nothing all night, and that if he would allow
me to • buy something to eat, I should be very much obliged
to him. He appeared surprised at this — I see him stop and
look at me now — and after considering for a few moments,
said he wanted to call on an old person who lived not far off,
and that the best way would be for me to buy some bread, or
whatever I liked best that was wholesome, and make my
breakfast at her house, where we could get some milk.

Accordingly we looked in at a baker's window, and after
I had made a series of proposals to buy everything that was
bilious in the shop, and he had rejected them one by one, we
decided in favor of a nice little loaf of brown bread, which cost
me threepence. Then, at a grocer's shop, we bought an egg
and a slice of streaky bacon ; which still left what I thought a
good deal of change, out of the second of the bright shillings,
and made me consider London a very cheap place. These
provisions laid in, we went on through a great noise and
uproar that confused my weary head beyond description, and
over a bridge which, no doubt, was London Bridge (indeed
I think he told me so, but I was half asleep), until we came
to the poor person's house, which was a part of some alms-
houses, as I knew by their look, and by an inscription on a
stone over the gate, which said they were established for
twenty-five poor women.

The master at Salem House lifted the latch of one of a
number of little black doors that were all alike, and had each
a little diamond-paned window on one side, and another little
diamond-paned window above; and we went into the little
house of one of these poor old women, who was blowing a fire
to make a little saucepan boil. On seeing the master enter,
the old woman stopped with the bellows on her knee, and said
something that I thought sounded like u My Charley ! " but
on seeing me come in too, she got up, and rubbing her hands
made a confused sort of half courtesy.



OF DAVID COPPEEFIELD. 81

" Can you cook this young genteman's breakfast for him,
if you please ? " said the master at Salem House.

" Can I ? " said the old woman. " Yes can I, sure ! "

" How's Mrs. Fibbitson to-day ? " said the master, looking
at another old woman in a large chair by the fire, who was
such a bundle of clothes that I feel grateful to this hour for
not having sat upon her by mistake.

" Ah, she's poorly/' said the first old woman. " It's one
of her bad days. If the fire was to go oat, through any acci-
dent, I verily believe she' d go out too, and never come to life
again."

As they looked at her, I looked at her also. Although it
was a warm day, she seemed to think of nothing but the fire.
I fancied she was jealous even of the saucepan on it ; and I
have reason to know that she took its impressment into the
service of boiling my egg and broiling my bacon, in dudgeon ;
for I saw her, with my own discomfited eyes, shake her fist
at me once, when those culinary operations were going on, and
no one else was looking. The sun streamed in at the little
window, but she sat with her own back and the back of the
large chair towards it, screening the fire as if she were
sedulously keeping it warm, instead of it keeping her warm,
and watching it in a most distrustful manner. The comple-
tion of the preparations for my breakfast, by relieving the
fire, gave her such extreme joy that she laughed aloud — and
a very unmelodious laughed she had, I must say.

I sat down to my brown loaf, my egg, and my rasher of
bacon, with a basin of milk besides, and made a most delicious
meal. While I was yet in the full enjoyment of it, the old
woman of the house said to the master :

" Have you got your flute with you ? "

" Yes," he returned.

"Have a blow at it," said the old woman, coaxingly.
"Do!"

The master, upon this, put his hand underneath the skirts of
his coat, and brought out his flute in three pieces, which he
screwed together, and began immediately to play. My impres-
sion is, after many years of consideration, that there never
can have been anybody in the world who played worse. He

VOL. 1 — 6



82 THE PERSONAL HIST6&Y AND EXPERIENCE

made the most dismal sounds I have ever heard produced by
any means, natural or artificial. I don't know what the tunes
were — if there were such things in the performance at all,
which I doubt — but the influence of the strain upon me was,
first, to make me think of all my sorrows until I could hardly
keep my tears back : then to take away my appetite ; and
lastly to make me so sleepy that I couldn't keep my eyes
open. They begin to close again, and I begin to nod, as the
recollections rise fresh upon me. Once more the little room
with its open corner cupboard, and its square-backed chairs,
and its angular little staircase leading to the room above, and
its three peacock's feathers displayed over the mantel-piece —
I remember wondering when I first went in, what that pea-
cock would have thought- if he had known what his finery
was doomed to come to — fades from before me, and I nod,
and sleep. The flute becomes inaudible, the wheels of the
coach are heard instead, and I am on my journey. The coach
jolts, I wake with a start, and the flute has come back again,
and the master at Salem House is sitting with his legs crossed,
playing it dolefully, while the old woman of the house looks
on delighted. She fades in her turn, and he fades, and all
fades, and there is no flute, no master, no Salem House, no
David Copperfield, no anything but heavy sleep.

I dreamed, I thought, that once while he was blowing into
this dismal flute, the old woman of the house, who had gone
nearer and nearer to him in her ecstatic admiration, leaned
over the back of his chair and gave him an affectionate squeeze
round the neck, which stopped his playing for a moment. I
was in the middle state between sleeping and waking, either
then or immediately afterwards ; for, as he resumed — it was
a real fact that he had stopped playing — I saw and heard the
same old woman ask Mrs. Fibbitson if it wasn't delicious
(meaning the flute), to which Mrs. Fibbitson replied, " Ay,
ay ! Yes ! " and nodded at the fire : to which, I am per-
suaded, she gave the credit of the whole performance.

When I seemed to have been dozing a long while, the master
at Salem House unscrewed his flute into the three pieces, put
them up as before, and took me away. We found the coach
very near at hand, and got upon the roof ; but I was so dead



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 83

sleepy, that when we stopped on the road to take up some-
body else, they put me inside where there were no passengers,
and where I slept profoundly, until I found the coach going at
a footpace up a steep hill among green leaves. Presently, it
stopped, and had come to its destination.

A short walk brought us — I mean the master and me —
to Salem House, which was enclosed with a high brick wall,
and looked very dull. Over a door in this wall was a board
with Salem House upon it ; and through a grating in this
door we were surveyed, when we rang the bell, by a surly
face, which I found, on the door being opened, belonged to a
stout man with a bull-neck, a wooden leg, overhanging temples,
and his hair cut close all round his head.

" The new boy," said the master.

The man with the wooden leg eyed me all over — it didn't
take long, for there was not much of me — and locked the
gate behind us, and took out the key. We were going up to
the house, among some dark heavy trees, when he called after
my conductor.

" Hallo ! "

We looked back, and he was standing at the door of a little
lodge, where he lived, with a pair of boots in his hand.

"Here! The cobbler's been," he said, "since you've been
out, Mr. Mell, and he says he can't mend 'em any more. He
says there ain't a bit of the original boot left, and he wonders
you expect it."

With these words he threw the boots towards Mr. Mell,
who went back a few paces to pick them up, and looked at
them (very disconsolately, I was afraid) as we went on to-
gether. I observed then, for the first time, that the boots he
had on were a good deal the worse for wear, and that his
stocking was just breaking out in one place, like a bud.

Salem House was a square brick building with wings ; of a
bare and unfurnished appearance. All about it was so very
quiet, that I said to Mr. Mell I supposed the boys were out ;
but he seemed surprised at my not knowing that it was holi-
day-time. That all the boys were at their several homes.
That Mr. Creakle, the proprietor, was down by the seaside
with Mrs. and Miss Creakle ; and that I was sent in holiday-



84 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

time as a punishment for my misdoing, all of which he ex-
plained to me as we went along.

I gazed upon the schoolroom into which he took me, as the
most forlorn and desolate place I had ever seen. I see it now.
A long room, with three long rows of desks, and six of forms,
and bristling all round with pegs for hats and slates. Scraps
of old copy-books and exercises litter the dirty floor. Some
silkworms 5 houses, made of the same materials, are scattered
over the desks. Two miserable little white mice, left behind
by their owner, are running up and down in a fusty castle
made of pasteboard and wire, looking in all the corners with
their red eyes for anything to eat. A bird, in a cage, very
little bigger than himself, makes a mournful rattle now and
then in hopping on his perch, two inches high, or dropping
from it ; but neither sings nor chirps. There is a strange
unwholesome smell upon the room, like mildewed corduroys,
sweet apples wanting air, and rotten books. There could not
well be more ink splashed about it, if it had been roofless from
its first construction, and the skies had rained, snowed, hailed,
and blown ink through the varying seasons of the year.

Mr. Mell having left me while he took his irreparable boots
up stairs, I went softly to the upper end of the room, observ-
ing all this as I crept along. Suddenly I came upon a paste-
board placard, beautifully written, which was lying on the
desk, and bore these words — " Take care of Mm. He bites."

I got upon the desk immediately, apprehensive of at least a
great dog underneath. But, though I looked all round with .
anxious eyes, I could see nothing of him. I was still engaged
in peering about, when Mr. Mell came back, and asked me
what I did up there.

"I beg your pardon, sir," says I, "if you please, I' in looking
for the dog."

" Dog ? " says he, " What dog ? "

"Isn't it a dog, sir?"

"Isn't what a dog ? "

" That's to be taken care of, sir ; that bites."

"No, Copperfield," says he, gravely, "that's not a dog.
That's a boy. My instructions are, Copperfield, to put this



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 85

placard on your back. I am sorry to make such a beginning
with you, but I must do it."

With that, he took me down, and tied the placard, which
was neatly constructed for the purpose, on my shoulders like
a knapsack ; and wherever I went, afterwards, I had the con-
solation of carrying it.

What I suffered from that placard, nobody can imagine.
Whether it was possible for people to see me or not, I always
fancied that somebody was reading it. It was no relief to turn
round and find nobody ; for wherever my back was, there I
imagined somebody always to be. That cruel man with the
wooden leg, aggravated my sufferings. He was in authority ;
and if he ever saw me leaning against a tree, or a wall, or the
house, he . roared out from his lodge-door in a stupendous
voice, " Hallo, you sir ! You Copperfield ! Show that badge
conspicuous, or I'll report you ! " The playground was a bare
gravelled yard, open to all the back of the house and the
offices ; and I knew that the servants read it, and the butcher
read it, and the baker read it ; that everybody, in a word, who
came backwards and forwards to the house, of a morning, when
I was ordered to walk there, read that I was to be taken care
of, for I bit. I recollect that I positively began to have a
dread of myself, as a kind of wild boy who did bite.

There was an old door in this playground, on which the
boys had a custom of carving their names. It was completely
covered with such inscriptions. In my dread of the end of the
vacation and their coming back, I could not read a b6y ; s name,
without inquiring in what tone and with what emphasis he
would read, " Take care of him. He bites." There was one
boy — a certain J. Steerforth — who cut his name very deep
and very often, who, I conceived, would read it in a rather
strong voice, and afterwards pull my hair. There was another
boy, one Tommy Traddles, who I dreaded would make game
of it, and pretend to be dreadfully frightened of me. There
was a third, George Demple, who I fancied would sing it.
I have looked, a little shrinking creature, at that door, until
the owners of all the names — there were five-and-forty of
them in the school then, Mr. Mell said — seemed to send me



86 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

to Coventry by general acclamation, and to ciy out, each in his
own way, " Take care of him. He bites ! "

It was the came with the places at the desks and forms. It
was the same with the groves of deserted bedsteads I peeped
at, on my way to, and when I was in, my own bed. I re-
member dreaming night after night, of being with my mother
as she used to be, or of going to a party at Mr. Peg-
gotty's, or of travelling outside the stage-coach, or of dining
again with my unfortunate friend the waiter, and in all these
circumstances making people scream and stare, by the unhappy
disclosure that I had nothing on but my little night-shirt, and
that placard.

In the monotony of my life, and in my constant apprehen *
sion of the reopening of the school, it was such an insup-
portable affliction ! I had long tasks every day to do with
Mr. Mell ; but I did them, there being no Mr. and Miss
Murdstone here, and got through them without disgrace.
Before, and after them, I walked about — supervised, as I have
mentioned, by the man with the wooden leg. How vividly I
call to mind the damp about the house, the green cracked
flag stones in the court, and old leaky water-butt, and the dis-
colored trunks of some of the grim trees, which seemed to
have dripped more in the rain than other trees, and to have
blown less in the sun ! At one we dined, Mr Mell and I, at
the upper end of a long bare dining-room, full of deal tables,
and smelling of fat. Then, we had more tasks until tea, which
Mr. Mell drank out of a blue tea-cup, and I out of a tin pot.
All day long, and until seven or eight in the evening^ Mr. Mell,
at his own detached desk in the schoolroom, worked hard with
pen, ink, ruler, books, and writing-paper, making out the bills
(as I found) for last half year. When he had put up his
things for the night he took out his flute, and blew at it, until
I almost thought he would gradually blow his whole being
into the large hole at the top, and ooze away at the keys.

I picture my small self in the dimly lighted rooms, sitting
with my head upon my hand, listening to the doleful per-
formance of Mr. Mell, £nd conning to-morrow's lessons. I
picture myself with my books shut up, still listening to the
doleful performance of Mr. Mell, and listening through it to



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 87

what used to be at home, and to the blowing of the wind on
Yarmouth flats, and feeling very sad and solitary. I picture
myself going up to bed, among the unused rooms, and sitting
on my bedside crying for a comfortable word from Peggotty.
I picture myself coming down stairs in the morning, and
looking through a long ghastly gash of a stair-case window,
at the school-bell hanging on the top of an out-house, with a
weathercock above it; and dreading the time when it shall
ring J. Steerf orth and the rest to work : which is only second,
in my foreboding apprehensions, to the time when the man
with the wooden leg shall unlock the rusty gate to give admis-
sion to the awful Mr. Creakle. I cannot think I was a very
dangerous character in any of these aspects, but in all of them
I carried the same warning on my back.

Mr. Mell never said much to me, but he was never harsh to
me. I suppose we were company to each other, without
talking. I forgot to mention that he would talk to himself
sometimes, and grin, and clench his fist, and grind his teeth,
and pull his hair in an unaccountable manner. But he had
these peculiarities : and at first they frightened me, though I
soon got used to them.



88 THE PERSONAL HISTOBY AND EXPERIENCE



CHAPTER VL

I ENLARGE MY CIRCLE OF ACQUAINTANCE.

I had led this life about a month, when the man with the
wooden leg began to stump about with a mop and a bucket
of water, from which I inferred that preparations were making
to receive Mr. Creakle and the boys. I was not mistaken ; for
the mop came into the schoolroom before long, and turned
out ]\Ir. Mell and me, who lived where we could, and got on
how we could, for some days, during which we were always in
the way of two or three young women, who had rarely shown
themselves before, and were so continually in the midst of
dust that I sneezed almost as much as if Salem House had
been a great snuff-box.

One day I was informed by Mr. Mell, that Mr. Creakle
would be home that evening. In the evening, after tea, I
heard that he was come. Before bed-time, I was fetched by
the man with the wooden leg to appear before him.

Mr. Creakle's part of the house was a good deal more com-
fortable than ours, and he had a snug bit of garden that
looked pleasant after the dusty playground, which was sucb
a desert in miniature, that I thought no one but a camel, or
a dromedary, could have felt at home in it. It seemed to
me a bold thing even to take notice that the passage looked
comfortable, as I went on my way, trembling, to Mr. Creakle's
presence : which so abashed me, when I was ushered into it,
that I hardly saw Mrs. Creakle or Miss Creakle (who were
both there in the parlor), or anything but Mr. Creakle, a stout
gentleman with a bunch of watch-chain and seals, in an arm-
chair, with a tumbler and bottle beside him.

"So!" said Mr. Creakle. "This is the young gentleman
whose teeth are to be filed ! Turn him round."

The wooden-legged man turned me about so as to exhibit
the placard ; and having afforded time for a full survey of it,



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 89

turned me about again, with my face to Mr. Creakle, and
posted himself at Mr. Creakle's side. Mr. Creakle's face was
fiery, and his eyes were small, and deep in his head ; he had
thick veins in his forehead, a little nose, and a large chin.
He was bald on the top of his head ; and had some thin wet-
looking hair that was just turning gray, brushed across each
temple, so that the two sides interlaced on his forehead. But
the circumstance about him which impressed me most, was,
that he had no voice, but spoke in a whisper. The exertion
this cost him, or the consciousness of talking in that feeble
way, made his angry face so much more angry, and his thick
veins so much thicker, when he spoke, that I am not surprised,
on looking back, at this peculiarity striking me as his chief
one.

"Now," said Mr. Creakle. "What's the report of this
boy ? »

" There's nothing against him yet," returned the man with
the wooden leg. " There has been no opportunity."

I thought Mr. Creakle was disappointed. I thought Mrs.
and Miss Creakle (at whom I now glanced for the first time,
and who were, both, thin and quiet) were not disappointed.

" Come here, sir ! " said Mr. Creakle, beckoning to me.

" Come here ! " said the man with the wooden leg, repeat-
ing the gesture.

"I have the happiness of knowing your father-in-law,"
whispered Mr. Creakle, taking me by the ear ; " and a worthy
man he is, and a man of a strong character. He knows me,
and I know him. Do you know me ? Hey ? " said Mr.
Creakle, pinching my ear with ferocious playfulness.

" Not yet, sir," I said, flinching with the pain.

" Not yet ? Hey ? " repeated Mr. Creakle. " But you will
soon. Hey ? "

" You will soon. Hey ? " repeated the man with the
wooden leg. I afterwards found that he generally acted,
with his strong voice, as Mr. Creakle's interpreter to the boys.

I was very much frightened, and said, I hoped so, if he
pleased. I felt, all this while, as if my ear were blazing ; he
pinched it so hard.

"Fll tell you what I am," whispered Mr. Creakle, letting it



yO THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE






go at last, with a screw at parting that brought the water into
my eyes. " Tin a Tartar."

* A Tartar," said the man with the wooden leg.

" When I say I'll do a thing, I do it," said Mr. Creakle ; " and
when I say I will have a thing done, I will have it done."

" — Will have a thing done, I will have it done," repeated
the man with the wooden leg.

" I am a determined character," said Mr. Creakle. " That's
what I am. I do my duty. That's what I do. My flesh and
blood " — he looked at Mrs. Creakle as he said this — " when
it rises against me, is not my flesh and blood. I discard it.
Has that fellow," to the man with the wooden leg, " been
here again ? "

" No," was the answer.

"No," said Mr. Creakle. "He knows better. He knows
me. Let him keep away. I say let him keep away," said
Mr. Creakle, striking his hand upon the table, and looking at
Mrs. Creakle, "for he knows me. Now you have begun to
know me too, my young friend, and you may go. Take him
away."

I was very glad to be ordered away, for Mrs. and Miss
Creakle were both wiping their eyes, and I felt as uncom-
fortable for them, as I did for myself. But I had a petition
on my mind which concerned me so nearly, that I couldn't
help saying, though I wondered at my own courage :

" If you please, sir — "

Mr. Creakle whispered, " Hah ? What's this ? " and bent his
eyes upon me, as if he would have burnt me up with them.

" If you please, sir," I faltered, " if I might be allowed (I
am very sorry indeed, sir, for what I did) to take this writing
off, before the boys come back — "

Whether Mr. Creakle was in earnest, or whether he only did
it to frighten me, I don't know, but he made a burst out of his
chair, before which I precipitately retreated, without waiting
for the escort of the man with the wooden leg, and never once
stopped until I reached my own bedroom, where, finding I
was not pursued, I went to bed, as it was time, and lay quak-
ing, for a couple of hours.

Next morning Mr. Sharp came back. Mr. Sharp was the



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELB. §1

first master, and superior to Mr. Mell. Mr. Mell took his
meals with the boys, but Mr. Sharp dined and supped at Mr.
Creakle's table. He was a limp, delicate-looking gentleman,
I thought, with a good deal of nose, and a way of carrying
his head on one side, as if it were a little too heavy for him.
His hair was very smooth and wavy ; but I was informed by
the very first boy who came back that it .was a wig (a second-
hand one he said), and that Mr. Sharp went out every Saturday
afternoon to get it curled.

It was no other than Tommy Traddles who gave me this
piece of intelligence. He was the first boy who returned.
He introduced himself by informing me that I should find his
name on the right-hand corner of the gate, over the top bolt ;
upon that I said, " Traddles ? " to which he replied, u The
same," and then he asked me for a full account of myself and
family.

It was a happy circumstance for me that Traddles came
back first. He enjoyed my placard so much, that he saved me
from the embarrassment of either disclosure or concealment,
by presenting me to every other boy who came back, great or
small, immediately on his arrival, in this form of introduction,
" Look here ! Here's a game ! n Happily, too, the greater
part of the boys came back low-spirited, and were not so
boisterous at my expense as I had expected. Some of them
certainly did dance about me like wild Indians, and the greater
part could not resist the temptation of pretending that I was
a dog, and patting and smoothing me lest I should bite, and
saying, "Lie down, sir ! " and calling me Towzer. This was
naturally confusing, among so many strangers, and cost me
some tears, but on the whole it was much better than I had
anticipated.

I was not considered as being formally received into the
school, however, until J. Steerforth arrived. Before this boy,
who was reputed to be a great scholar, and was very good-
looking, and at least half-a-dozen years my senior, I was carried
as before a magistrate. He inquired, under a shed in the play-
ground, into the particulars of my punishment, and was pleased
to express his opinion that it was " a jolly shame ; " for which
I became bound to him ever afterwards.



92 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" What money have you got, Copperfield ? " he said, walk-
ing aside with me when he had disposed of my affair in these
terms.

I told him seven shillings.

"You had better give it to me to take care of," he said D
u At least, you can if you like. You needn't if you don't like."

I hastened to comply with his friendly suggestion, and
opening Peggotty's purse, turned it upside down into his hand.

" Do you want to spend anything now ? P he asked me.

" iSTo, thank you," I replied.

" You can, if you like, you know," said Steerf orth. " Say
the word."

"No, thank you, sir," I repeated.

"Perhaps you'd like to spend a couple of shillings, or so, in
a bottle of currant wine by and by, up in the bedroom ? " said
Steerf orth. " You belong to my bedroom, I find."

It certainly had not occurred to me before, but I said, Yes,
I should like that.

"Very good," said Steerf orth. "You'll be glad to spend
another shilling or so, in almond cakes, I dare say ? "

I said, Yes, I should like that, too.

"And another shilling or so in biscuits, and another in
fruit, eh?" said Steerf orth. "I say, young Copperfield, you're
going it ! "

I smiled because he smiled, but I was a little troubled in
my mind, too. t

" Well ! " said Steerf orth. " We must make it stretch as far
as we can ; that's all. Fll do the best in my power for you.
I can go out when I like, and I'll smuggle the prog in." With
these words he put the money in his pocket, and kindly told
me not to make myself uneasy ; he would take care it should
be all right.

He was as good as his word, if that were all right which I
had a secret misgiving was nearly all wrong — for I feared it
was a waste of my mother's two half-crowns — though I had
preserved the piece of paper they were wrapped in ; which
was a precious saving. When we went up stairs to bed, he
produced the whole seven shillings' worth, and laid it out on
my bed in the moonlight, saying:






OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 93

"There you are, young Copperfield, and a royal spread
youVe got ! "

I couldn't think of doing the honors of the feast, at my time
of life, while he was by ; my hand shook at the very thought
of it. I begged him to do me the favor of presiding ; and my
request being seconded by the other boys who were in that
room, he acceded to it, and sat upon my pillow, handing round
the viands — with perfect fairness, I must say — and dispens-
ing the currant wine in a little glass without a foot, which was
his own property. As to me, I sat on his left hand, and the
rest were grouped about us, on the nearest beds and on the
floor.

How well I recollect our sitting there, talking in whispers,
or their talking, and my respectfully listening, I ought rather
to say; the moonlight falling a little way into the room,
through the window, painting a pale window on the floor, and
the greater part of us in shadow, except when Steerforth
dipped a match into a phosphorus-box, when he wanted to
look for anything on the board, and shed a blue glare over us
that was gone directly ! A certain mysterious feeling, conse-
quent on the darkness, the secrecy of the revel, and the whis-
per in which everything was said, steals over me again, and I
listen to all they tell me, with a vague feeling of solemnity
and awe, which makes me glad that they are all so near, and
frightens me (though I feign to laugh) when Traddles pre-
tends to see a ghost in the corner.

I heard all kinds of things about the school and all belong-
ing to it. I heard that Mr. Creakle had not preferred his
claim to being a Tartar without reason ; that he was the stern-
est and most severe of masters ; that he laid about him, right
and left, every day of his life, charging in among the boys like
a trooper, and slashing away, unmercifully. That he knew
nothing himself, but the art of slashing, being more ignorant
(J. Steerforth said) than the lowest boy in the school ; that he
had been, a good many years ago, a small hop-dealer in the
Borough, and had taken to the schooling business after being
bankrupt in hops, and making away with Mrs. Creakle's money.
With a good deal more of that sort, which I wondered how
they knew.



94 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

I heard that the man with the wooden leg, whose name was
Tungay, was an obstinate barbarian who had formerly assisted
in the hop business, but had come into the scholastic line with
Mr. Creakle, in consequence, as was supposed among the boys,
of his having broken his leg in Mr. Creakle's service, and hav-
ing done a deal of dishonest work for him, and knowing his
secrets. I heard that with the single exception of Mr. Creakle,
Tungay considered the whole establishment, masters and boys,
as his natural enemies, and that the only delight of his life
was to be sour and malicious. I heard that Mr. Creakle had a
son, who had not been Tungay's friend, and who, assisting in
the school, had once held some remonstrance with his father
on an occasion when its discipline was very cruelly exercised,
and was supposed, besides, to have protested against his fath-
er's usage of his mother. I heard that Mr. Creakle had turned
him out of doors, in consequence ; and that Mrs. and Miss
Creakle had been in a sad way, ever since.

But the greatest wonder that I heard of Mr. Creakle was,
there being one boy in the school on whom he never ventured to
lay a hand, and that boy being J. Steerforth. Steerforth him-
self confirmed this when it was stated, and said that he should
like to begin to see him do it. On being asked by a mild boy
(not me) how he would proceed if he did begin to see him do
it, he dipped a match into his phosphorus-box on purpose to
shed a glare over his reply, and said he would commence with
knocking him down with a blow on the forehead from the
seven-and-six-penny ink-bottle that was always on the mantel-
piece. We sat in the dark for some time, breathless.

I heard that Mr. Sharp and Mr. Mell were both supposed
to be wretchedly paid ; and that when there was hot and cold
meat for dinner at Mr. Creakle's table, Mr. Sharp was always
expected to say he preferred cold ; which was again corrobo-
rated by J. Steerforth, the only parlor-boarder. I heard that
Mr. Sharp's wig didn't fit him; and that he needn't be so
a bounceable " — somebody else said " bumptious " — about it,
because his own red hair was very plainly to be seen behind.

I heard that one boy, who was a coal-merchant's son, came
as a set-off against the coal-bill, and was called on that account
" Exchange or Barter" — a name selected from the arithmetic-



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 95

book as expressing this arrangement. I heard that the table-
beer was a robbery of parents, and the pudding an imposition.
I heard that Miss Creakle was regarded by the school in gen-
eral as being in love with Steerforth ; and I am sure, as I sat
in the dark, thinking of his nice voice, and his fine face, and
his easy manner, and his curling hair, I thought it very likely.
I heard that Mr. Mell was not a bad sort of fellow, but hadn't
a sixpence to bless himself with ; and that there was no doubt
that old Mrs. Mell, his mother, was as poor as Job/ I thought
of my breakfast then, and what had sounded like " my Char-
ley ! " but I was, I am glad to remember, as mute as a mouse
about it.

The hearing of all this, and a good deal more, outlasted the
banquet some time. The greater part of the guests had gone
to bed as soon as the eating and-drinking were over ; and we,
who had remained whispering and listening half undressed, at
last betook ourselves to bed, too.

" Good night, young Copperfield," said Steerforth, " I'll take
care of you."

" You're very kind," I gratefully returned. "I am very
much obliged to you."

"You haven't got a sister, have you?" said Steerforth,
yawning.

"No," I answered.

"That's a pity," said Steei forth. "If you had had one,
I should think she would have been a pretty, timid, little,
bright-eyed sort of girl. I should have liked to know her.
Good night, young Copperfield."

" Good night, sir," I replied.

I thought of him very much after I went to "bed, and raised
myself, I recollect, to look at him where he lay in the moon-
light, with his handsome face turned up, ahd his head reclining
easily on his arm. He was a person of great power in my
eyes ; that was of course the reason of my mind running on
him. No veiled future dimly glanced upon him in the moon-
beams. There was no shadowy picture of his footsteps, in the
garden that I dreamed of walking in all night.



96 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE



CHAPTER VII.

MY u FIRST HALF " AT SALEM HOUSE.

School began in earnest next day. A profound impression
was made upon me, I remember, by the roar of voices in the
schoolroom suddenly becoming hushed as death when Mr.
Creakle entered after breakfast, and stood in the doorway
looking round upon us like a giant in a story-book surveying
his captives.

Tungay stood at Mr. Creakle's elbow. He had no occasion,
I thought, to cry out " Silence ! " so ferociously, for the boys
were all struck speechless and motionless.

Mr. Creakle was seen to speak, and Tungay was heard, to
this effect.

"3STow, boys, this is a new half. Take care what you're
about, in this new half. Gome fresh up to the lessons, I ad-
vise you, for I come fresh up to the punishment. I won't
flinch. It will be of no use your rubbing yourselves; you
won't rub the marks out that I shall give you. Now get to
work, every boy ! "

When this dreadful exordium was over, and Tungay had
stumped out again, Mr. Creakle came to where I sat, and told
me that if I were famous for biting, he was famous for biting,
too. He then showed me the cane, and asked me what I
thought of that, for a tooth ? Was it a sharp tooth, hey ?
Was it a double tooth, hey ? Had it a deep prong, hey ? Did
it bite, hey ? Did it bite ? At every question he gave me a
fleshy cut with it that made me writhe ; so I was very soon
made free of Salem House (as Steerforth said), and very soon
in tears also.

Not that I mean to say these were special marks of dis-
tinction, which only I received. On the contrary, a large
majority of the boys (especially the smaller ones) were visited
with similar instances of notice, as Mr. Creakle made the



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 97

round of the schoolroom. Half the establishment was writhe
ing and crying, before the day's work began ; and how much
of it had writhed and cried before the day's work was over, I
am really afraid to re~collect, lest I should seem to exaggerate.

I should think there never can have been a man who
enjoyed his profession more than Mr. Creakle did. He had a
delight in cutting at the boys, which was like the satisfaction
of a craving appetite. I am confident that he couldn't resist
a chubby boy, especially ; that there was a fascination in such
a subject, which made him restless in his mind, until he had
scored- and marked him for the day. I was chubby myself,
and ought to know. I am sure when I think of the fellow
now, my blood rises against him with the disinterested indig-
nation I should feel if I could have known all about him
without having ever been in his power ; but it rises hotly,
because I know him- to have been an incapable brute, who had
no more right to be possessed of the great trust he held, than
to be Lord High Admiral, or Commander-in-chief : in either
of which capacities, it is probable, that he would have done
infinitely less mischief.

Miserable little propitiators of a remorseless Idol, how
abject we were to him ! what a launch in life I think it now,
on looking back, to be so mean and servile to a man of such
parts and pretensions !

Here I sit at the desk again, watching his eye — humbly
watching his eye, as he rules a cyphering-book for another
victim whose hands have just been flattened by that identical
ruler, and who is trying to wipe the sting out with a pocket-
handkerchief. I have plenty to do. I don't watch his eye in
idleness, but because I am morbidly attracted to it, in a dread
desire to know what he will do next, and whether it will be
my turn to suffer, or somebody else's. A lane of small boys
beyond me, with the same interest in his eye, watch it too.
I think he knows it, though he pretends he don't. He makes
dreadful mouths as he rules 6he cyphering-book ; and now he
throws his eye sideways down our lane, and we all droop over
our books and tremble. A moment afterwards we are again
eyeing him. An unhappy culprit, found guilty of imperfect
exercise, approaches at his command. The culprit falters

VOL. 1 — 7



98 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

excuses, and professes a determination to do better to-morrow.
Mr. Crealde cuts a joke before he beats him, and we laugh at
it — miserable little dogs, we laugh, with our visages as white
as ashes, and our hearts sinking into our boots.

Here I sit at the desk again, on a drowsy summer afternoon.
A buzz and hum go up around me, as if the boys were so many
blue-bottles. A cloggy sensation of the lukewarm fat of meat
is upon me (we dined an hour or two ago), and my head is. as
heavy as so much lead. I would give the world to go to sleep.
I sit with my eye on Mr. Creakle, blinking at him like a young
owl ; when sleep overpowers me for a minute, he still looms
through my slumber, ruling those cyphering-books ; until he
softly comes behind me and wakes me to plainer perception of
him, with a red ridge across my back.

Here I am in the playground, with my eyes still fascinated
by him, though I can't see him. The window at a little dis-
tance from which I know he is having his dinner, stands for
him, and I eye that instead. If he shows his face near it,
mine assumes an imploring and submissive expression. If he
looks out through the glass, the boldest boy (Steerforth
excepted) stops in the middle of a shout or yell, and becomes
contemplative. One day, Traddles (the most unfortunate boy
in the world) breaks that window accidentally with a ball. I
shudder at this moment with the tremendous sensation of
seeing it done, and feeling that the ball has bounded on to
Mr. Creakle's sacred head.

Poor Traddles ! In a tight sky-blue suit that made his arms
and legs like German sausages, or roly-poly puddings, he w r as
the merriest and most miserable of all the boys. He was
always being caned — I think he was caned every day that
half-year, except one holiday Monday when he was only ruler' d
on both hands — and was always going to write to his uncle
about it, and never did. After laying his head on the desk
for a little while, he would cheer up somehow, begin to laugh
again, and draw skeletons all over his slate, before his eyes
were dry. I used at first to wonder what comfort Traddles
found in drawing skeletons ; and for some time looked upon
him as a sort of hermit, who reminded himself by those
symbols of mortality that caning couldn't last forever. But I



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 99

believe he only did it because they were easy, and didn't want
any features.

He was very honorable, Traddles was ; and held it as a
solemn duty in the boys to stand by one another. He suffered
for this on several occasions ; and particularly once, when
Steerforth laughed in church, and the Beadle thought it was
Traddles, and took him out. I see him now, going away in
custody, despised by the congregation. He never said who
was the real offender, though he smarted for it next day, and
was imprisoned so many hours that he came forth with a
whole churchyard-full of skeletons swarming all over his
Latin Dictionary. But he had his reward. Steerforth said
there was nothing of the sneak in Traddles, and we all felt
that to be the highest praise. For my part, I could have gone
through a good deal (though I was much less brave than
Traddles, and nothing like so old) to have won such a recom-
pense.

To see Steerforth walk to church before us, arm-in-arm with
Miss Creakle, was one or the great sights of my life. I didn't
think Miss Creakle equal to little Em'ly in point of beauty,
and I didn't love her (I didn't dare) ; but I thought her a
young lady of extraordinary attractions, and in point of gen-
tility not to be surpassed. When Steerforth, in white trousers,
carried her parasol for her, I felt proud to know him; and
believed that she could not choose but adore him with all her
heart. Mr. Sharp and Mr. Mell were both notable personages
in my eyes ; but Steerforth was to them what the sun was to
two stars. v

Steerforth continued his protection of me, and proved a
very useful friend ; since nobody dared to annoy one whom he
honored with his countenance. He couldn't — or at all events
he didn't — defend me from Mr. Creakle, who was very severe
with me ; but whenever I had been treated worse than usual,
he always told me that I wanted a little of his pluck, and that
he wouldn't have stood it" himself ; which I felt he intended
for encouragement, and considered to be very kind of him.
There was one advantage, and only one that I know of, in Mr.
Creakle's severity. He found my placard in his way when he
came up or down behind the form on which I sat, and wanted



100 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

to make a cut at me in passing ; for this reason it was soon
taken off, and I saw it no more.

An accidental circumstance cemented the intimacy between
Steerforth and me, in a manner that inspired me with great
pride and satisfaction, though it sometimes led to incon-
venience. It happened on one occasion, when he was doing
me the honor of talking to me in the playground, that I haz-
arded the observation that something or somebody — I forget
what now — was like something or somebody in Peregrine
Pickle. He said nothing at the time ; but when I was going
to bed at night, asked me if I had got that book.

I told him no, and explained how it was that I had read it;
and all those other books of which I have made mention.

"And do you recollecVthem ? " Steerforth said.

Oh yes, I replied ; I had a good memory, and I believed I
recollected them very well.

" Then I tell you what, young Copperfield," said Steerforth,
"you shall tell 'em to me. I can't get to sleep very early at
night, and I generally wake rather early in the morning.
We'll go over 'em one after another. We'll make some regular
Arabian Nights of it."

I felt extremely flattered by this arrangement, and we com-
menced carrying it into execution that very evening. What
ravages I committed on my favorite authors in the course of
my interpretation of them, I am not in a condition to say, and
should be very unwilling to know ; but I had a profound faith
in them, and I had, to the best of my belief, a simple, earnest
manner of narrating what I did, narrate ;'and these qualities
went a long way.

The drawback was, that I was often sleepy at night, or out
of spirits and indisposed to resume the story ; and then it
was rather hard work, and it must be done ; for to disappoint
or displease Steerforth was of course out of the question. In
the morning too, when I felt weary, and should have enjoyed
another hour's repose very much, it was a tiresome thing to be
roused, like the Sultana Scheherazade, and forced into a long
story before the getting-up bell rang ; but Steerforth was reso-
lute; and as he explained to me, in return, my sums and
exercises, and anything in my tasks that was too hard for me,



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 101

I was no loser by the transaction. Let me do myself justice,
however. I was moved by no interested or selfish motive, nor
was I moved by fear of him. I admired and loved him, and
his approval was return enough. It was £o precious to me
that I look back on these trifles, now, with an aching heart.

Steerforth was considerate too ; and showed his considera-
tion, in one particular instance, in an unflinching manner that
was a little tantalizing, I suspect, to poor Traddles and the
rest. Peggotty 5 s promised letter — what a comfortable letter
it was ! — arrived before u the half " was many weeks old ; and
with it a cake in a perfect nest of oranges, and two bottles of
cowslip wine. This treasure, as in duty bound, I laid at the
feet of Steerforth, and begged him to dispense.

"Now, Fll tell you what, young Copperfield," said he:
" the wine shall be kept to wet your whistle when you are
story-telling."

I blushed at the idea, and begged him, in my modesty, not
to think of it. But he said he had observed I was sometimes
hoarse — a little roopy was his exact expression — and it should
be, every drop, devoted to the purpose he had mentioned.
Accordingly, it was locked up in his box, and drawn off by
himself in a phial, and administered to me through a piece of
quill in the cork, when I was supposed to be in want of a
restorative. Sometimes, to make it a more sovereign specific,
he was so kind as to squeeze orange juice into it, or to stir it
up with ginger, or dissolve a peppermint drop in it; and
although I cannot assert that the flavor was improved by these
experiments, or that it was exactly the compound one would
have chosen for a stomachic, the last thing at night and the
first thing in the morning, I drank it gratefully, and was very
sensible of his attention.

We seem to me, to have been months over Peregrine, and
months more over the other stories. The institution never
flagged for want of a story, I am certain ; and the wine lasted
out almost as well as the matter. Poor Traddles — I never
think of that boy but with a strange disposition to laugh, and
with tears in my eyes — was a sort of chorus, in general ; and
affected to be convulsed with mirth at the comic parts, and to
be overcome with fear when there was any passage of an



102 THE PERSONAL SlSTOBY AND EXPERIENCE

alarming character in the narrative. This rather put me out,
very often. It was a great jest of his, I recollect, to pretend
that he couldn't keep his teeth from chattering, whenever
mention was made of an Alguazil in connection with the adven-
tures of Gil Bias; and I remember when Gil Bias met the
captain of the robbers in Madrid, this unlucky joker counter-
feited such an ague of terror, that he was overheard by Mr.
Creakle, who was prowling about the passage, and handsomely
flogged for disorderly conduct in the bedroom.

Whatever I had within me that was romantic and dreamy,
was encouraged by so much story-telling in the dark ; and in
that respect the pursuit may not have been very profitable to
me. But the being cherished as a kind of plaything in my
room, and the consciousness that this accomplishment of mine
was bruited about among the boys, and attracted a good deal
of notice to me though I was the youngest there, stimulated
me to exertion. In a school carried on by sheer cruelty,
whether it is presided over by a dunce or not, there is not
likely to be much learnt. I believe our boys were, generally,
as ignorant a set as any schoolboys in existence ; they were
too much troubled and knocked about to learn ; they could no
more do that to advantage, than any one can do anything to
advantage in a life of constant misfortune, torment, and worry.
But my little vanity, and Steerforth' s help, urged me on some-
how ; and without saving me from much, if anything, in the
way of punishment, made me, for the time I was there, an
exception to the general body, insomuch that I did steadily
pick up some crumbs of knowledge.

In this I was much assisted by Mr. Mell, who had a liking
for me that I am grateful to remember. It always gave me
pain to observe that Steerforth treated him with systematic
disparagement, and seldom lost an occasion of wounding his
feelings, or inducing others to do so. This troubled me the
more for a long time, because I had soon told Steerforth, from
whom I. could no more keep such a secret, than I could keep a
cake or any other tangible possession, about the two old women
Mr. Mell had taken me to see ; and I was always afraid that
Steerforth would let it out, and twit him with it.

We little thought, any one of us, I dare say, when I ate my



OF DAVID COPPEEFIELD. 103

breakfast that first morning, and went to sleep under the
shadow of the peacock's feathers to the sound of the flute,
what consequences would come of the introduction into those
almshouses of my insignificant person. But the visit had its
unforeseen consequences ; and of a serious sort, too, in their
way.

One day when Mr. Creakle kept the house from indisposi-
tion, which naturally diffused a lively joy through the school,
there was a good deal of noise in the course of the morning's
work. The great relief and satisfaction experienced by the
boys made them difficult to manage ; and though the dreaded
Tungay brought his wooden leg in twice or thrice, and took
notes of the principal offenders' names, no great impression
was made by it, as they were pretty "sure of getting into trouble
to-morrow, do what they would, and thought it wise, no doubt,
to enjoy themselves to-day.

It was, properly, a half-holiday ; being Saturday. But as
the noise in the playground would have disturbed Mr. Creakle,
and the weather was not favorable for going out walking, we
were ordered into school in the afternoon, and set some lighter
tasks than usual, which were made for the occasion. It was
the day of the week on which Mr. Sharp went out to get his
wig curled ; so Mr. Mell, who always did the drudgery, what-
ever it was, kept school by himself.

If I could associate the idea of a bull or a bear with any
one so mild as Mr. Mell, I should think of him, in connection
with that afternoon when the uproar was at its height, as of
one of those animals, baited by a thousand dogs. I recall him
bending his aching head, supported on his bony hand, over
the book on his desk, and wretchedly endeavoring to get on
with his tiresome work, amidst an uproar that might have
made the Speaker of the House of Commons giddy. Boys
started in and out of their places, playing at puss-in-the-corner
with other boys ; there were laughing boys, singing boys, talk-
ing boys, dancing boys, howling boys ; boys shuffled with their
feet, boys whirled about him, grinning, making faces, mim-
icking him behind his back and before his eyes : mimicking
his poverty, his boots, his coat, his mother, everything belong-
ing to him that they should have had consideration for.



104 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" Silence ! " cried Mr. Mell, suddenly rising up, and striking
his desk with the book. " What does this mean ! It's impos-
sible to bear it. It's maddening. How can you do it to me,
boys?"

It was my book that he struck his desk with ; and as I stood
beside hirn, following his eye as it glanced round the room, I
saw the boys all stop, some suddenly surprised, some half
afraid, and some sorry perhaps.

Steerforth's place was at the bottom of the school, at the
opposite end of the long room. He was lounging with his
back against the wall, and his hands in his pockets, and looked
at Mr. Mell with his mouth shut up as if he were whistling,
when !Mr. Mell looked at him.

" Silence, Mr. Steerforth ! " said Mr. Mell.

" Silence yourself," said Steerforth, turning red. " Whom
are you talking to ? "

" Sit down," said Mr. Mell.

" Sit down yourself," said Steerforth, " and mind your busi-
ness."

There was a titter, and some applause ; but Mr. Mell was
so white, that silence immediately succeeded ; and one boy,
who had darted out behind him to imitate his mother again,
changed his mind, and pretended to want a pen mended.

" If you think, Steerforth," said Mr. Mell, " that I am not
acquainted with the power you can establish over any mind
here " — he laid his hand, without considering what he did
(as I supposed), upon my head — " or that I have not observed
you, within a few minutes, urging your juniors on to every
sort of outrage against me, you are mistaken."

" I don't 'give myself the trouble of thinking at all about
you," said Steerforth, coolly; "so Fm not mistaken, as it
happens."

"And when you make use of your position of favoritism
here, sir," pursued Mr. Mell, with his lip trembling very
much, " to insult a gentleman — "

" A what ? — where is he ? " said Steerforth.

Here somebody cried out, "Shame, J. Steerforth! Too
bad ! " It was Traddles ; whom Mr. Mell instantly dis-
comfited by bidding him hold his tongue.



OF DAVID GOPPERFIELD. 105

— " To insult one who is not fortunate in life, sir, and who
never gave you the least offence, and the many reasons for not
insulting whom you are old enough and wise enough to under-
stand," said Mr. Mell, with his lip trembling more and more,
"you commit a mean and base action. You can sit down or
stand up as you please, sir. Copperfield, go on."

"Young Copperfield," said Steerforth, coming forward up
the room, "stop a bit. I tell you what, Mr. Mell, once for
all. When you take the liberty of calling me mean or base,
or anything of that sort, you are an impudent beggar. You
are always a beggar, you know ; but when you do that, you
are an impudent beggar."

I am not clear whether he was going to strike Mr. Mell, or
Mr. Mell was going to strike him, or there was any such
intention on either side. I saw a rigidity come upon the
whole school as if they had been turned into stone, and found
Mr. Creakle in the midst of us, with Tungay at his side, and
Mrs. and Miss Creakle looking in at the door as if they were
frightened. Mr. Mell, with his elbows on his desk and his
face in his hands, sat, for some moments, quite still.

" Mr. Mell," said Mr. Creakle, shaking him by the arm ;
and his whisper was so audible now, that Tungay felt it
unnecessary to repeat his words ; " you have not forgotten
yourself, I hope ? "

"No, sir, no," returned the Master, showing his face, and
shaking his head, and rubbing his hands in great agitation.

" No sir. No. I have remembered myself, I — no, Mr.
Creakle, I have not forgotten myself, I — I have remembered
myself, sir. I — I — could wish you had remembered me a little
sooner, Mr. Creakle. It — it — would have been more kind,
sir, more just, sir. It would have saved me something, sir."

Mr. Creakle, looking hard at Mr. Mell, put his hand on
Tungay's shoulder, and got his feet upon the form close by,
and sat upon the desk. After still looking hard at Mr. Mell
from this throne, as he shook his head, and rubbed his hands,
and remained in the same state of agitation, Mr. Creakle
turned to Steerforth, and said :

"Now, sir, as he don't condescend to tell me, what is
this?" '



106 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

Steerforth evaded the question for a little while ; looking
in scorn and anger on his opponent, and remaining silent.
I could not help thinking even in that interval, I remember,
what a noble fellow he was in appearance, and how homely
and plain Mr. Mell looked opposed to him.

" What did he mean by talking about favorites, then ! "
said Steerforth at length.

" Favorites ? " repeated Mr. Creakle, with the veins in his
forehead swelling quickly. "Who talked about favorites ?"

"He did," said Steerforth.

"And pray, what did you mean by that, sir ? " demanded
Mr. Creakle, turning angrily on his assistant.

" I meant, Mr. Creakle," he returned, in a low voice, " as I
said j that no pupil had a right to avail himself of his position
of favoritism to degrade me."

"To degrade you?" said Mr. Creakle. "My stars! But
give me leave to ask you, Mr. WhatVyour-name 5 " and here
Mr. Creakle folded his arms, cane and all, upon his chest, and
made such a knot of his brows that his little eyes were hardly
visible below them ; " whether, when you talk about favorites,
you showed proper respect to me ? To me, sir," said Mr.
Creakle, darting his head at him suddenly, and drawing it
back again, "the principal of this establishment, and your
employer."

" It was not judicious, sir, I am willing to admit," said Mr.
Mell. " I should not have done so, if I had been cool."

Here Steerforth struck in.

"Then he said I was mean, and then he said I was base,
and then I called him a beggar. If I had been cool, perhaps
I shouldn't have called him a beggar. But I did, and I am
ready to take the consequences of it."

Without considering, perhaps, whether there were any con-
sequences to be taken, I felt quite in a glow at this gallant
speech. It made an impression on the boys, too, for there was
a low stir among them, though no one spoke a word.

"I am surprised, Steerforth — although your candor does
you honor," said Mr. Creakle, " does you honor, certainly —
I am surprised, Steerforth, I must say, that you should attach





fucIi an epithet to any person employed and paid in Salem
House, sir."

Steerforth gave a short laugh.

"That's not an answer, sir/' said Mr. Creakle, "to my
remark. I expect more than that from you, Steerforth."

If Mr. Mell looked homely, in my eyes, before the hand-
some boy, it would be quite impossible to say how homely Mr.
Creakle looked.

" Let him deny it," said Steerforth.

" Deny that he is a beggar, Steerforth ? " cried Mr. Creakle.
" Why, where does he go a begging ? "

" If he is not a beggar himself, his near relation's one/' said
Steerforth. "It's all the same."

He glanced at me, and Mr. Mell's hand gently patted me
upon the shoulder. I looked up with a flush upon my face
and remorse in my heart, but Mr. Mell's eyes were fixed on
Steerforth. He continued to pat me kindly on the shoulder,
but he looked at him.

"Since you* expect me, Mr. Creakle, to justify myself/' said
Steerforth, "and to say what I mean, — r what I have to say is,
that his mother lives on charity in an almshouse."

Mr. Mell still looked at him, and still patted me kindly on
the shoulder, and said to himself, in a whisper, if I heard
right : " Yes, I thought so."

Mr. Creakle turned to his assistant, with a severe frown and
labored politeness :

" Now, you hear what this gentleman says, Mr. Mell. Have
the goodness, if you please, to set him right before the as-
sembled school."

"He is right, sir, without correction," returned Mr. Mell,
in the midst of a dead silence; "what he has said is true."

"Be so good then as declare publicly, will you./' said Mr.
Creakle, putting his head on one side, and rolling his eyes
round the school, "whether it ever came to my knowledge
until this moment ? "

" I believe not directly," he returned.

"Why, you know not/' said Mr. Creakle. "Don't you,
man?"

"I apprehend you never supposed my worldly circumstances



108 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

to be very good," replied the assistant. " You know what my
position is, and always has been here."

"I apprehend, if you come to that," said Mr. Creakle, with
his veins swelling again bigger than ever, " that you've been
in a wrong position altogether, and mistook this for a charity
school. Mr. Mell, we'll part if you please. The sooner the
better."

"There is no time," answered Mr. Mell, rising, "like the
present."

" Sir, to you ! " said Mr/ Creakle.

"I take my leave of you, Mr. Creakle, and of all of you,"
said Mr. Mell, glancing round the room, and again patting me
gently on the shoulder. "James Steerforth, the best wish I
can leave you is, that you may come to be ashamed of what
you have done to-day. At present I would prefer to see you
anything rather than a friend to me, or to any one in whom I
feel an interest."

Once more he laid his hand upon my shoulder; and then
taking his flute and a few books from his desk, and leaving the
key in it for his successor, he went out of the school, with his
property under his arm. Mr. Creakle then made a speech,
through Tungay, in which he thanked Steerforth for asserting
(though- perhaps too warmly) the independence and respec-
tability of Salem House ; and which he wound up by shaking
hands with Steerforth, while we gave three cheers — I did not
quite know what for, but I suppose for Steerforth, and so
joined in them ardently, though I felt miserable. Mr. Creakle
then caned Tommy Traddles for being discovered in tears,
instead of cheers, on account of Mr. Mell's departure : and
went back to his sofa or his bed, or wherever he had come
from.

We were left to ourselves now, and looked very blank, I
recollect, on one another. For myself, I felt so much self-
reproach and contrition for my part in what had happened,
that nothing would have enabled me to keep back my tears
but the fear that Steerforth, who often looked at me, I saw,
might think it unfriendly — or, I should rather say, consider-
ing our relative ages, and the feeling with which I regarded
him, undutiful — if I showed the emotion which distressed me.



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 109

He was very angry with Traddles, and said he was glad he had
caught it.

Poor Traddles, who had passed the stage of lying with his
head upon the desk, and was relieving himself as usual with a
burst of skeletons, said he didn't care. Mr. Mell was ill-used.

" Who has ill-used him, you girl ? " said Steerf orth.

" Why, you have," returned Traddles.

"What have I done ? " said Steerf orth.

"What have you done?" retorted Traddles. "Hurt his
feelings and lost him his situation."

"His feelings!" repeated Steerf orth, disdainfully. "His
feelings will soon get the better of it, HI be bound. His feel-
ings are not like yours, Miss Traddles. -As to his situation —
which was a precious one, wasn't it ? — do you suppose I am
not going to write home, and take care that he gets some
money ? Polly ? "

We thought this intention very noble in Steerforth, whose
mother was a widow, and rich, and would do almost anything,
it was said, that he asked her. We were all extremely glad
to see Traddles so put down, and exalted Steerforth to the
skies ; especially when he told us, as he condescended to do,
that what he had done had been done expressly for us, and for
our cause ; and that he had conferred a great boon upon us
by unselfishly doing it.

But I must say that when I was going on with a story in
the dark that night, Mr. MelPs old flute seemed more than
once to sound mournfully in my ears ; and that when at last
Steerforth was tired, and I lay down* in my bed, I fancied it
playing so sorrowfully somewhere, that I was quite wretched.

I soon forgot him in the contemplation of Steerforth, who,
in an easy amateur way, and without any book (he seemed to
me to know everything by heart), took some of his classes
until a new master was found. The new master came from a
grammar-school ; and before he entered on his duties, dined in
the parlor one day to be introduced to Steerforth. Steerforth
approved of him highly, and told us he was a Brick. With-
out exactly understanding what learned distinction was meant
by this, I respected him greatly for it, and had no doubt what-
ever of his superior knowledge ; though he never took the



110 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

pains with me — not that /was anybody — that Mr. Mell had
taken.

There was only one other event in this half-year out of the
daily school-life, that made an impression on me which still
survives. It survives for many reasons.

One afternoon, when we were all harassed into a state of
dire confusion, and Mr. Creakle was laying about him dread-
fully, Tungay came in, and called out in his usual strong way :
"Visitors for Copperfield ! "

A few words were interchanged between him and Mr.
Creakle, as, who the visitors were, and what room they were
to be shown into ; and then I, who had, according to custom,
stood up on the announcement being made, and felt quite faint
with astonishment, was told to go by the back stairs and get
a clean frill on, before I repaired to the dining-room. These
orders I obeyed, in such a flutter and hurry of my young
spirits as I had never known before ; and when I got to the
parlor-door, and the thought came into my head that it might
be my mother — I had only thought of Mr. or Miss Murdstone
until then — I drew back my hand from the lock, and stopped
to have a sob before I went in.

At first I saw nobody ; but feeling a pressure against the
door, I looked round it, and there, to my amazement, were Mr.
Peggotty and Ham, ducking at me with their hats, and squeez-
ing one another against the wall. I could not help laughing ;
but it was much more in the pleasure of seeing them, than at
the appearance they made. We shook hands in a very cordial
way ; and I laughed and laughed, until I pulled out my pocket-
handkerchief and wiped my eyes.

Mr. Peggotty (who never shut his mouth once, I remember,
during the visit) showed great concern when he saw me do
this, and nudged Ham to say something.

" Cheer up, Mas'r Davy bor' ! " said Ham, "in his simpering
way. "Why, how you have growed ! n

" Am I grown ? " I said, drying my eyes. I was not crying
at anything particular that I know of ; but somehow it made
me cry to see old friends..

" Growed, Mas'r Davy bor' ? Ain't he growed ! " said Ham.

" Ain't he growed ! " said Mr. Peggotty.



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. Ill

They made me laugh again by laughing at each other, and
then we all three laughed until I was in danger of crying
again.

" Do you know how mamma is, Mr. Peggotty ? " I said.
" And how my dear, dear, old Peggotty is ? "

" Onconimon," said Mr. Peggotty.

" And little Em'ly and Mrs. Gummidge ? "

" On — common," said Mr. Peggotty.

There was a silence. Mr. Peggotty, to relieve it, took two
prodigious lobsters, and an enormous crab, and a large canvas
bag of shrimps, out of his pockets, and piled them up in Ham's
arms.

" You see," said Mr. Peggotty, " knowing as you was par-
tial to a little relish with your wittles when you was along
with us, we took the liberty. The old Mawther biled 'em, she
did. Mrs. Gummidge biled 'em. Yes," said Mr. Peggotty,
slowly, who I thought appeared to stick to the subject on
account of having no other subject ready, "Mrs. Gummidge,
I do assure you, she biled ; em."

I expressed my thanks ; and Mr. Peggotty, after looking at
Ham, who stood smiling sheepishly over the shell-fish, with-
out making any attempt to help him, said :

" We come, you see, the wind and tide making in our favor,
in one of our Yarmouth lugs to Gravesen'. My sister she
wrote to me the name of this here place, and wrote to me as
if ever I chanced to come to Gravesen', I was to come over and
inquire for Mas'r Davy, and give her dooty, humbly wishing
him well, and reporting of the family as they was oncommon
tog-be-sure. Little Em'ly, you see, she'll write to my sister
when I go back, as I see you, and as you was similarly oncom-
mon, and so we make it quite a merry-go-rounder."

I was obliged to consider a little before I understood what
Mr. Peggotty meant by this figure, expressive of a complete
circle of intelligence. I then thanked him heartily ; and said,
with a consciousness of reddening, that I supposed little Em'ly
was altered too, since we used to pick up shells and pebbles
on the beach ?

" She's getting to be a woman, that's wot she's getting to
be," said Mr. Peggotty. " Ask him."



\12 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

He meant Hani, who beamed with delight and assent over
the bag of shrimps.

" Her pretty face ! " said Mr. Peggotty, with his own shin-
ing like a light.

" Her learning ! M said Ham.

"Her writing !" said Mr. Peggotty. "Why it's as black as
jet ! And so large it is, you might see it anywheres."

It was perfectly delightful to behold with what enthusiasm
Mr. Peggotty became inspired when he thought of his little
favorite. He stands before me again, his bluff hairy face
irradiating with a joyful love and pride, for which I can find
no description. His honest eyes fire up, and sparkle, as if
their depths were stirred by something bright. His broad
chest heaves with pleasure. His strong loose hands clench
themselves, in his earnestness ; and he emphasizes what he
says with a right arm that shows, in my pigmy view, like a
sledge hammer.

Ham was quite as earnest as he. I dare say they would
have said much more about her, if they had not been abashed
by the unexpected coming in of Steerforth, who seeing me in
a corner speaking with two strangers, stopped in a song he was
singing, and said : " I didn't know you were here, young Cop^
perfield ! " (for it was not the usual visiting room), and crossed
by us on his way out.

I am not sure whether it was in the pride of having such a
friend as Steerforth, or in the desire to explain to him how I
came to have such a friend as Mr. Peggotty, that I called to
him as he was going away. But I said, modestly — Good
Heaven, how it all comes back to me this long time after-
wards ! —

" Don't go, Steerforth, if you please. These are two Yar-
mouth boatmen — very kind, good people — who are relations
of my nurse, and have come from Gravesend to see me."

" Ay, ay ? " said Steerforth, returning. " I am glad to see
them. How are you both ? "

There was an ease in his manner — a gay and light manner
it was, but not swaggering — which I still believe to have
borne a kind of enchantment with it. I still believe him, in
virtue of this carriage, his animal spirits, his delightful voice,



i



OF DAVID COPPEEFIELD. 113

his handsome face and figure, and, for aught I know, of some
inborn power of attraction besides (which I think a few people
possess), to have carried a spell with him to which it was a
natural weakness to yield, and which not many persons could
withstand. I could not but see how pleased they were with
him, and how they seemed to open their hearts to him in a
moment.

"You must let them know at home, if you please, Mr.
Peggotty," I said, " when that letter is sent, that Mr. Steer-
forth is very kind to me, and that I don't know what I should
ever do here without hiin."

" Nonsense ! " said Steerf orth, laughing. " You mustn't tell
them anything of the sort."

" And if Mr. Steerforth ever comes into Norfolk, or Suffolk,
Mr. Peggotty," I said, " while I am there, you may depend
upon it I shall bring him to Yarmouth, if he will let me, to
see your house. You never saw such a good house, Steerforth.
It's made out of a boat ! "

"Made out of a boat, is it ?" said Steerforth. "It's the
right sort of house for such a thorough-built boatman."

"So 'tis, sir, so 'tis, sir," said Ham, grinning. "You're
right, young gen'lm'n. Mas'r Davy, bor', gen'lm'n's right. A
thorough-built boatman ! Hor, hor ! That's what he is, too ! "

Mr. Peggotty was no less pleased than his nephew, though
his modesty forbade him to claim a personal compliment so
vociferously.

"Well, sir," he said, bowing and chuckling, and tucking in
the ends of his neckerchief at his breast, " I thankee, sir, I
thankee ! I do my endeavors in my line of life, sir."

"The best of men can do no more, Mr. Peggotty," said
Steerforth. He had got his name already.

"I'll pound it it's wot you do yourself, sir," said Mr.
Peggotty, shaking his head, "and wot you do well — right
well ! I thankee, sir. I'm obleeged to you, sir, for your
welcoming manner of me. I'm rough, sir, but I'm ready —
least ways, I hope I'm ready, you understand. My house ain't
much for to see, sir, but it's hearty at your service, if ever
you should come along with Mas'r Davy to see it. I'm a
reg'lar Dodman, I am," said Mr. Peggotty, by which he meant

VOL. 1 — 8



114 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

snail, and this was in allusion to his being slow to go, for he
had attempted to go after every sentence, and had somehow or
other come back again; "but I wish you both well, and I
wish you happy ! "

Ham echoed this sentiment, and we parted with them in
the heartiest manner. I was almost tempted that evening to
tell Steerforth about pretty little Em'ly, but I was too timid
of mentioning her name, and too much afraid of his laughing
at me. I remember that I thought a good deal, and in an
uneasy sort of way, about Mr. Peggotty having said that she
was getting on to be a woman; but I decided that was non-
sense.

We transported the shell-fish, or the " relish" as Mr. Peg-
gotty had modestly called it, up into our room unobserved,
and made a great supper that evening. But Traddles couldn't
get happily out of it. He was too unfortunate even to come
through a supper like anybody else. He was taken ill in the
night — quite prostrate he was — in consequence of Crab ; and
after being drugged with black draughts and blue pills, to an
extent which Demple (whose father was a doctor) said was
enough to undermine a horse's constitution, received a caning
and six chapters of Greek Testament for refusing to confess.

The rest of the half-year is a jumble in my recollection of
the daily strife and struggle of our lives ; of the waning sum-
mer and the changing season; of the frosty mornings when
we were rung out of bed, and the cold, cold smell of the dark
nights when we were rung into bed again ; of the evening
schoolroom dimly lighted and indifferently warmed, and the
morning schoolroom which was nothing but a great shivering
machine; of the alternation of boiled beef with roast beef,
and boiled mutton with roast mutton ; of clods of bread-and-
butter, dog's-eared lesson-books, cracked slates, tear-blotted
copy-books, canings, rulerings, hair-cuttings, rainy Sundays,
suet-puddings, and a dirty atmosphere of ink surrounding all.

I well remember though how the distant idea of the
holidays, after seeming for an immense time to be a stationary
speck, began to come towards us, and to grow and grow. How
from counting months, we came to weeks, and then to days :
and how I then began to be afraid that I should not be sent






OF DAVID' COPPERFIELD. 115

for, and when I learnt from Steerforth that I had been sent
for and was certainly to go home, had dim forebodings that I
might break my leg first. How the breaking-up day changed
its place fast, at last, from the week after next to next week,
this week, the day after to-morrow, to-morrow, to-day, to-night
— when I was inside the Yarmouth mail, and going home.

I had many a broken sleep inside the Yarmouth mail, and
many an incoherent dream of all these things. But when I
awoke at intervals, the ground outside the window was not
the playground of Salem House, and the sound in my ears
was not the sound of Mr. Creakle giving it to Traddles, but
the sound of the coachman touching up the horses.



116 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE



CHAPTER VIII.

MY HOLIDAYS. ESPECIALLY ONE HAPPY AFTERNOON.

When we arrived before day at the inn where the mail
stopped, which was not the inn where my friend the waiter
lived, I was shown up to a nice little bedroom, with Dolphin
painted on the door. Very cold I was I know, notwithstand-
ing the hot tea they had given me before a large fire down
stairs ; and very glad I was to turn into the Dolphin's bed,
■ pull the Dolphin's blankets round my head, and go to sleep.

Mr. Barkis the carrier was to call for me in the morning at
nine o'clock. I got up at eight, a little giddy from the shortness
of my night's rest, and was ready for him before the appointed
time. He received me exactly as if not five minutes had elapsed
since we were last together, and I had only been into the hotel
to get change for sixpence, or something of that sort.

As soon as I and my box were in the cart, and the carrier
seated, the lazy horse walked away with us all at his accus-
tomed pace.

u You look very well, Mr. Barkis," I said, thinking he would
like to know it.

Mr. Barkis rubbed his cheek with his cuff, and then looked
at his cuff as if he expected to find some of the bloom upon
it ; but made no other acknowledgment of the compliment.

"I gave your message, Mr. Barkis," I said: "I wrote to
Peggotty."

"Ah!" said Mr. Barkis.

Mr. Barkis seemed gruff, and answered drily.

" Wasn't it right, Mr. Barkis ? " I asked, after a little hesi-
tation.

"Why no," said Mr. Barkis.

"Not the message ? "

" The message was right enough, perhaps," said Mr. Barkis ;
" but it come to an end there."



OF DAVID C0PPERF1ELD. 117

Not understanding what he meant, I repeated inquisitively :
" Came to an end, Mr. Barkis ? "

"Nothing come of it," he explained, looking at me side-
ways. " No answer."

" There was an answer expected, was there, Mr. Barkis ? n
said I, opening my eyes. Por this was a new light to me.

" When a man says he's willing" said Mr. Barkis, turning
his glance slowly on me again, "it's as much as to say, that
man's a waitin' for a answer."

"Well, Mr. Barkis?"

"Well," said Mr. Barkis, carrying his eyes back to his horse's
ears ; " that man's been awaitin' for a answer ever since."

" Have you told her so, Mr. Barkis ? "

"N — no," growled Mr. Barkis, reflecting about it. "I
ain't got no call to go and tell her so. I never said six words
to her myself. I ain't a goin' to tell her so."

" Would you like me to do it, Mr. Barkis ? " said I, doubt-
fully.

" You might tell her, if you would," said Mr. Barkis, with
another slow look at me, "that Barkis was a waitin' for a
answer. Says you — what name is it ? "

"Her name?"

"Ah ! " said Mr. Barkis, with a nod of his head.

"Peggotty."

" Chrisen name ? Or nat'ral name ? " said Mr. Barkis.

" Oh, it's not her christian name. Her christian name is
Clara."

" Is it though ! " said Mr. Barkis.

He seemed to find an immense fund of reflection in this
circumstance, and sat pondering and inwardly whistling for
some time.

" Well ! " he resumed, at length. " Says you, i Peggotty !
Barkis is a waitin' for a answer.' Says she, perhaps, ' Answer
to what ? ' Says you, < To what I told you.' < What is that ? '
says she. ' Barkis is willin',' says you."

This extremely artful suggestion, , Mr. Barkis accompanied
with a nudge of his elbow that gave me quite a stitch in my
side. After that, he slouched over his horse in his usual
manner ; and made no other reference to the subject except,



118 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

half an hour afterwards, taking a piece of chalk from his
pocket, and writing up, inside the tilt of the cart, "Clara
Peggotty " — apparently as a private memorandum.

Ah, what a strange feeling it was to be going home when
it was not home, and to find that every object I looked at,
reminded me of the happy old home, which was like a dream
I could never dream again ! The days when my mother and
I and Peggotty were all in all to one another, and there was
no one to come between us, rose up before me so sorrowfully
on the road, that I am not sure I was glad to be there — not
sure but that I would rather have remained away, and for-
gotten it in Steerforth's company. But there I was ; and
soon I was at our house, where the bare old elm trees wrung
their many hands in the bleak wintry air, and shreds of the
old rooks' nests drifted away upon the wind.

The carrier put my box down at the garden gate, and left
me. I walked along the path towards the house, glancing" at
the windows, and fearing at every step to see Mr. Murdstone
or Miss Murdstone lowering out of one of them. No face
appeared, however ; and being come to the house, and knowing
how to open the door, before dark, without knocking, I went
in with a quiet timid step.

God knows how infantine the memory may have been, that
was awakened within me by the sound of my mother's voice
in the old parlor, when I set foot in the hall. She was singing
in a low tone. I think I must have lain in her arms, and
heard her singing so to me when I was but a baby. The strain
was new to me, and yet it was so old that it filled my heart
brimful ; like a friend come back from a long absence.

I believed, from the solitary and thoughtful way in which
my mother murmured her song, that she was alone. And I
went softly into the room. She was sitting by the fire, suck-
ling an infant, whose tiny hand she held against her neck.
Her eyes were looking down upon its face, and she sat sing-
ing to it. I was so far right, that she had no other companion.

I spoke to her, and she started, and cried out. But seeing
me, she called me her dear Davy, her own boy ! and coming
half across the room to meet me, kneeled down upon the
ground and kissed me, and laid my head down on her bosom



OF DAVID COPPEEFIELD. 119

near the little creature that was nestling there, and put its
hand up to my lips.

I wish I had died. I wish I had died then, with that feel-
ing in my heart! I should have been more fit for Heaven
than I ever have been since.

"He is your brother," said my mother, fondling me.
" Davy, my pretty boy ! My poor child ! " Then she kissed
me more and more, and clasped me round the neck. This she
was doing when Peggotty came running in, and bounced down
on the ground beside us, and went mad about us both for a
quarter of an hour.

It seemed that I had not been expected so soon, the carrier
being much before his usual time. It seemed, too, that Mr.
and Miss Murdstone had gone out upon a visit in the neighbor-
hood, and would not return before night. I had never hoped
for this. I had never thought it possible that we three could
be together undisturbed, once more ; and I felt, for the time,
as if the old days were come back.

We dined together by the fireside. Peggotty was in attend-
ance to wait upon us, but my mother wouldn't let her do it,
and made her dine with us. I had my own old plate, with a
brown view of a man-of-war in full sail upon it, which Peggotty
had hoarded somewhere all the time I had been away, and
would not have had broken, she said, for a hundred pounds. I
had my own old mug with David on it, and my own old little
knife and fork that wouldn't cut.

While we were at table, I thought it a favorable occasion to
tell Peggotty about Mr. Barkis, who, before I had finished
what I had to tell her, began to laugh, and throw her apron
over her face.

" Peggotty," said my mother. " What's the matter ? "

Peggotty only laughed the more, and held her apron tight
over her face when my mother tried to pull it away, and sat
as if her head were in a bag.

* What are you doing, you stupid creature ? " said my
mother, laughing.

" Oh, drat the man ! " cried Peggotty. " He wants to marry me."

"It would be a very good match for you; wouldn't it?"
said my mother.



120 THE PEBSONAL HISTOBY AND EXPEBIENCE

"Oh! I don't know/' said Peggotty. " Don't ask me. I
wouldn't have him if he was made of gold. Nor I wouldn't
have anybody."

" Then, why don't you tell him so, you ridiculous thing ? "
said my mother.

" Tell him so/' retorted Peggotty, looking out of her apron.
" He has never said a word to me about it. He knows better.
If he was to make so bold as say a word to me, I should
slap his face."

Her own was as red as ever I saw it, or any other face I
think ; but she only covered it again, for a few moments at a
time, when she was taken with a violent fit of laughter ; and
after two or three of those attacks, went on with her dinner.

I remarked that my mother, though she smiled when Peg-
gotty looked at her, became more serious and thoughtful. I
had seen at first that she was changed. Her face was very
pretty still, but it looked careworn, and too delicate ; and her ,
hand was so thin and white that it seemed to me to be almost
transparent. But the change to which I now refer was super-
added to this : it was in her manner, which became anxious
and fluttered. At last she said, putting out her hand, and lay-
ing it affectionately on the hand of her old servant :

u Peggotty dear, you are not going to be married ? "

" Me, ma'am ? " returned Peggotty, staring. " Lord bless
you, no ! "

" Not just yet ? " said my mother, tenderly.

" Never ! " cried Peggotty.

My mother took her hand, and said :

" Don't leave me, Peggotty. Stay with me. It will not be
for long, perhaps. What should I ever do without you ! "

"Me leave you, my precious!" cried Peggotty. "Not for
all the world and his wife. Why, what's put that in your
silly little head ? " — for Peggotty had been used of old to talk
to my mother sometimes like a child.

But my mother made no answer, except to thank her, and
Peggotty went running on in her own fashion.

" Me leave you ? I think I see myself. Peggotty go away
from you ? I should like to catch her at it ! No, no, no,"
said Peggotty, shaking her head, and folding her arms ; " not






OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 121

she, my dear. It isn't that there ain't some Gats that would
be well enough pleased if she did, but they sha'n't be pleased.
They shall be aggravated. Fll stay with you till Fm a cross
cranky old woman. And when I'm too deaf, and too lame,
and too blind, and too mumbly for want of teeth, to be of any
use at all, even to be found fault with, then I shall go to my
Davy, and ask him to take me in."

u And Peggotty," says I, " I shall be glad to see you, and
I'll make you as welcome as a queen."

" Bless your dear heart!" cried Peggotty. "I know you
will!" And she kissed me beforehand, in grateful acknowl-
edgment of my hospitality. After that, she covered her head
up with her apron again, and had another laugh about Mr.
Barkis.- After that, she took the baby out of its little cradle,
and nursed it. After that, she cleared the dinner-table ; after
that, came in with another cap on, and her workbox, and the
yard-measure, and the bit of wax candle, all just the same as
ever. We sat round the fire, and talked delightfully. I told
them what a hard master Mr. Creakle was, and they pitied me
very much. I told them what a fine fellow Steerforth was,
and what a patron of mine, and Peggotty said she would walk
a score of miles to see him. I took the little baby in my arms
when it was awake, and nursed it lovingly. When it was
asleep again, I crept close to my mother's side, according to
my old custom, broken now a long time, and sat with my arms
embracing her waist, and my little red cheek on her shoulder,
and once more felt her beautiful hair drooping over me — like
an angel's wing as I used to think, I recollect — and was very
happy indeed.

While I sat thus, looking at the fire, and seeing pictures in
the red-hot coals, I almost believed that I had never been
away ; that Mr. and Miss Murdstone were such pictures, and
would vanish when the fire got low; and that there was
nothing real in all that I remembered, save my mother,
Peggotty, and I.

Peggotty darned away at a stocking as long as she could
see, and then sat with it drawn on her left hand like a glove,
and her needle iu her right, ready to take another stitch when-
ever there was a blaze. I cannot conceive whose stockings



122 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

they can have been that Peggotty was always darning, or
where such an unfailing supply of stockings in want of darn-
ing can have come from. Prom my earliest infancy she seems
to have been always employed in that class of needlework, and
never by any chance in any other.

" I wonder," said Peggotty, who was sometimes seized with
a fit of wondering on some most unexpected topic, "what's
become of Davy's great-aunt ? "

" Lor, Peggotty ! " observed my mother, rousing herself
from a reverie, " what nonsense you talk ! "

"Well, but I really do wonder, ma'am," said Peggotty.

" What can have put such a person in your head ? " inquired
my mother. "Is there nobody else in the world to come
there ? "

"I don't know how it is," said Peggotty, "unless it's on
account of being stupid, but _my head never can pick and
choose its people. They come and they go, and they don't
come and they don't go, just as they like. I wonder what's
become of her ? "

"How absurd you are, Peggotty," returned my mother.
" One would suppose you wanted a second visit from her."

"Lord forbid !" cried Peggotty.

"Well, then, don't talk about such uncomfortable things,
there's a good soul," said my mother. " Miss Betsey is shut up
in her cottage by the sea, no doubt, and will remain there. At
all events, she is not likely ever to trouble us again."

" No ! " mused Peggotty. " No, that ain't likely at all —
I wonder, if she was to die, whether she'd leave Davy any-
thing?"

"Good gracious me, Peggotty," returned my mother, "what
a nonsensical woman you are ! when you know that she took
offence at the poor dear boy's ever being born at all ! "

" I suppose she wouldn't be inclined to forgive him now,"
hinted Peggotty.

" Why should she be inclined to forgive him now ? " said
my mother, rather sharply.

"Now that he's got a brother, I mean," said Peggotty.

My mother immediately began to cry, and wondered how
Peggotty dared to say such a thing.



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 123

"As if this poor little innocent in its cradle had ever done
any harm to you or anybody else, you jealous thing!" said*
she. "You had much better go and marry Mr. Barkis, the
carrier. Why don't you ? "

"I should make Miss Murdstone happy, if I was to/' said
Peggotty.

" What a bad disposition you have, Peggotty ! " returned
my mother. " You are as jealous of Miss Murdstone as it is
possible for a ridiculous creature to be. You want to keep
the keys yourself, and give out all the things, I suppose ? I
shouldn't be surprised if you did. When you know that she
only does it out of kindness and the best intentions ! You
know she does, Peggotty — you know it well."

Peggotty muttered something to the effect of "Bother the
best intentions ! " and something else to the effect that there
was a little too much of the best intentions going on.

" I know what you mean, you cross thing," said my mother.
" I understand you, Peggotty, perfectly. You know I do, and
I wonder you don't color up like fire. But one point at a
time. Miss Murdstone is the point now, Peggotty, and j you
sha'n't escape from it. Haven't you heard her say, over and
over again, that she thinks I am too thoughtless and too — a
—a—"

" Pretty," suggested Peggotty.

" Well," returned my mother, half laughing, " and if she is
so silly as to say so, can I be blamed for it ? "

" No one says you can," said Peggotty.

" No, I should hope not, indeed ! " returned my mother.
" Haven't you heard her say, over and over again, that on this
account she wishes to spare me a great deal of trouble, which
she thinks I am not suited for, and which I really don't know
myself that I am suited for ; and isn't she up early and late,
and going to and fro continually — and doesn't she do all
sorts of things, and grope into all sorts of places, coal-holes
and pantries and I don't know where, that can't be very
agreeable — and do you mean to insinuate that there is not
a sort of devotion in that ? "

" I don't insinuate at all," said Peggotty.

" You do, Peggotty," returned my mother. " You never do



124 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

anything else, except your work. You are always insinuating.
You revel in it. And when you talk of Mr. Murdstone's good
intentions — "

" I never talked of 'em," said Peggo.tty.

"Xo, Peggotty," returned my mother, "but you insinuated.
That's what I told you just now. That's the worst of you.
You tcill insinuate. I said, at the moment, that I understood
you, and you see I did. When you talk of Mr. ATurdstone's
good intentions, and pretend to slight them (for I don't be-
lieve you really do, in your heart, Peggotty), you must be as
well convinced as I am how good they are, and how they ac-
tuate him in everything. If he seems to have been at all
stern with a certain person, Peggotty — you understand, and
so I am sure does Davy, that I am not alluding to anybody
present — it is solely because he is satisfied that it is for a
certain person's benefit. He naturally loves a certain person,
on my account ; and acts solely for a certain person's good.
He is better able to judge of it than I am ; for I very well
know that I am a weak, light, girlish creature, and that
he is a firm, grave, serious man. And he takes," said my
mother, with the tears which were engendered in her affec-
tionate nature, stealing down her face, " he takes great pains
with me ; and I ought to be very thankful to him, and very
submissive to him even in my thoughts ; and when I am not,
Peggotty, I worry and condemn myself, and feel doubtful of
my own heart, and don't know what to do."

Peggotty sat with her chin on the foot of the stocking, look-
ing silently at the fire.

"There, Peggotty," said my mother, changing her tone,
" don't let us fall out with one another, for I couldn't bear it.
You are my true friend, I know, if I have any in the world.
When I call you a ridiculous creature, or a vexatious thing,
or anything of that sort, Peggotty, I only mean that you are
my true friend, and always have been, ever since the night
when 3*Ir. Copperfield first brought me home here, and you
came out to the gate to meet me."

Peggotty was not slow to respond, and ratify the treaty of
friendship by giving me one of her best hugs. I think I had
some glimpses of the real character of this conversation at the



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 125

time ; but I am sure, new, that the good creature originated
it • and took her part in it, merely that my mother might
comfort herself with the little contradictory summary in
Which she had indulged. The design was efficacious ; for I
remember that my mother seemed more at ease during the
rest of the evening, and that Peggotty observed her less.

When we had had our tea, and the ashes were thrown up,
and the candles snuffed, I read Peggotty a chapter out of the
Crocodile Book, in remembrance of old times — she took it
out of her pocket : I don't know whether she had kept it
there ever since — and then we talked about Salem House,
which brought me round again to Steerforth, who was my
great subject. We were very happy; and that evening, as the
last of its race, and destined evermore to close that volume of
my life, will never pass out of my memory.

It was almost ten o'clock before we heard the sound of
wheels. We all got up then ; and my mother said hurriedly
that, as it was so late, and Mr. and Miss Murdstone approved
of early hours for young people, perhaps I had better go to
bed. I kissed her, and went up stairs with my candle, directly,
before they came in. It appeared to my childish fancy, as I
ascended to the bedroom where I had been imprisoned, that
they brought a cold blast of air into the house which blew
away the old familiar feeling like a feather.

I felt uncomfortable about going down to breakfast in the
morning, as I had never set eyes on Mr. Murdstone since the
day when I committed my memorable offence. However, as
it must be done, I went down, after two or three false starts
half-way, and as many runs back on tiptoe to my own room,
and presented myself in the parlor.

He was standing before the fire with his back to it, while
Miss Murdstone made the tea. He looked at me steadily as I
entered, but made no sign of recognition whatever.

I went up to him, after a moment of confusion, and said :
" I beg your pardon, sir. I am very sorry for what I did, and
I hope you will forgive me."

" I am glad to hear you are sorry, David," he replied.

The hand he gave me was the hand I had bitten. I could
not restrain my eye from resting for an instant on a red spot



126 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

upon it ; but it was not so red as I turned, when I met that
sinister expression in his face.

"How do you do, ma'am/' I said to Miss Murdstone.

" Ah, dear me ! " sighed Miss Murdstone, giving me the tea-
caddy scoop instead of her fingers. " How long are the holi-
days ? "

"A month, ma'am."

" Counting from when ? "

"From to-day, ma'am."

"Oh ! " said Miss Murdstone. "Then here's one day off."

She kept a calendar of the holidays in this way, and every
"morning checked a day off in exactly the same manner. She
did it gloomily until she came to ten, but when she got into
two figures she become more hopeful, and, as the time ad-
vanced, even jocular.

It was on this very first day that I had the misfortune to
throw her, though she was not subject to such weakness in
general, into a state of violent consternation. I came into
the room where she and my mother were sitting ; and the baby
(who was only a few weeks old) being on my mother's lap, I
took it very carefully in my arms. Suddenly Miss Murd-
stone gave such a scream that I all but dropped it.

" My dear Jane ! " cried my mother.

" Good heavens, Clara, do you see ? " exclaimed Miss
Murdstone.

" See what, my dear Jane ? " said my mother ; " where ? "

" He's got it ! " cried Miss Murdstone. " The boy has got
the baby ! "

She was limp with horror ; but stiffened herself to make a
dart at me, and take it out of my arms. Then, she turned
faint ; and was so very ill, that they were obliged to give her
cherry-brandy. I was solemnly interdicted by her, on her
recovery, from touching my brother any more on any pretence
whatever; and my poor mother, who, I could see, wished
otherwise, meekly confirmed the interdict by saying: "No
doubt you are right, my dear Jane."

On another occasion, when we three were together, this
same dear baby — it was truly dear to me, for our mother's
sake — was the innocent occasion of Miss Murdstone's going





into a passion. My mother, who had been looking at its eyes
as it lay upon her lap, said :

" Davy ! come here ! " and looked at mine.

I saw Miss Murdstone lay her beads down.

" I declare," said my mother, gently, " they are exactly alike.
I suppose they are mine. I think they are the color of mine.
But they are wonderfully alike."

" What are you talking about, Clara ? " said Miss Murd-
stone.

"My dear Jane," faltered my mother, a little abashed by
the harsh tone of this inquiry, "I find that the baby's eyes and
Davy's are exactly alike."

"Clara!" said Miss Murdstone, rising angrily, ''you are a
positive fool sometimes."

" My dear Jane," remonstrated my mother.

"A positive fool," said Miss Murdstone. "Who else could
compare my brother's baby with your boy ? They are not at
all alike. * They are exactly unlike. They are utterly dis-
similar in all respects. I hope they will ever remain so. I
will not sit here and hear such comparisons made." With that
she stalked out, and made the door bang after her.

In short, I was not a favorite with Miss Murdstone. In
short, I was not a favorite there with anybody, not even
with myself ; for those who did like me could not show it, and
those who did not showed it so plainly that I had a sensitive
consciousness of always appearing constrained, boorish, and
dull.

I felt that I made them as uncomfortable as they made me.
If I came into the room where they were, and they were talk-
ing together and my mother seemed cheerful, an anxious cloud
would steal over her face from the moment of my entrance.
If Mr. Murdstone were in his best humor, I checked him. If
Miss Murdstone were in her worst, I intensified it. I had
perception enough to know that my mother was the victim
always ; that she was afraid to speak to me, or be kind to me,
lest she should give them some offence by her manner of doing
so, and receive a lecture afterwards; that she was not only
ceaselessly afraid of her own offending, but of my offending,
and uneasily watched their looks if I only moved. Therefore



128 THE PERSONAL HISTOBY AND EXPERIENCE

I resolved to keep myself as much out of their way as I
could ; and many a wintry hour did I hear the church-clock
strike, when I was sitting in my cheerless bedroom, wrapped
in my little great coat, poring over a book.

In the evening, sometimes, I went and sat with Peggotty in
the kitchen. There I was comfortable, and not afraid of
being myself. But neither of -these resources was approved
of in the parlor. The tormenting humor which was dominant
there stopped them both. I was still held to be necessary to
lay poor mother's training, and, as one of her trials, could not
be suffered to absent myself.

" David," said Mr. Murdstone, one day after dinner when I
wab going to leave the room as usual; " I am sorry to observe
that you are of a sullen disposition."

" As sulky as a bear !" said Miss Murdstone.

I stood still, and hung my head.

"Now, David," said Mr. Murdstone, "a sullen, obdurate dis-
position is, of all tempers, the worst."

" And the boy's is, of all such dispositions that ever I have
seen," remarked his sister, "the most confirmed and stubborn.
I think, my dear Clara, even you must observe it ? "

"I beg your pardon, my dear Jane," said my mother, "but
are you quite sure — I am certain you'll excuse me, my dear
Jane — that you understand Davy ? "

"I should be somewhat ashamed of myself, Clara," returned
Miss Murdstone, "if I could not understand the boy, or any
boy. I don't profess to be profound ; but I do lay claim to
common sense."

"No doubt, my dear Jane," returned my mother, "your
Understanding is very vigorous — "

" Oh dear, no ! Pray don't say that, Clara," interposed Miss
Murdstone, angrily.

"But I am sure it is," resumed my mother ; " and everybody
knows it is. I profit so much by it myself, in many ways —
at least I ought to — that no one can be more convinced of it
than myself ; and therefore I speak with great diffidence, my
dear Jane, I assure you."

"We'll say I don't understand the boy, Clara," returned
Miss Murdstone, arranging the little fetters on her wrists.-





"We'll agree, if you please, that I don't understand liim at
all. He is much too deep for me. But perhaps my brother's
penetration may enable him to have some insight into his
character. And I believe my brother was speaking on the
subject when we — not very decently — interrupted him."

" I think, Clara/' said Mr. Murdstone, in a low grave voice,
" that there may be better and more dispassionate judges of
such a question than you."

"Edward," replied my mother, timidly, "you are a far bet-
ter judge of all questions than I pretend to be. Both you and
Jane are. I only said — "

"You only said something weak and inconsiderate," he
replied. " Try not to do it again, my dear Clara, and keep a
watch upon yourself."

My mother's lips moved, as if she answered " Yes, my dear
Edward," but she said nothing aloud.

"I was sorry, David, I remarked," said Mr. Murdstone,
turning his head and his eyes stiffly towards me, " to observe
that you are of a sullen disposition. This is not a character
that I can suffer to develop itself before my eyes without an
effort at improvement. You must endeavor, sir, to change it.
We must endeavor to change it for you."

" I beg your pardon, sir," I faltered. " I have never meant
to be sullen since I came back."

" Don't take refuge in a lie, sir ! " he returned, so fiercely,
that I saw my mother involuntarily put out her trembling
hand as if to interpose between us. " You have withdrawn
yourself in your sullenness to your own room. You have
kept your own room when you ought to have been here. You
know now, once for all, that I require you to be here, and
not there. Further, that I require you to bring obedience
here. You know me, David, I will have it done."

Miss Murdstone gave a hoarse chuckle.

"I will have a respectful, prompt, and ready bearing to-
wards myself," he continued, " and towards Jane Murdstone,
and towards your mother. I will not have this room shunned
as if it were infected, at the pleasure of a child. Sit down."

He ordered me like a dog, and I obeyed like a dog.

" One thing more," he said. " I observe that you have an

VOL. 1 — 9



130 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

attachment to low and common company. You are not to
associate with servants. The kitchen will not improve you,
in the many respects in which you need improvement. Of the
woman who abets you, I say nothing — since you, Clara,"
addressing my mother in a lower voice, " from old associations
and long established fancies, have a weakness respecting her
which is not yet overcome."

" A most unaccountable delusion it is ! " cried Miss Murd-
stone.

"I only say," he resumed, addressing me, "that I disap-
prove of your preferring such company as Mistress Peggotty,
and that it is to be abandoned. Now, David, you understand
me, and you know what will be the consequence if you fail to
obey me to the letter."

I knew well — better perhaps than he thought, as far as my
poor mother was concerned — and I obeyed him to the letter.
I retreated to my own room no more ; I took refuge with Peg*
gotty no more ; but sat wearily in the parlor day after day,
looking forward to night, and bedtime.

What irksome constraint I underwent, sitting in the same
attitude hours upon hours, afraid to move an arm or a leg lest
Miss Murdstone should complain (as she did on the least
pretence) of my restlessness, and afraid to move an eye lest it
should light on some look of dislike or scrutiny that would
find new cause for complaint in mine ! What intolerable
dulness to sit listening to the ticking of the clock ; and watch-
ing Miss Murdstone's little shiny steel beads as she strung
them ; and wondering whether she would ever be married, and
if so, to what sort of unhappy man ; and counting the divisions
in the moulding on the chimney-piece ; and wandering away,
with my eyes, to the ceiling, among the curls and corkscrews
in the paper on the wall !

What walks I took alone, down muddy lanes, in the bad
winter weather, carrying that parlor, and Mr. and Miss Murd-
stone in it, everywhere : a monstrous load that I was obliged
to bear, a daymare that there was no possibility of breaking
in, a weight that brooded on my wris and blunted them !

What meals I had in silence and embarrassment, always
feeling that there were a knife and fork too many, and that








mine ; an appetite too many, and that mine ; a plate and chair
too many, and those mine ; a somebody too many, and that I !

What evenings, when the candles came, and I was expected
to employ myself, but not daring to read an entertaining book,
pored over some hard-headed, harder-hearted treatise on arith-
metic ; when the tables of weights and measures set them-
selves to tunes, as Rule Britannia, or Away with Melancholy ;
and wouldn't stand still to be learnt, but would go threading
my grandmother's needle through my unfortunate head, in at
one ear and out at the other !

What yawns and dozes I lapsed into, in spite of all my
care j what starts I came out of concealed sleeps with ; what
answers I never got, to little observations that I rarely made ;
what a blank space I seemed, which everybody overlooked,
and yet I was in everybody's way ; what a heavy relief it was
to hear Miss Murdstone hail the first stroke of nine at night,
and order me to bed !

Thus the holidays lagged away, until the morning came
when Miss Murdstone said : " Here's the last day off ! " and
gave me the closing cup of tea of the vacation.

I was not sorry to go. I had lapsed into a stupid state ;
but I was recovering a little and looking forward to Steer-
forth, albeit Mr. Creakle loomed behind him. Again Mr.
Barkis appeared at the gate, and again Miss Murdstone in her
warning voice, said : " Clara ! " when my mother bent over
me, to bid me farewell.

I kissed her, and my baby brother, and was very sorry then ;
but not sorry to go away, for the gulf between us was there,
and the parting was there, every day. And it is not so much
the embrace she gave me, that lives in my mind, though it was
as fervent as could be, as what followed the embrace.

I was in the carrier's cart when I heard her calling to me.
I looked out, and she stood at the garden-gate alone, holding
her baby up in her arms for me to see. It was cold still
weather ; and not a hair of her head, or a fold of her dress,
was stirred, as she looked intently at me, holding up her child.

So I lost her. So I saw her afterwards, in my sleep at
school — a silent presence near my bed — looking at me with
the same intent face — holding up her baby in her arms.



132 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE



CHAPTER IX

I HAVE A MEMORABLE BIRTHDAY.

I pass over all that happened at school, until the anniver-
sary of my birthday came round in March. Except that
Steerforth was more to be admired than ever, I remember
nothing. He was going away at the end of the half-year, if
not sooner, and was more spirited and independent than before
in my eyes, and therefore more engaging than before ; but
beyond this I remember nothing. The great remembrance by
which that time is marked in my mind, seems to have swal-
lowed up all lesser recollections, and to exist alone.

It is even difficult for me to believe that there was a gap of
full two months between my return to Salem House and the
arrival of that birthday. I can only understand that the fact
was so, because I know it must have been so ; otherwise I
should feel convinced that there was no interval, and that the
one occasion trod upon the other's heels.

How well I recollect the kind of day it was ! I smell the
fog that hung about the place ; I see the hoar frost, ghostly,
through it; I feel my rimy hair fall clammy on my cheek; I
look along the dim perspective of the schoolroom, with a sput-
tering candle here and there to light up the foggy morning,
and the breath of the boys wreathing and smoking in the raw
cold as they blow upon their fingers, and tap their feet upon
the floor.

It was after breakfast, and we had been summoned in from
the playground, when Mr. Sharp entered and said:

" David Copperfield is to go into the parlor/'

I expected a hamper from Peggotty, and brightened at the
order. Some of the boys about me put in their claim not to
be forgotten in the distribution of the good things, as I got
out of my seat with great alacrity.



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 133

"Don't hurry, David," said Mr. Sharp. "There's time
enough, my boy, don't hurry."

I might have been surprised by the feeling tone in which he
spoke, if I had given it a thought ; but I gave it none until
afterwards. I hurried away to the parlor ; and there I found
Mr. Creakle sitting at his breakfast with the cane and a news-
paper before him, and Mrs. Creakle with an opened letter in
her hand. But no hamper.

"David Copperfield," said Mrs. Creakle, leading me to a
sofa, and sitting down beside me. " I want to speak to you
very particularly. I have something to tell you, my child."

Mr. Creakle, at whom of course I looked, shook his head
without looking at me, and stopped up a sigh with a very
large piece of buttered toast.

" You are too young to know how the world changes every
day," said Mrs. Creakle, "and how the people in it pass away.
But we all have to learn it, David ; some of us when we are
young, some of us when we are old, some of us at all times of
our lives."

I looked at her earnestly.

" When you came away from home at the end of the vaca-
tion," said Mrs. Creakle, after a pause, "were they all well ?"
After another pause, " Was <y our mamma well ? "

I trembled without distinctly knowing why, and still looked
at her earnestly, making no attempt to answer.

"Because," said she, "I grieve to tell you that I hear this
morning your mamma is very ill."

A mist arose between Mrs. Creakle and me, and her figure
seemed to move in it for an instant. Then I felt the burning
tears run down my face, and it was steady again.

" She is very dangerously ill," she added.

I knew all now.

" She is dead."

There was no need to tell me so. I had already broken out
into a desolate cry, and felt an orphan in the wide world.

She was very kind to me. She kept me there all day, and
left me alone sometimes ; and I cried, and wore myself to
sleep, and awoke and cried again. When I could cry no more,
I began to think ; and then the oppression on my breast was



134 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

heaviest^ and my grief a dull v pain that there was no ease
for.

And yet my thoughts were idle ; not intent on the calamity
that weighed upon my heart, but idly loitering near it. I
thought of our house shut up and hushed. I thought of the
little baby, who, Mrs. Creakle said, had been pining away for
some time, and who, they believed, would die too. I thought
of my father's grave in the churchyard, by our house, and of
my mother lying there beneath the tree I knew so well. I
stood upon a chair when I was left alone, and looked into the
glass to see how red my eyes were, and how sorrowful my
face was. I considered, after some hours were gone, if my
tears were really hard to flow now, as they seemed to be, what,
in connection with my loss, it would affect me most to think
of when I drew near home — for I was going home to the
funeral. I am sensible of having felt that a dignity attached
to me among the rest of the boys, and that I was important
in my affliction.

If ever child were stricken with sincere grief, I was. But
I remember that this importance was a kind of satisfaction to
me, when I walked in the playground that afternoon while the
boys were in school. When I saw them glancing at me out
of the windows, as they went up to their classes, I felt distin-
guished, and looked more melancholy, and walked slower.
When school was over, and they came out and spoke to me, I
felt it rather good in myself not to be proud to any of them,
and to take exactly the same notice of them all, as before.

I was to go home next night ; not by the mail, but by the
heavy night-coach, which was called the Farmer, and was
principally used by country-people travelling short inter-
mediate distances upon the road. We had no story-telling
that evening, and Traddles insisted on lending me his pillow.
I don't know what good he thought it would do me, for I had
one of my own : but it was all he had to lend, poor fellow,
except a sheet of letter-paper full of skeletons, and that he
gave me at parting, as a soother of my sorrows and a contri-
bution to my peace of mind.

I left Salem House upon the morrow afternoon. I little
thought then that I left it never to return. We travelled very





slowly all night, and did not get into Yarmouth before nine
or ten o'clock in the morning. I looked out for Mr. Barkis,
but he was not there ; and instead of him a fat, short-winded,
merry-looking, little old man in black, with rusty little bunches
of ribbons at the knees of his breeches, black stockings, and a
broad-brimmed hat, came puffing up to the coach-window, and
said:

" Master Copperfield ? "

"Yes, sir."

" Will you come with me, young sir, if you please," he said,
opening the door, " and I shall have the pleasure of taking
you home."

I put my hand in his, wondering who he was, and we
walked away to a shop in a narrow street, on which was
written Omer, Draper, Tailor, Haberdasher, Funeral
Furnisher, &c. It was a close and stifling little shop ; full of
all sorts of clothing, made and unmade, including one window
full of beaver-hats and bonnets. We went into a little back-
parlor behind the shop, where we found three young women
at work on a quantity of black materials, which were heaped
upon the table, and little bits and cuttings of which were
littered all over the floor. There was a good fire in the room,
and a breathless smell of warm black crape — I did not know
what the smell was then, but I know now.

The three young women, who appeared to be very indus-
trious and comfortable, raised their heads to look at me, and
then went on with their work. Stitch, stitch, stitch. At the
same time there came from a workshop across a little yard
outside the window, a regular sound of hammering that kept
a kind of tune : E-at — tat-tat, rat — tat-tat, rat — tat-tat, with-
out any variation.

"Well," said my conductor to one of the three young
women. " How do you get on, Minnie ? "

"We shall be ready by the trying-on time," she replied
gaily, without looking up. " Don't you be afraid, father."

Mr. Omer took off his broad-brimmed hat, ahd sat down and
panted. He was so fat that he was obliged to pant some time
before he could say :

"That's right."



136 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" Father !" said Minnie, playfully. " What a porpoise you
do grow ! "

"Well, I don't know how it is, my dear," he replied, con-
sidering about it. " I am rather so."

" You are such a comfortable man, you see," said Minnie.
"You take things so easy."

"No use taking 'em otherwise, my dear," said Mr. Omer.

"No, indeed," returned his daughter. "We are all pretty
gay here, thank Heaven ! Ain't we, father ? "

" I hope so, my dear," said Mr. Omer. " As I have got my
breath now, I think Fll measure this young scholar. Would
you walk into the shop, Master Copperfield ? "

I preceded Mr. Omer, in compliance with his request ; and
after showing me a roll of cloth which he said was extra
super, and too good mourning for anything short of parents,
he took my various dimensions, and put them down in a book.
While he was recording them he called my attention to his
stock in trade, and to certain fashions which he said had
" just come up," and to certain other fashions which he said
had "just gone out."

" And by that sort of thing we very often lose a little mint
of money," said Mr. Omer. "But fashions are like human
beings. They come in, nobody knows when, why, or how;
and they go out, nobody knows when, why, or how. Every-
thing is like life, in my opinion, if you look at it in that point
of view."

I was too sorrowful to discuss the question, which would
possibly have been beyond me under any circumstances ; and
Mr. Omer took me back into the parlor, breathing with some
difficulty on the way.

He then called down a little breakneck range of steps
behind a door : " Bring up that tea and bread-and-butter ! "
which, after some time, during which I sat looking about me
and thinking, and listening to the stitching in the room and
the tune that was being hammered across the yard, appeared
on a tray, and turned out to be for me.

" I have been acquainted with you," said Mr. Omer, after
watching me for some minutes, during which I had not made
much impression on the breakfast, for the black things de«



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 137

stroyed my appetite, " I have been acquainted with you* a long
time, my young friend."

" Have you, sir ? "

" All your life," said Mr. Omer. " I may say before it. I
knew your father before you. He was five foot nine and a
half, and he lays in five and twen-ty foot of ground."

" Eat — tat-tat, rat — tat-tat, rat — tat-tat," across the yard.

" He lays in five and twen-ty foot of ground, if he lays in
a fraction," said Mr. Omer, pleasantly. "It was either his
request or her direction, I forget which."

" Do you know how my little brother is, sir ? " I inquired.

Mr. Omer shook his head.

"Rat — tat-tat, rat — tat-tat, rat — tat-tat."

"He is in his mother's arms," said he.

" Oh, poor little fellow ! Is he dead ? "

" Don't mind it more than you can help," said Mr. Omer.
"Yes. The baby's dead."

My wounds broke out afresh at this intelligence. I left the
scarcely tasted breakfast, and went and rested my head on
another table in a corner of the little room, which Minnie
hastily cleared, lest I should spot the mourning that was lying
there with my tears. She was a pretty good-natured girl,
and put my hair away from my eyes with a soft kind touch ;
but she was very cheerful at having nearly finished her work
and being in good time, and was so different from me !

Presently the tune left off, and a good-looking young felloe
came across the yard into the room. He had a hammer in
his hand, and his mouth was full of little nails, which he was
obliged to take out before he could speak.

"Well, Joram ! " said Mr. Omer. "How do you get on ? "

"All right," said Joram. "Done, sir."

Minnie colored a little, and the other two girls smiled at
one another.

"What! you were at it by candle-light last night, when I
was at the club, then ? Were you ? " said Mr. Omer, shutting
up one eye.

" Yes," said Joram. " As you said we could make a little
trip of it, and go over together, if it was done, Minnie and
me — and you."



138 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

"Oh! I thought you were going to leave me out alto-
gether," said Mr. Omer, laughing till he coughed.

" — As you was so good as to say that," resumed the young
man, " why I turned to with a will, you see. Will you give
me your opinion of it ? "

"I will," said Mr. Omer, rising. "My dear;" and he
stopped and turned to me ; " would you like to see your — "

" 3STo, father," Minnie interposed.

"I thought it might be agreeable, my dear," said Mr.
Omer. " But perhaps you're right."

I can't say how I knew it was my dear, dear mother's coffin
that they went to look at. I had never heard one making ; I
had never seen one that I know of : but it came into my mind
what the noise was, while it was going on; and when the
young man entered, I am sure I knew what he had been
doing.

The work being now finished, the two girls, whose names
I had not heard, brushed the shreds and threads from their
dresses, and went into the shop to put that to rights, and wait
for customers. Minnie stayed behind to fold up what they
had made, and pack it in two baskets. This she did upon her
knees, humming a lively little tune the while. Joram, who I
had no doubt was her lover, came in and stole a kiss from her
while she was busy (he didn't appear to mind me, at all), and
said her father was gone for the chaise, and he must make
haste and get himself ready. Then he went out again ; and
then she put her thimble and scissors in her pocket, and stuck
a needle threaded with black thread neatly in the bosom of
her gown, and put on her outer clothing smartly, at a little
glass behind the door, in which I saw the reflection of her
pleased face.

All this I observed, sitting at the table in the corner with
niy head leaning on my hand, and my thoughts running on
very different things. The chaise soon came round to the
front of the shop, and the baskets being put in first, I was
put in next, and those three followed. I remember it as a
kind of half chaise-cart, half piano-forte van, painted of a
sombre color, and drawn by a black horse with a long tail.
There was plenty of room for us all.





I do not think I Lave ever experienced so strange a feeling
in my life (I am wiser now, perhaps) as that of being with
them, remembering how they had been employed, and seeing
them enjoy the ride. I was not angry with them; I was
more afraid of them, as if I were cast away among creatures
with whom I had no community of nature. They were very
cheerful. The old man sat in front to drive, and the two
young people sat behind him, and whenever he spoke to them
leaned forward, the one on one side of his chubby face and
the other on the other, and made a great deal of him. They
would have talked to me too, but I held back, and moped in
my corner ; scared by their love-making and hilarity, though
it was far from boisterous, and almost wondering that no
judgment came upon them for their hardness of heart.

So, when they stopped to bait the horse, and ate and drank
and enjoyed themselves, I could touch nothing that they
touched, but kept my fast unbroken. So, when we reached
home, I dropped out of the chaise behind, as quickly as pos-
sible, that I might not be in their company before those
solemn windows, looking blindly on me like closed eyes once
bright. And oh, how little need I had had to think what
would move me to tears when I came back — seeing the window
of my mother's room, and next it that which, in the better
time, was mine !

I was in Peggotty's arms before I got to the door, and she
took me into the house. Her grief burst out when she first
saw me ; but she controlled it soon, and spoke in whispers,
and walked softly, as if the dead could be disturbed. She
had not been in bed, I found, for a long time. She sat up at
night still, and watched. As long as her poor dear pretty was
above the ground, she said, she would never desert her.

Mr. Murdstone took no heed of me when I went into the
parlor where he was, but sat by the fireside, weeping silently,
and pondering in his elbow-chair. Miss Murdstone, who was
busy at her writing-desk, which was covered with letters and
papers, gave me her cold finger-nails, and asked me, in an
iron whisper, if I had been measured for my mourning,

I said: "Yes."



140 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" And your shirts," said Miss Murdstone ; " have you
brought ; em home ? "

" Yes, ma'am. I have brought home all my clothes."

This was all the consolation that her firmness administered
to me. I do not doubt that she had a choice pleasure in
exhibiting what she called her self-command, and her firm-
ness, and her strength of mind, and her common sense, and_
the whole diabolical catalogue of her un amiable qualities, on
such an occasion. She was particularly proud of her turn for
business ; and she showed it now in reducing everything to
.pen and ink, and being moved by nothing. All the rest of
that day, and from morning to night afterwards, she sat at
that desk ; scratching composedly with a hard pen, speaking in
the same imperturbable whisper to everybody ; never relaxing
a muscle of her face, or softening the tone of her voice, or
appearing with an atom of her dress astray.

Her brother took a book sometimes, but never read it that
I saw. He would open it and look at it as if he were read-
ing, but would remain for a whole hour without turning the
leaf, and then put it down and walk to and fro in the room.
I used to sit with folded hands watching him, and counting
his footsteps, hour after hour. He very seldom spoke to her,
and never to me. He seemed to be the only restless thing
except the clocks, in the whole motionless house.

In these days before the funeral, I saw but little of Peg-
gotty, except that, in passing up or down stairs, I always
found her close to the room where my mother and her baby
lay, and except that she came to me every night, and sat by
my bed's head while I went to sleep. A day or two before
the burial — I think it was a day or two before, but I am con-
scious of confusion in my mind about that heavy time, with
nothing to mark its progress — she took me into the room. I
only recollect that underneath some white covering on the bed,
with a beautiful cleanliness and freshness all around it, there
seemed to me to lie embodied the solemn stillness that was
in the house ; and that when she would have turned the cover
gently back, I cried : " no ! no ! ;; and held her hand.

If the funeral had been yesterday, I could not recollect it
better. The very air of the best parlor, when I went in at



OF DAVID GOPPEBFIELD. 141

the door, the bright condition of the fire, the shining of the
wine in the decanters, the patterns of the glasses and plates,
the faint sweet smell of cake, the odor of Miss Murdstone's
dress, and our black clothes. Mr. Chillip is in the room, and
comes to speak to me.

" And how is Master David ? " he says, kindly.

I cannot tell him very well. I give him my hand, which he
holds in his.

" Dear me ! " says Mr. Chillip, meekly smiling, with some-
thing shining in his eye. " Our little friends grow up around
us. They grow out of our knowledge, ma'am ? "

This is to Miss Murdstone, who makes no reply.

H There is a great improvement here, ma'am?" says Mr.
Chillip.

Miss Murdstone merely answers with a frown and a formal
bend ; Mr. Chillip, discomfited, goes into a corner, keeping me
with him, and opens his mouth no more.

I remark this, because I remark everything that happens,
not because I care about myself, or have done since I came
home. And now the bell begins to sound, and Mr. Omer and
another come to make us ready. As Peggotty was wont to
tell me, long ago, the followers of my father to the same grave
were made ready in the same room.

There are Mr. Murdstone, our neighbor Mr. Grayper, Mr.
Chillip,- and I. When we go out to the door, the Bearers and
their load are in the garden ; and they move before us down
the path, and past the elms, and through the gate, and into the
churchyard, where I have so often heard the birds sing on a
summer morning.

We stand around the grave. The day seems different to
me from every other day, and the light not of the same color
— of a sadder color. Now there is a solemn hush, which we
have brought from home with what is resting in the mould ;
and while we stand bare-headed, I hear the voice of the clergy-
man, sounding remote in the open air, and yet distinct and
plain, saying: "I am the Resurrection and the Life, saith the
Lord ! " Then I hear sobs ; and, standing apart among the
lookers-on, I see that good and faithful servant, whom of all
the people upon earth I love the best, and unto whom my



142 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

childish heart is certain that the Lord will one day say :
"Well done."

There are many faces that I know, among the little crowd ;
faces that I knew in church, when mine was always wondering
there ; faces that first saw my mother, when she came to the
village in her youthful bloom. I do not mind them — I mind
nothing but my grief — and yet I see and know them all ; and
even in the background, far away, see Minnie looking on ; and
her eye glancing on her sweetheart, who is near me.

It is over, and the earth is filled in, and we turn to come
away. Before us stands our house, so pretty and unchanged,
so linked in my mind with the young idea of what is gone,
that all my sorrow has been nothing to the sorrow it calls
forth. But they take me on ; and Mr. Chillip talks to me ;
and when we get home, puts some water to my lips ; and when
I ask his leave to go up to my room, dismisses me with the
gentleness of a woman.

All this, I say, is yesterday's event. Events of later date
have floated from me to the shore where all forgotten things
will reappear, but this stands like a high rock in the ocean.

I knew that Peggotty would come to me in my room. The
Sabbath stillness of the time (the day was so like Sunday ! I
have forgotten that) was suited to us both. She sat down by
my side upon my little bed ; and holding my hand, and some-
times putting it to her lips, and sometimes smoothing- it with
hers, as she might have comforted my little brother, told me,
in her way, all that she had to tell concerning what had
happened.

"She was never well," said Peggotty, "for a long time.
She was uncertain in her mind, and not happy. When her
baby was born, I thought at first she would get better ; but
she was more delicate, and sunk a little every day. She used
to like to sit alone before her baby came, and then she cried ;
but afterwards she used to sing to it — so soft, that I once
thought, when I heard her, it was like a voice up in the air,
that was rising away.

" I think she got to be more timid, and more frightened-like,
of late ; and that a hard word was like a blow to her. But



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 143

she was always the same to me. She never changed to her
foolish Peggotty, didn't my sweet girl."

Here Peggotty stopped, and softly beat upon my hand a little
while.

" The last time that I saw her like her own old self, was
the night when you came home, my dear. The day you went
away, she said to me, ( I never shall see my pretty darling
again. Something tells me so, that tells the truth, I know.'

" She tried to hold up after that ; and many a time, when
they told her she was thoughtless * and light-hearted, made
believe to be so ; but it was all a bygone then. .. She never
told her husband what she had told me — she was afraid of
saying it to anybody else — till one night, a little more than a
week before it happened, when she said to him : ' My dear, I
think I am dying.'

"'It's off my mind now, Peggotty,' she told me, when I
laid her in her bed that night. ( He will believe it more and
more, poor fellow, every day for a few days to come ; and then
it will be past. I am very tired. If this is sleep, sit by me
while I sleep : don't leave me. God bless both my children !
God protect and keep my fatherless boy ! '

" I never left her afterwards," said Peggotty. " She often
talked to them two down stairs — for she loved them; she
couldn't bear not to love any one who was about her — but
when they went away from her bedside, she always turned to
me, as if there was rest where Peggotty was, and never fell
asleep in any other way.

" On the last night, in the evening, she kissed me, and said :
6 If my baby should die too, Peggotty, please let them lay him
in my arms, and bury us together.' (It was done; for the
poor lamb lived but a day beyond her.) i Let my dearest boy
go with us to our resting-place,' she said, 'and tell him that
his mother, when she lay here, blessed him, not once, but a
thousand times.' "

Another silence followed this, and another gentle beating on
my hand.

" It was pretty far in the night," said Peggotty, " when she
asked me for some drink ; and when she had taken it, gave me
such a patient smile, the dear ! — so beautiful ! —



144 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" Daybreak had come, and the sun was rising, when she said
to me, how kind and considerate Mr. Copperfield had always
been to her, and how he had borne with her, and had told her,
when she doubted herself, that a loving heart was better and
stronger than wisdom, and that he was a happy man in hers.
' Peggotty, my dear/ she said then, f put me nearer to you/ for
she was very weak. c Lay your good arm underneath my neck/
she said, ' and turn me to you, for your face is going far off,
and I want it to be near.' I put it as she asked ; and oh Davy !
the time had come when iny first parting words to you were
true — when she was glad to lay her poor head on her stupid
cross old Peggotty's arm — and she died like a child that had
gone to sleep ! "

Thus ended Peggotty's narration. From the moment of my
knowing of the death of my mother, the idea of her as she
had been of late had vanished from me. I remembered her,
from that instant, only as the young mother of my earliest
impressions, who had been used to wind her bright curls round
and round her finger, and to dance with me at twilight in the
parlor. What Peggotty had told me now, was so far from
bringing me back to the later period, that it rooted the earlier
image in my mind. It may be curious, but it is true. In her
death she winged her way back to her calm untroubled youth,
and cancelled all the rest.

The mother who lay in the grave, was the mother of my
infancy ; the little creature in her arms, was myself, as I had
once been, hushed for ever on her bosom.







CHAPTEE X.

I BECOME NEGLECTED, AND AM PROVIDED FOR.

The first act of business Miss Murdstone performed when
the day of the solemnity was over, and light was freely
admitted into the house, was to give Peggotty a month's
warning. Much as Peggotty would have disliked such a
service, I believe she would have retained it, for my sake, in
preference to the best upon earth. She told me we must part,
and told me why ; and we condoled with one another, in all
sincerity.

As to me or my future, not a word was said, or a step
taken. Happy they would have been, I dare say, if they
could have dismissed me at a month's warning too. I mus-
tered courage once, to ask Miss Murdstone when I was going
back to school ; and she answered, drily, she believed I was
not going back at all. I was told nothing more. I was very
anxious to know what was going to be done with me, and so
was Peggotty ; but neither she nor I could pick up any infor-
mation on the subject.

There was one change in my condition, which, while it
relieved me of a great deal of present uneasiness, might have
made me, if I had been capable of considering it closely, yet
more uncomfortable about the future. It was this. The con-
straint that had been put upon me, was quite abandoned. I
was so far from being required to keep my dull post in the
parlor, that on several occasions, when I took my seat there,
Miss Murdstone frowned to me to go away. I was so far from
being warned off from Peggotty's society, that, provided I was
not in Mr. Murdstone's, I was never sought out or inquired
for. At first I was in daily dread of his taking my education
in hand again, or of Miss Murdstone's devoting herself to it ;
but I soon began to think that such fears were groundless, and
that all I had to anticipate was neglect.
vol, i — 10



146 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

I do not conceive that this discovery gave me much pain
then. I was still giddy with the shock of my mother's death,
and in a kind of stunned state as to all tributary things. I
can recollect, indeed, to have speculated, at odd times, on the
possibility of my not being taught any more, or cared for any
more ; and growing up to be a shabby moody man, lounging
an idle life away, about the village ; as well as on the feasi-
bility of my getting rid of this picture by going away some-
where, like the hero in a story, to seek my fortune : but these
were transient visions, day dreams I sat looking at sometimes,
as if they were faintly painted or written on the wall of my
room, and which, as they melted away, left the wall blank again.

"Peggotty," I said in a thoughtful whisper, one evening,
when I was warming my hands at the kitchen fire, " Mr. Murd-
stone likes me less than he used to. He never liked me much,
Peggotty ; but he would rather not even see me uoav, if he can
help it."

" Perhaps it's his sorrow," said Peggotty, stroking my hair.

" I am sure, Peggotty, I am sorry too. If I believed it was
his sorrow, I should not think of it at all. But it's not that;
oh, no, it's not that."

" How do you know it's not that ? " said Peggotty, after a
silence.

" Oh, his sorrow is another and quite a different thing. He
is sorry at this moment, sitting by the fireside with Miss Murd-
stone ; but if I was to go in, Peggotty, he would be something
besides."

" What would he be ? " said Peggotty.

"Angry," I answered, with an involuntary imitation of his
dark frown. " If he was only sorry, he wouldn't look at me
as he does. Jam only sorry, and it makes me feel kinder."

Peggotty said nothing for a little while ; and I warmed my
hands as silent as she.

" Davy," she said at length.

"Yes, Peggotty?"

" I have tried, my dear, all ways I could think of — all the
ways there are, and all the ways there ain't, in short — to get
a suitable service here, in Blunderstone ; but there's no such
a thing, my love."





" And what do you mean to do, Peggotty ? " said I, wistfully.
" Do you mean to go and seek your fortune ? "

"I expect I shall be forced to go to Yarmouth," replied
Peggotty, " and live there."

"You might have gone farther off," I said, brightening a
little, " and been as bad as lost. I shall see you sometimes,
my dear old Peggotty, there. You won't be quite at the other
end of the world, will you ? "

f? Contrairy-ways, please God ! " cried Peggotty, with great
animation. "As long as you are here, my pet, I shall come
over every week of my life to see you. One day every week
of my life ! "

I felt a great weight taken off my mind by this promise ;
but even this was not all, for Peggotty went on to say :

" Pm a going, Davy, you see, to my brother's first, for an-
other fortnight's visit — just till I have had time to look about
me, and get to be something like myself again. Now, I have
been thinking, that perhaps, as they don't want you here at
present, you might be let to go along with me."

If anything short of being in a different relation to every
one about me, Peggotty excepted, could have given me a sense
of pleasure at that time, it would have been this project of all
others. The idea of being again surrounded by those honest
faces, shining welcome on me ; of renewing the peacefulness
of the sweet Sunday morning, when the bells were ringing,
the stones dropping in the water, and the shadowy ships break-
ing through the mist; of roaming up and down with little
Em'ly, telling her my troubles, and finding charms against
them in the shells and pebbles on the beach ; made a calm in
my heart. It was ruffled next moment, to be sure, by a doubt
of Miss Murdstone's giving her consent; but even that was
set at rest soon, for she came out to take an evening grope in
the store-closet while we were yet in conversation, and Peg-
gotty, with a boldness that amazed me, broached the topic on
the spot.

" The boy will be idle there," said Miss Murdstone, looking
into a pickle-jar, " and idleness is the root of all evil. But, to
be sure, he would be idle here — or anywhere, in my opinion."



148 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

Peggotty had an angry answer ready, I could see ; but she
swallowed it for my sake, and remained silent.

" Humph!" said Miss Murdstone, still keeping her eye on
the pickles ; " it is of more importance than anything else — it
is of paramount importance — that my brother should not be
disturbed or made uncomfortable. I suppose I had better say
yes."

I thanked her, without making any demonstration of joy,
lest it should induce her to withdraw her assent. Nor could I
help thinking this a prudent course, when she looked at me
out of the pickle-jar with as great an access of sourness as if
her black eyes had absorbed its contents. However the per-
mission was given, and was never retracted ; for when the
month was out, Peggotty and I were ready to depart.

Mr. Barkis came into the house for Peggotty's boxes. I had
never known him to pass the garden-gate before, but on this
occasion he came into the house. And he gave me a look as
he shouldered the largest box and went out, which I thought
had meaning in it, if meaning could ever be said to find its way
into Mr. Barkis's visage.

Peggotty was naturally, in low spirits at leaving what had
been her home so many years, and where the two strong attach-
ments of her life — for my mother and myself — had been
formed. She had been walking in the churchyard, too, very
early ; and she got into the cart, and sat in it with her hand-
kerchief at her eyes.

So long as she remained in this condition, Mr. Barkis gave
no sign of life whatever. He sat in his usual place and atti-
tude, like a great stuffed figure. But when she began to look
about her, and to speak to me, he nodded his head and grinned
several times. I have not the least notion at whom, or what
he meant by it.

" It's a beautiful day, Mr. Barkis ! " I said, as an act of
politeness.

" It ain't bad," said Mr. Barkis, who generally qualified his
speech, and rarely committed himself.

"Peggotty is quite comfortable now, Mr. Barkis," I remarked,
for his satisfaction.

" Is she, though ! " said Mr. Barkis.



OF DAVID COPPEBFIEIlD. 149

After reflecting about it, with a sagacious air, Mr. Barkis
eyed her, and said :

" Are you pretty comfortable ? "

Peggotty laughed, and answered in the affirmative.

" But really and truly, you know. Are you ? " growled Mr.
Barkis, sliding nearer to her on the seat, and nudging her
with his elbow. " Are you ? Really and truly pretty com-
fortable ? Are you ? Eh ? n At each of these inquiries Mr.
Barkis shuffled nearer to her, and gave her another nudge ; so
that at last" we were all crowded together in the left-hand
corner of the cart, and I was so squeezed that I could hardly
bear it.

Peggotty calling his attention to my sufferings, Mr. Barkis
gave me a little more room at once, and got away by degrees.
But I could not help observing that he seemed to think he had
hit upon a wonderful expedient for expressing himself in a
neat, agreeable, and pointed manner, without the inconven-
ience of inventing conversation. He manifestly chuckled
over it for some time. By and by he turned to Peggotty again,
and repeating, " Are you pretty comfortable, though?" bore
down upon us as before, until the breath was nearly wedged
out of my body. By and by he made another descent upon us
with the same inquiry, and the same result. At length, I got
up whenever I saw him coming, and, standing on the foot-
board, pretended to look at the prospect ; after which I did
very well. '

He was so polite as to stop at a public-house, expressly on
our account, and entertain us with broiled mutton and beer.
Even when Peggotty was in the act of drinking, he was seized
with one of those approaches, and almost choked her. But as
we drew nearer to the end of our journey, he had more to do
and less time for gallantry ; and when we got on Yarmouth
pavement, we were all too much shaken and jolted, I appre-
hend, to have any leisure for anything else.

Mr. Peggotty and Ham waited for us at the old place.
They received me and Peggotty in an affectionate manner, and
shook hands with Mr. Barkis, who, with his hat on the very
back of his head, and a shame-faced leer upon his countenance,
and pervading his very legs, presented but a vacant appear-



150 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

ance, I thought. They each took one of Peggotty's trunks,
and we were going away, when Mr. Barkis solemnly made a
sign to me with his forefinger to come under an archway.

"I say," growled Mr. Barkis, "it was all right."

I looked up into his face, and answered, with an attempt to
be very profound : " Oh ! "

" It didn't come to a end there," said Mr. Barkis, nodding
confidentially. " It was all right."

Again I answered " Oh ! "

"You know who was willing" said my friend. "It was
Barkis, and Barkis only."

I nodded assent.

"It's all right," said Mr. Barkis, shaking hands ; "I'm a
friend of your'n. You made it all right, first. It's all right."

In his attempts to .be particularly lucid, Mr. Barkis was so
extremely mysterious, that I might have stood looking in his
face for an hour, and most assuredly should have got as much
information out of it as out of the face of a clock that had
stopped, but for Peggotty's calling me away. As we were
going along, she asked me what he had said ; and I told her
he had said it was all right.

"Like his impudence," said Peggotty, "but I don't mind
that ! Davy dear, what should you think if I was to think
of being married ! "

" Why — I suppose you would like me as much then,
Peggotty, as you do now ? " I returned, after a little con-
sideration.

, Greatly to the astonishment of the passengers in the street,
as well as of her relations going on before, the good soul was
obliged to stop and embrace me on the spot, with many
protestations of her unalterable love.

" Tell me what should you say, darling ? " she asked again,
when this was over, and we were walking on.

"If you were thinking of being married — to Mr. Barkis,
Peggotty?"

" Yes," said Peggotty.

" I should think it would be a very good thing. For then
you know, Peggotty, you would always have the horse and



OF DAVID COPPEEFIELD. 151

cart to bring you over to see me, and could come for nothing,
and be sure of coming."

"The sense of the dear!" cried Peggotty. "What I have
been thinking of this month back ! Yes, my precious ; and I
think I should be more independent altogether, you see ; let
alone my working with a better heart in my own house, than
I could in anybody else's now. I don't know what I might
be fit for, now, as a servant to a stranger. And I shall be
always near my pretty's resting-place," said Peggotty, musing,
" and be able to see it when I like ; and when 1 lie down to
rest, I may be laid not far off from my darling girl ! "

We neither of us said anything for a little while.

" But I wouldn't so much as give it another thought," said
Peggotty, cheerily, "if my Davy was anyways against it —
ot if I had been asked in church thirty times three times
over, and was wearing out the ring in my pocket."

" Look at me, Peggotty," I replied ; " and see if I am not
really glad, and don't truly wish it ! " As indeed I did, with
all my heart.

"Well, my life," said Peggotty, giving me a squeeze, "I
have thought of it night and day, every way I can, and I hope
the right way; but I'll think of it again, and speak to my
brother about it, and in the meantime we'll keep it to our-
selves, Davy, you and me. Barkis is a good plain creetur',"
said Peggotty, " and if I tried to do my duty by him, I think
it would be my fault if I wasn't — if I wasn't pretty com-
fortable," said Peggotty, laughing heartily.

This quotation from Mr. Barkis was so appropriate, and
tickled us both so much, that we laughed again and again, and
were quite in a pleasant humor when we came in view of Mr.
Peggotty's cottage.

It looked just the same, except that it may, perhaps, have
shrunk a little in my eyes ; and Mrs. Gummidge was waiting
at the door as if she had stood there ever since. All within
was the same, down to the seaweed in the blue mug in my
bedroom. I went into the outhouse to look about me ; and
the very same lobsters, crabs, and crawfish possessed by the
same desire to pinch the world in general, appeared to be in
the same state of conglomeration in the same old corner.



152 THE PERSONAL HISTOBY AND EXPERIENCE

But there was no little Eru'ly to be seen, so I asked Mr.
Peggotty where she was.

" She's at school, sir/' said Mr. Peggotty, wiping the heat
consequent on the porterage of Peggotty s box from his fore-
head ; "she'll be home/' looking at the Dutch clock, "in from
twenty minutes to half-an-hour's time. We all on us feel the
loss of her, bless ye ! "

Mrs. Gummidge moaned.

" Cheer up, mawther ! " cried Mr. Peggotty.

" I feel it more than anybody else/' said Mrs. Gummidge ;
u I'm a lone lorn creetur', and she used to be a'most the only
think that didn't go contrairy with me."

Mrs. Gummidge, whimpering and shaking her head, applied
herself to blowing the fire. Mr. Peggotty, looking round
upon us while she was so engaged, said in a low voice, which
he shaded with his hand: "The old 'un ! " From this I
rightly conjectured that no improvement had taken place since
my last visit in the state of Mrs. Gummidge's spirits.

Ifow, the whole place was, or it should have been, quite as
delightful a place as ever ; and yet it did not impress me in
the same way. I felt rather disappointed with it. Perhaps
it was because little Enrly was not at home. I knew the way
by which she would come, and presently found myself strolling
along the path to meet her.

A figure appeared in the distance before long, and I soon
knew it to be Em'ly, who was a little creature still in stature,
though she was grown. But when she drew nearer, and I
saw her blue eyes looking bluer, and her dimpled face looking
brighter, and her own self prettier and gayer, a curious feeling
came over me that made me pretend not to know her, and pass
by as if I were looking at something a long way off. I have
done such a thing since in later life, or I am mistaken.

Little Em'ly didn't care a bit. She saw me well enough ;
but instead of turning round and calling after me, ran away
laughing. This obliged me to run after her, and she ran so
fast that we were very near the cottage before I caught her.

"Oh, it's you, is it?" said little Em'ly.

" Why, you knew who it was, Em'ly," said I.

" And didn't you know who it was ? " said Em'ly. I was



OF DAVID GOPPEEFIELD. 153

going to kiss her, but she covered her cherry lips with her
hands, and said she wasn't a baby now, and ran away, laughing
more than ever, into the house.

She seemed to delight in teasing me, which was a change
in her I wondered at very much. The tea-table was ready,
and our little locker was put out in its old place, but instead
of coming to sit bylne, she went and bestowed her company
upon that grumbling Mrs. Grummidge : and on Mr. Peggotty's
inquiring why, rumpled her hair all over her face to hide it,
and would do nothing but laugh.

"A little puss it is !" said Mr. Peggotty, patting her with
his great hand.

" So sh' is ! so sh' is ! " cried Ham. " Mas'r Davy bor, so
sh' is ! " and he sat and chuckled at her for some time, in a
state of mingled admiration and delight, that made his face a
burning red.

Little Em'ly was spoiled by them all, in fact ; and by no
one more than Mr. Peggotty himself, whom she could have
coaxed into anything by only going and laying her cheek
against his rough whisker. That was my opinion, at least,
when I saw her do it ; and I held Mr. Peggotty to be thor-
oughly in the right. But she was so affectionate and sweet-
natured, and had such a pleasant manner of being both sly and
shy at once, that she captivated me more than ever.

She was tender-hearted, too ; for when, as we sat round the
fire after tea, an allusion was made by Mr. Peggotty over his
pipe to the loss I had sustained, the tears stood in her eyes,
and she looked at me so kindly across the lable, that I felt
quite thankful to her.

" Ah ! " said Mr. Peggotty, taking up her curls, and running
them over his hand like water, " here's another orphan, you
see, sir. And here," said Mr. Peggotty, giving Ham a back-
handed knock in the chest, "is another of 'em, though he don't
look much like it."

" If I had you for my guardian, Mr. Peggotty," said I, shak-
ing my head, " I don't think I should feel much like it."

" Well said, Mas'r Davy, bor ! " cried Ham, in an ecstasy.
" Hoorah ! Well said ! Nor more you wouldn't ! Hor ! Hor ! "



154 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

— Here lie returned Mr. Peggotty' s back-hander, and little
Em'ly got up and kissed Mr. Peggotty.

"And how's your friend, sir ? " said Mr. Peggotty to me.

"Steerforth?" said L

" That's the name ! * cried Mr. Peggotty, turning to Ham.
" I knowed it was something in our way."

" You said it was Rudderf ord," observed Ham, laughing.

"Well?" retorted Mr. Peggotty. "And ye steer with a
rudder, don't ye ? It ain't fur off. How is he, sir ? "

"He was very well indeed when I came away, Mr. Peg-
gotty."

" There's a friend ! " said Mr. Peggotty, stretching out his
pipe. " There's a friend, if you talk of friends ! Why, Lord
love my heart alive, if it ain't a treat to look at him ! "

" He is very handsome, is he not ? " said I, my heart warm-
ing with this praise.

" Handsome ! " cried Mr. Peggotty. " He stands up to you
like — like a — why I don't know what he donH stand up to
you like. He's so bold ! "

" Yes ! That's just his character," said I. " He's as brave
as a lion, and you can't think how frank he is, Mr. Peggotty."

" And I do suppose, now," said Mr. Peggotty, looking at me
through the smoke of his pipe, " that in the way of book-learn-
ing he'd take the wind out of a'most anything."

" Yes," said I, delighted ; " he knows everything. He is
astonishingly clever."

"There's a friend ! " murmured Mr. Peggotty, with a grave
toss of his head.

"Nothing seems to cost him any trouble," said I. "He
knows a task if he only looks at it. He is the best cricketer
you ever saw. He will give you almost as many men as you
like at draughts, and beat you easily."

Mr. Peggotty gave his head another toss, as much as to
say : " Of course he will."

"He is such a speaker," I pursued, "that he can win any-
body over 5 and I don't know what you'd say if you were to
hear him sing, Mr. Peggotty."

Mr. Peggotty gave his head another toss, as much as to
say : " I have no doubt of it."





"Then, he's such a generous, fine, noble fellow," said I,
4uite carried away by my favorite theme, "that it's hardly
possible to give him as much praise as he deserves. I am
sure I can never feel thankful enough for the generosity with
which he has protected rue, so much younger and lower in the
school than himself."

I was running on, very fast indeed, when my eyes rested
on little Em'ly's face, which was bent forward over the table,
listening with the deepest attention, her breath held, her blue
eyes sparkling like jewels, and the color mantling in her
cheeks. She looked so extraordinarily earnest and pretty,
that I stopped in a sort of wonder ; and they all observed her
at the same time, for, as I stopped, they laughed and looked
at her.

" Em'ly is like me," said Peggotty, " and would like to see
him."

Em'ly was confused by our all observing her, and hung
down her head, and her face was covered with blushes.
Glancing up presently through her stray curls, and seeing
that we were all looking at her still (I am sure I, for one,
could have looked at her for hours), she ran away, and kept
away till it was nearly bedtime.

I lay down in the old little bed in the stern of the boat, and
the wind came moaning on across the flat as it had done
before. But I could not help fancying, now, that it moaned
of those who were gone ; and instead of thinking that the
sea might rise in the night and float the boat away, I
thought of the sea that had risen, since I last heard those
sounds, and drowned my happy home. I recollect, as the
wind and water began to sound fainter in my ears, putting
a short clause into my prayers, petitioning that I might
grow up to marry little Em'ly, and so dropping lovingly
asleep.

The days passed pretty much as they had passed before,
except — it was a great exception — that little Em'ly and I
seldom wandered on the beach now. She had tasks to learn,
and needlework to do ; and was absent during a great part of
each day. But I felt that we should not have had these old
wanderings, even if it had been otherwise. Wild and full of



156 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

childish whims as Em'ly was, she was more of a little woman
than I had supposed. She seemed to have got a great
distance away from me, in little more than a year. She
liked me, but she laughed at me, and tormented me; and
when I went to meet her, stole home another way, and was
laughing at the door, when I came back, disappointed.
The best times were when she sat quietly at work in the
doorway, and I sat on the wooden step at her feet, reading
to her. It seems to me at this hour, that I have never
seen such sunlight as on those bright April afternoons ;
that I have never seen such a sunny little figure as I used
to see, sitting in the doorway of the old boat; that I have
never beheld such sky, such water, such glorified ships
sailing away into golden air.

On the very first evening after our arrival, Mr. Barkis
appeared in an exceedingly vacant and awkward condition,
and with a bundle of oranges tied up in a handkerchief.
As he made no allusion of any kind to this property, he
was supposed to have left it behind him by accident when
he went away ; until Ham, running after him to restore it,
came back with the information that it was intended for
Peggotty. After that occasion he appeared every evening at
exactly the same hour, and always* with a little bundle, to
which he never alluded, and which he regularly put behind
the door, and left there. These offerings of affection were
of a most various and eccentric description. Among them
I remember a double set of pigs ; trotters, a huge pin-cushion,
half a bushel or so of apples, a pair of jet earrings, some
Spanish onions, a box of dominoes, a canary bird and cage,
and a leg of pickled pork.

Mr. Barkis's wooing, as I remember it, was altogether of a
peculiar kind. He very seldom said anything ; but would sit
by the fire in much the same attitude as he sat in his cart, and
stare heavily at Peggotty, who was opposite. One night,
being, as I suppose, inspired by love, he made a dart at the
bit of wax candle she kept for her thread, and put it in his
waistcoat-pocket and carried it off. After that, his great
delight was to produce it when it was wanted, sticking to the
lining of his pocket, in a partially melted state, and pocket it



OF DAVID COPPEEFIELD. 157

again when it was done with. He seemed to enjoy himself
very much, and not to feel a . all called upon to talk. Even
when he took Peggotty out for a walk on the flats, he had no
uneasiness on that head, I believe; contenting himself with
now and then asking her if she was pretty comfortable ; and I
remember that sometimes, after he was gone, Peggotty would
throw her apron over her face, and laugh for half an hour.
Indeed, we were all more or less amused, except that miser-
able Mrs. Gummidge, whose courtship would appear to have
been of an exactly parallel nature, she was so continually
reminded by these transactions of the old one.

At length, when the term of my visit was nearly expired,
it was given out that Peggotty and Mr. Barkis were going to
make a day's holiday together, and that little Em'ly and I
were to accompany them. I had but a broken sleep the night
before, in anticipation of the pleasure of a whole day with
Em'ly. We were all astir betimes in the morning ; and while
we were yet at breakfast, Mr. Barkis appeared in the distance,
driving a chaise-cart towards the object of his affections.

Peggotty was dressed as usual, in her neat and quiet mourn-
ing ; but Mr. Barkis bloomed in a new blue coat, of which the
tailor had given him such good measure, that the cuffs would
have rendered gloves unnecessary in the coldest weather,
while the collar was so high that it pushed his hair up on end
on the top of his head. His bright buttons, too, were of the
largest size. Rendered complete by drab pantaloons and a
buff waistcoat, I thought Mr. Barkis a phenomenon of respec-
tability.

When we were all in a bustle outside the door, I found that
Mr. Peggotty was prepared with an old shoe, which was to be
thrown after us for luck, and which he offered to Mrs. Gum-
midge for that purpose.

"No. It had better be done by somebody else, Dan'l," said
Mrs. Gummidge. " I'm a lone lorn creetur' myself, and every-
think that reminds me of creeturs that ain't lone and lorn,
goes contrairy with me."

" Come, old gal ! " cried Mr. Peggotty. " Take and heave
it!"

"No, Dan'l," returned Mrs. Gummidge, whimpering and



158 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

shaking her head. "If I felt less, I could do more. You
don't feel like me, Dan 3 l ; thinks don't go contrairy with you,
nor you with them ; you had better do it yourself."

But here Peggotty, who had been going about from one to
another in a hurried way, kissing everybody, called out from
the cart, in which we all were by this time (Em'ly and I on
two little chairs, side by side), that Mrs. Gummidge must do
it. So Mrs. Gummidge did it; and, I am sorry to relate, cast
a damp upon the festive character of our departure, by imme-
diately bursting into tears, and sinking subdued into the arms
of Ham, with the declaration that she knowed she was a
burden, and had better be carried to the House at once.
"Which I really thought was a sensible idea, that Ham might
have acted on.

Away we went, however, on our holiday excursion ; and the
first thing we did was to stop at a church, where Mr. Barkis
tied the horse to some rails, and went in with Peggotty,
leaving little Em'ly and me alone in the chaise. I took that
occasion to put my arm round Em'ly's waist, and propose that
as I was going away so very soon now, we should determine
to be very affectionate to one another, and very happy, all day.
Little Ein'ly consenting, and allowing me to kiss her, I became
desperate ; informing her, I recollect, that I never could love
another, and that I was prepared to shed the blood of anybody
who should aspire to her affections.

How merry little Em'ly made herself about it ! With what
a demure assumption of being immensely older and wiser than
I, the fairy little woman said I was " a silly boy ; w and then
laughed so charmingly that I forgot the pain of being called
by that disparaging name, in the pleasure of looking at her.

Mr. Barkis and Peggotty were a good while in the church,
but came out at last, and then we drove away into the country.
As we were going along, Mr. Barkis turned to me, and said,
with a wink, — by the by, I should hardly have thought, before,
that he could wink :

" What name was it as I wrote up in the cart ? "

" Clara Peggotty," I answered.

" What name would it be as I should write up now, if there
was a tilt here ? "




UJ

cc

h
DC
<
D_
UJ
Q



<



UJ
O

D
C5

CO

2



OF DAVID COPPEEFIELD. 159

" Clara Peggotty, again," I suggested.

"Clara Peggotty Barkis!" he returned, and burst into a
roar of laughter that shook the chaise.

In a word, they were married, and had gone into the church
for no other purpose. Peggotty was resolved that it should
be quietly done ; and the clerk had given her away, and there
had been no witnesses of the ceremony. She was a little con-
fused when Mr. Barkis made this abrupt announcement of their
union, and could not hug me enough in token of her unim-
paired affection ; but she soon became herself again, and said
she was very glad it was over.

We drove to a little inn in a by road, where we were
expected, and where we had a very comfortable dinner, and
passed the day with great satisfaction. If Peggotty had been
married every day for the last ten years, she could hardly
have been more at her ease about it; it made no sort of
difference in her: she was just the same as ever, and went
out for a stroll with little Ein'ly and me before tea, while
Mr. Barkis philosophically smoked his pipe, and enjoyed him-
self, I suppose, with the contemplation of his happiness. If
so, it sharpened his appetite ; for I distinctly call to mind that,
although he had eaten a good deal of pork and greens at
dinner, and had finished off with a fowl or two, he was obliged
to have cold boiled bacon for tea, and disposed of a large
quantity without any emotion.

I have often thought, since, what an odd, innocent, out-of-
the-way kind of wedding it must have been ! We got into
the chaise again soon after dark, and drove cosily back, look-
ing up at the stars, and talking about them. I was their chief
exponent, and opened Mr. Barkis's mind to an amazing extent.
I told him all I knew, but he would have believed anything I
might have taken it into my head to impart to him ; for he
had a profound veneration for my abilities, and informed his
wife in my hearing, on that very occasion, that I was " a young
Roeshus " — by which I think he meant, prodigy.

When we had exhausted the subject of the stars, or rather
when I had exhausted the mental faculties of Mr. Barkis,
little Em'ly and I made a. cloak of an old. wrapper, and sat
under it for the rest of the journey. Ah, how I loved her !



160 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

What happiness (I thought) if we were married, and were
going away anywhere to live among the trees and in the
fields, never growing older, never growing wiser, children ever,
rambling hand in hand through sunshine and among flowery
meadows, laying down our heads on moss at night, in a sweet
sleep of purity and peace, and buried by the birds when we
were dead ! Some such picture, with no real world in it,
bright with the light of our innocence, and vague as the stars
afar off, was in my mind all the way. I am glad to think
there were two such guileless hearts at Peggotty^s marriage as
little Emily's and mine. I am glad to think the Loves and
Graces took such airy forms in its homely procession.

Well, we came to the old boat again in good time at night ;
and there Mr. and Mrs. Barkis bade us good by, and drove
away snugly to their own home. I felt then, for the first
time, that I had lost Peggotty. I should have gone to bed
with a sore heart indeed under any other roof but that which
sheltered little Ein'ly's head.

Mr. Peggotty and Ham knew what was in my thoughts as
well as I did, and were ready with some supper and their
hospitable faces to drive it away. Little Em'ly came and sat
beside me on the locker for the only time in all that visit ;
and it was altogether a wonderful close to a wonderful day.

It was a night tide; and soon after we went to bed, Mr.
Peggotty and Ham went out to fish. I felt very brave at being
left alone in the solitary house, the protector of Em'ly and
Mrs. Gummidge, and only wished that a lion or a serpent, or
any ill-disposed monster, would make an attack upon us, that
I might destroy him, and cover myself with glory. But as
nothing of the sort happened to be walking about on Yarmouth
flats that night, I provided the best substitute I could by
dreaming of dragons until morning.

With morning came Peggotty ; who called to me, as usual,
under my window as if Mr. Barkis the carrier had been from
first to last a dream too. After breakfast she took me to her
own home, and a beautiful little home it was. Of all the
movables in it, I must have been most impressed by a certain
old bureau of some dark wood in the parlor (the tile-floored
kitchen was the general sitting-room), with a retreating top



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 161

which opened, let down, and became a desk, within which was
a large quarto edition of Fox's Book of Martyrs. This
precious volume, of which I do not recollect one w^ord, I
immediately discovered and immediately applied myself toj
and I never visited the house afterwards, but I kneeled on a
chair, opened the casket where this gem was enshrined, spread
rny arms over the desk, and fell to devouring the. book afresh.
I was chiefly edified, I am afraid, by the pictures, which were
numerous, and represented all kinds of dismal horrors ; but
the Martyrs and Peggotty's house have been inseparable in my
mind ever since, and are now.

I took leave of Mr. Peggotty, and Ham, and Mrs. Gum-
midge, and little Em'ly, that day ; and passed the night at
Peggotty's, in a little room in the roof (with the crocodile-
book on a shelf by the bed's head), which was to be always
mine, Peggotty said, and should always be kept for me in
exactly the same state.

" Young or old, Davy dear, as long as I am alive and have
this house over my head/' said Peggotty, " you shall find it as
if I expected you here directly minute. I shall keep it every
day, as I used to keep your old little room, my darling j and
if you was to go to China, you might think of it as being kept
just the same, all the time you were away."

I felt the truth and constancy of my dear old nurse, with all
my heart, and thanked her as well as I could. That was not
very well, for she spoke to me thus, with her arms round my
neck, in the morning, and I was going home in the morning,
and I went home in the morning, with herself and Mr. Barkis
in the cart. They left me at the gate, not easily or lightly ;
and it was a strange sight to me to see the cart go on, taking
Peggotty away, and leaving me under the old elm-trees looking
at the house in which there was no face to look on mine with
love or liking any more.

And now I fell into a state of neglect, which I cannot look
back upon without compassion. I fell at once into a solitary
condition, — apart from all friendly notice, apart from the
society of all other boys of my own age, apart from all com-
panionship but my own spiritless thoughts, — which seems to
cast its gloom upon this paper as I write.

VOL. I — 11



162 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

What would I have given, to have been sent to the hardest
school that ever was kept ! — to have been taught something,
anyhow, anywhere ! No such hope dawned upon me. They
disliked me ; and they sullenly, sternly, steadily overlooked
me. I think Mr. Murdstone's means were straitened at about
this time ; but it is little to the purpose. He could not bear
me ; and in putting me from him he tried, as I believe, to put
away the notion that I had any claim upon him — and suc-
ceeded.

I was not actively ill-used. I was not beaten, or starved ;
but the wrong that was done to me had no intervals of relent-
ing, and was done in a systematic, passionless manner. Day
after day, week after week, month after month, I was coldly
neglected. I wonder sometimes, when I think of it, what they
would have done if I had been taken with an illness ; whether
I should have lain down in my lonely room, and languished
through it in my usual solitary way, or whether anybody
would have helped me out.

When Mr. and Miss Murdstone were at home, I took my
meals with them ; in their absence, I ate and drank by myself.
At all times I lounged about the house and neighborhood
quite disregarded, except that they were jealous of my making
any friends : thinking, perhaps, that if I did, I might com-
plain to some one. For this reason, though Mr. Chillip often
asked me to go and see him (he was a widower, having, some
years before that, lost a little small light-haired wife, whom I
can just remember connecting in my own thoughts with a pale
tortoise-shell cat), it was but seldom that I enjoyed the happi-
ness of passing an afternoon in his closet of a surgery ; read-
ing some book that was new to me, with the smell of the
whole pharmacopoeia coming up my nose, or pounding some-
thing in a mortar under his mild directions.

For the same reason, added no doubt to the old dislike of
her, I was seldom allowed to visit Peggotty. Faithful to her
promise, she either came to see me, or met me somewhere
near, once every week, and never empty-handed; but many
and bitter were the disappointments I had, in being refused
permission to pay a visit to her at her house. Some few
times, however, at long intervals, I was allowed to go there;



OF DAVID COFFERFIELD. 163

and then I found out that Mr. Barkis was something of a
miser, or as Peggotty dutifully expressed it, was "a little
near/' and kept a heap of money in a box under his bed,^
which he pretended was only full of coats and trousers. In
this coffer, his riches hid themselves with such a tenacious
modesty, that the smallest instalments could only be tempted
out by artifice ; so that Peggotty had to prepare a long and
elaborate scheme, a very Gunpowder Plot, for every Saturday's
expenses.

All this time I was so conscious of the waste of any promise
I had given, and of my being utterly neglected, that I should
have been perfectly miserable, I have no doubt, but for the
old books. They were my only comfort ; and I was as true
to them as they were to me, and read them over and over I
don't know how many times more.

I now approach a period of my life, which I can never lose
the remembrance of, while I remember anything: and the
recollection of which has often, without my invocation, come
before me like a ghost, and haunted happier times.

I had been out one day, loitering somewhere, in the listless,
meditative manner that my way of life engendered, when,
turning the corner of a lane near our house, I came upon Mr.
Murdstone walking with a gentleman. I was confused, and
was going by them, when the gentleman cried :

"What! Brooks!"
• " No, sir, David Copperfield," I said.

" Don't tell me. You are Brooks," said the gentleman.
" You are Brooks of Sheffield. That's your name."

At these words, I observed the gentleman more attentively.
His laugh coming to my remembrance too, I knew him to be
Mr. Quinion, whom I had gone over to Lowestoft with Mr.
Murdstone to see, before — it is no matter — I need not recall
when.

"And how do you get on, and where are you being edu-
cated, Brooks ? " said Mr. Quinion.

He had put his hand upon my shoulder, and turned me
about, to walk with them. I did not know what to reply, and
glanced dubiously at Mr. Murdstone.

"He is at home at present," said the latter. "He is not



164 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

being educated anywhere. I don't know what to do with him.
He is a difficult subject."

That old, double look was on me for a moment ; and then
his eye darkened with a frown, as it turned, in its aversion,
elsewhere.

" Humph ! " said Mr. Quinion, looking at us both, I thought.
"Fine weather."

Silence ensued, and I was considering how I could best dis-
engage my shoulder from his hand, and go away, when he
said:

"I suppose you are a pretty sharp fellow still? Eh,
Brooks ? "

" Ay ! he is sharp enough," said Mr. Murdstone, impatiently.
"You had better let him go. He will not thank you for
troubling him."

On this hint, Mr. Quinion released me, and I made the best
of my way home. Looking back as I turned into the front
garden, I saw Mr. Murdstone leaning against the wicket of the
churchyard, and Mr. Quinion talking to him. They were both
looking after me, and I felt that they were speaking of me.

Mr. Quinion lay at our house that night. After breakfast,
the next morning, I had put my chair away, and was going out
of the room, when Mr. Murdstone called me back. He then
gravely repaired to another table, where his sister sat herself
at her desk. Mr. Quinion, with his hands in his pockets, stood
looking out of window 5 and I stood looking at them all.

" David," said Mr. Murdstone, "to the young this is a
world for action ; not for moping and droning in."

" As you do," added his sister.

"Jane Murdstone, leave it to me, if you please. I say,
David, to the young this is a world for action, and not for
moping and droning in. It is especially so for a young-boy of
your disposition, which requires a great deal of correcting;
and to which no greater service can be done than to force it to
conform to the ways of the working world, and to bend it and
break it."

"For stubbornness won't do here," said his sister. "What
it wants, is, to be crushed. And crushed it must be. Shall
be, too!"



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 165

He gave her a look, half in remonstrance, half in approval,
and went on :

" I suppose you know, David, that I am not rich. At any
rate, you know it now. You have received some considerable
education already. Education is costly ; and even if it were
not, and I could afford it, I am of opinion that it would not be
at all advantageous to you to be kept at a school. What is
before you is a fight with the world ; and the sooner you begin
it, the better."

I think it occurred to me that I had already begun it, in my
poor way : but it occurs to me now, whether or no.

" You have heard i the counting-house ? mentioned some-
times," said Mr. Murdstone.

" The counting-house, sir ? " I repeated.

" Of Murdstone and Grinby, in the wine trade," he replied.

I suppose I looked uncertain, for he went on hastily :

" You have heard the i counting-house ' mentioned, or the
business, or the cellars, or the wharf, or something about it."

" I think I have heard the business mentioned, sir," I said,
remembering what I vaguely knew of his and his sister's
resources. " But I don't know when."

"It does not matter when," he returned. "Mr. Quinion
manages that business."

I glanced at the latter deferentially as he stood looking out
of window.

"Mr. Quinion suggests that it gives employment to some
other boys, and that he sees no reason why it shouldn't, on
the same terms, give employment to you."

" He having," Mr. Quinion observed, in a low voice, and half
turning round, _" no other prospect, Murdstone."

Mr. l^urdstone, with an impatient, even an angry gesture,
resumed, without noticing what he had said :

"Those terms are, that you will earn enough for yourself
to provide for your eating and drinking, and pocket-money.
Your lodging (which I have arranged for) will be paid by me.
So will your washing — "

" — Which will be kept down to my estimate/ 5 said his
sister.

" Your clothes will be looked iJfter for you, too," said Mr.



166 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

Murdstone ; " as you will not be able, yet awhile, to get them
for yourself. So you are now going to London, David, with
Mr. Quinion, to begin the world on your own account."

" In short, you are provided for," observed his sister ; " and
will please to do your duty."

Though I quite understood that the purpose of this announce-
ment was to get rid of me, I have no distinct remembrance
whether it pleased or frightened me. My impression is, that
I was in a state of confusion about it, and, oscillating between
the two points, touched neither. Nor had I much time for the
clearing of my thoughts, as Mr. Quinion was to go upon the
morrow.

Behold me, on the morrow, in a much-worn little white hat,
with a black crape round it for my mother, a black jacket, and
a pair of hard stiff corduroy trousers — which Miss Murdstone
considered the best armor for the legs in that fight with the
world which was now to come off : behold me so attired, and
with my little worldly all before me in a small trunk, sitting,
a lone lorn child (as Mrs. Gummidge might have said), in the
post-chaise that was carrying Mr. Quinion to the London coach
at Yarmouth ! See, how our house and church are lessening in
the distance ; how the grave beneath the tree is blotted out by
intervening objects; how the spire points upward from my old
playground no more, and the sky is empty !






OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 167



CHAPTER XL

I BEGIN" LIFE ON MY OWN ACCOUNT, AND DON ; T LIKE IT.

I know enough of the world now, to have almost lost the
capacity of being much surprised by anything ; but it is mat-
ter of some surprise to me, even now, that I can have been
so easily thrown away at such an age. A child of excellent
abilities, and with strong powers of observation, quick, eager,
delicate, and soon hurt bodily or mentally, it seems wonderful
to me that nobody should have made any sign in my behalf.
But none was made ; and I became, at ten years old, a little
laboring hind in the service of Murdstone and Grinby.

Murdstone and Grinby's warehouse was at the water side.
It was down in Blackfriars. Modern improvements have
altered the place ; but it was the last house at the bottom of a
narrow street, curving down hill to the river, with some stairs
at the end, where people took boat. It was a crazy old house
with a wharf of its own, abutting on the water when the tide
was in, and on the mud wh^n the tide was out, and literally
overrun with rats. Its panelled rooms, discolored with the
dirt and smoke of a hundred years, I dare say ; its decaying
floors and staircase; the squeaking and scuffling of the old
gray rats down in the cellars ; and the dirt and rottenness of
the place ; are things, not of many years ago, in my mind, but
of the present instant. They are all before me, just as they
were in the evil hour when I went among them for the first
time, with my trembling hand in Mr. Quinion's. v

Murdstone and Grinby's trade was among a good many
kinds of people, but an important branch of it was the supply
of wines and spirits to certain packet ships. I forget now
where they chiefly went, but I think there were some among
them that made voyages both to the East and West Indies. I
know that a great many empty bottles were one of the conse-
quences of this traffic, and that certain men and boys were



168 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE.

employed to examine them against the light, and reject those
that were flawed, and to rinse and wash them. When the
empty bottles ran short, there were labels to be pasted on full
ones, or corks to be fitted to them, or seals to be put upon the
corks, or finished bottles to be packed in casks. All this work
was my work, and of the boys employed upon it I was one.

There were three or four of us, counting me. My working
place was established in a corner of the warehouse, where
Mr. Quinion could see me, when he chose to stand up on the
bottom rail of his stool in the counting-house, and look at me
through a window above the desk. Hither, on the first morn*
ing of my so auspiciously beginning life on my own account,
the oldest of the regular boys was summoned to show me my
business. His name was Mick Walker, and he wore a ragged
apron and a paper cap. He informed me that, his father was
a bargeman, and walked, in a black velvet head-dress, in the
Lord Mayor's Show. He also informed me that our principal
associate would be another boy whom he introduced by the —
to me — extraordinary name of Mealy Potatoes. I discovered,
however, that this youth had not been christened by that
name, but that it had been bestowed upon him in the ware-
house, on account of his complexion, which was pale or mealy.
Mealy's father was a waterman, who had the, additional dis-
tinction of being a fireman, and was engaged as such at one of
the large theatres ; where some young relation of Mealy's —
I think his little sister — did Imps in the Pantomimes.

No words can express the secret agony of my soul as T sunk
into this companionship; compared these henceforth every-day
associates with those of my happier childhood — not to say
with Steerforth, Traddles, and the rest of those boys ; and felt
my hopes of growing up to be a learned and distinguished
man crushed in my bosom. The deep remembrance of the
sense I had, of being utterly without hope now ; of the shame
I felt in my position ; of the misery it was to my young heart
to believe that day by day what I had learned, and thought,
and delighted in, and raised my fancy and my emulation up
by, would pass away from me, little by little, never to be
brought back any more ; cannot be written. As often as Mick
Walker went away in the course of that forenoon, I mingled



OF DAVID COPPEEFIELD. 169

my tears with the water in which I was washing the bottles ;
and sobbed as if there were a flaw in my own breast, and it
were in danger of bursting.

The counting-house clock was at half-past twelve, and there
was general preparation for going to dinner, when Mr. Quinion
tapped at the counting-house window, and beckoned to me to
go in. I went in, and found there a stoutish, middle-aged
person, in a brown surtout and black tights and shoes, with no
more hair upon his head (which was a large one, and very
shining) than there is upon an egg, and with a very extensive
face, which he turned full upon me. His clothes were shabby,
but he had an imposing shirt-collar on. He carried a jaunty
sort of a stick, with a large pair of rusty tassels to it ; and a
quizzing-glass hung outside his coat, — for ornament, I after-
wards found, as he very seldom looked through it, and couldn't
see anything when he did.

" This," said Mr. Quinion, in allusion to myself, " is he."

" This," said the stranger, with a certain condescending roll
in his voice, and a certain indescribable air of doing something
genteel, which impressed me very much, "is Master Copper-
field. I hope I see you well, sir ? "

I said I was very well, and hoped he was. I was sufficiently
ill at ease, Heaven knows ; but it was not in my nature to
complain much at that time of my life, so I said I was very
well, and hoped he was.

"I am," said the stranger,," thank Heaven, quite well. I
have received a letter from Mr. Murdstone, in which he men-
tions that he would desire me to receive into an apartment in
the rear of my house, which is at present unoccupied — and is,
in short, to be let as a — in short," said the stranger, with a
smile and in a burst of confidence, " as a bedroom — the young
beginner whom I have now the pleasure to — " and the stranger
waved his hand, and settled his chin in his shirt-collar.

" This is Mr. Micawber," said Mr. Quinion to me.

" Ahem ! " said the stranger, " that is my name."

" Mr. Micawber," said Mr. Quinion, " is known to Mr. Murd-
stone. He takes orders for us on commission, when he can
get any. He has been written to by Mr. Murdstone, on the
subject of your lodgings, and he will receive you as a lodger."



170 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" My address/' said Mr. Micawber, " is Windsor Terrace,
City Road. I — in short/' said Mr. Micawber, with the same
genteel air, and in another burst of confidence — "I live
there."

I made him a bow.

"Under the impression," said Mr. Micawber, "that your
peregrinations in this metropolis have not as yet been extensive,
and that you might have some difficulty in penetrating the
arcana of the Modern Babylon in the direction of the City
Road — in short," said Mr. Micawber, in another burst of con-
fidence, " that you might lose yourself — I shall be happy to
call this evening, and install you in the knowledge of the
nearest way."

I thanked him with all my heart, for it was friendly in him
to offer to take that trouble.

"At what hour," said Mr. Micawber, "shall I — "

" At about eight," said Mr. Quinion.

" At about eight," said Mr. Micawber, " I beg to wish you
good day, Mr. Quinion. I will intrude no longer."

So he put on his hat, and went out with his cane under his
arm : very upright, and humming a tune when he was clear of
the counting-house.

Mr. Quinion then formally engaged me to be as useful as I
could in the warehouse of Murdstone and Grinby, at a salary,
I think, of six shillings a week. I am not clear whether
it was six or seven. I am inclined to believe, from my
uncertainty on this head, that it was six at first and seven
afterwards. He paid me a week down (from his own pocket,
I believe), and I gave Mealy sixpence out of it to get my trunk
carried to Windsor Terrace at night : it being too heavy for
my strength, small as it was. I paid sixpence more for my
dinner, which was a meat pie and a turn at a neighboring
pump ; and passed the hour which was allowed for that meal,
in^ walking about the streets.

At the appointed time in the evening, Mr. Micawber
reappeared. I washed my hands and face, to do the greater
honor to his gentility, and we walked to our house, as I
suppose I must now call it, together ; Mr. Micawber impressing
the names of streets, and the shapes of corner houses upon



OF DAVID COPPEEFIELD. 171

me, as we went along, that I might find my way back easily,
in the morning.

Arrived at his house in Windsor Terrace (which I noticed
was shabby like himself, but also, like himself, made all the
show it could), he presented me to Mrs. Micawber, a thin and
faded lady, not at all young, who was sitting in the parlor
(the first floor was altogether unfurnished, and the blinds
were kept down to delude the neighbors), with a baby at her
breast. This baby was one of twins ; and I may remark here
that I hardly ever, in all my experience of the family, saw
both the twins detached from Mrs. Micawber at the same
time. One of them was always taking refreshment.

There were two other children; Master Micawber, aged
about four, and Miss Micawber, aged about three. These, and
a dark-complexioned young woman, with a habit of snorting,
who was servant to the family, and informed me, before half-
an-hour had expired, that she was " a Orfling," and came from
St. Luke's workhouse, in the neighborhood, completed the
establishment. My room was at the top of the house, at the
back ; a close chamber ; stencilled all over with an ornament
which my young imagination represented as a blue muffin;
and very scantily furnished.

"I never thought/' said Mrs. Micawber when she came up,
twin and all, to show me the apartment, and sat down to take
breath, "before I was married, when I lived with papa and
mamma, that I should ever find it necessary to take a lodger.
But Mr. Micawber being in difficulties, all considerations of
private feeling must give way."

I said : " Yes, Ma'am."

"Mr. Micawber's difficulties are almost overwhelming just
at present," said Mrs. Micawber ; " and whether it is possible
to bring him through them, I don't know. When I lived at
home with papa and mamma, I really should have hardly
understood what the word meant, in the sense in which I now
employ it, but experientia does it — as papa used to say."

I cannot satisfy myself whether she told me that Mr.
Micawber had been an officer in the Marines, or whether I
have imagined it. I only know that I believe to this hour
that he was in the Marines once upon a time, without knowing



172 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

why. He was a sort of town traveller for a number of mis-
cellaneous houses, now ; but made little or nothing of it, I am
afraid.

" If Mr. Micawber's creditors will not give him time," said
Mrs. Micawber, " they must take the consequences ; and the
sooner they bring it to an issue the better. Blood cannot be
obtained from a stone, neither can anything on account be
obtained at present (not to mention law expenses) from Mr.
Micawber."

I never can quite understand whether my precocious self-
dependence confused Mrs. Micawber in reference to my age,
or whether she was so full of the subject that she would have
talked about it to the very twins if there had been nobody
else to communicate with, but this was the strain in which
she began, aud she went on accordingly all the time I knew
her.

=— Poor Mrs. Micawber ! She said she had tried to exert her-
self ; and so, I have no doubt, she had. The centre of the
street-door was perfectly covered with a great brass-plate, on
which was engraved "Mrs. Micawber's Boarding Establish-
ment for Young Ladies ; " but I never found that any young
lady had ever been to school there ; or that any young lady
ever came, or proposed to come ; or that the least preparation
was ever made to receive any young lady. The only visitors
I ever saw or heard of, were creditors. They used to come at
all hours, and some of them were quite" ferocious. One dirty-
• faced man, I think he was a boot-maker, used to edge himself
into the passage as early as seven o'clock in the morning, and
call up the stairs to Mr. Micawber — " Come ! You ain't out
yet, you know. Pay us, will you ? Don't hide, you know ;
that's mean. I wouldn't be mean if I was you. Pay us, will
you ? You just pay us, d'ye hear ? Come ! " Receiving no
answer to these taunts, he would mount in his wrath to the
words " swindlers " and " robbers ; " and these being ineffec-
tual too, would sometimes go to the extremity of crossing the
street, and roaring up at the windows of the second floor,
where he knew Mr. Micawber was. At these times, Mr.
Micawber would be transported with grief and mortification,
even to the length (as I was once made aware by a scream



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 173

from his wife) of making motions at himself with a razor;
but within half an hour afterwards, he would polish up his
shoes with extraordinary pains, and go out, humming a tune
with a greater air of gentility than ever. Mrs. Micawber was
quite as elastic. I have known her to be thrown into fainting
fits by the king's taxes at three o'clock, and* to eat lamb-
chops, breaded, and drink warm ale (paid for with two tea-
spoons that had gone to the pawnbroker's) at four. On one
occasion, when an execution had just been put in, coming
home through some chance as early as six o'clock, I saw her
lying (of course with a twin) under the grate in a swoon, with
her hair all torn about her face ; but I never knew her more
cheerful than she was, that very same night, over a. veal-
cutlet before the kitchen fire, telling me stories about her
papa and mamma, and the company they used to keep.

In this house, and with this family, I passed my leisure
time. My own exclusive breakfast of a penny loaf and a
pennyworth of milk, I provided myself ; I kept another small
loaf, and a modicum of cheese, on a particular shelf of a par-
ticular cupboard, to make my supper on when I came back at
night. This made a hole in the six or seven shillings, I know
well ; avid I was out at the warehouse all day, and had to sup-
port myself on that money all the week. From Monday morn-
ing until Saturday night, I had no advice, no counsel, no
encouragement, no consolation, no assistance, no support, of
any kind, from any one, that I can call to mind, as I hope to
go to Heaven !

I was so young and childish, and so little qualified — how
could I be otherwise ? — to undertake the whole charge of my
own existence, that often, in going to Murdstone and Grinby's,
of a morning, I could not resist the stale pastry put out for
sale at half-price at the pastrycooks' doors, and spent in that
the money I should have kept for my dinner. Then, I went
without my dinner, or bought a roll or a slice of pudding. I
remember two pudding-shops between which I was divided,
according to my finances. One was in a court close to St.
Martin's Church, — at the back of the church, — which is now
removed altogether. The pudding at that shop was made of
currants, and was rather a special pudding, but was dear, two-



174 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

pennyworth not being larger than a pennyworth of more ordi-
nary pudding. A good shop for the latter was in the Strand
— somewhere in that part which has been rebuilt since. It
was a stout pale pudding, heavy and flabby, and with great
flat raisins in it, stuck in whole at wide distances apart. It
came up hot at about my time every day, and many a day did
I dine off it. When I dined regularly and handsomely, I had
a^aveloy and a penny-loaf, or a fourpenny plate of red beef
from a cook's shop ; or a plate of bread and cheese and a glass
of beer, from a miserable old public-house opposite our place
of business, called the Lion, or the Lion and something else
that I have forgotten. Once, I remember carrying my own
bread (which I had brought from home in the morning) under
my arm, wrapped in a piece of paper, like a book, and going
to a famous alamode beef-house near Drury Lane, and order-
ing a " small plate " of that delicacy to eat with it. What
the waiter thought of such a strange little apparition coming
in all alone, I don't know ; but I can see him now, staring at
me as I ate my dinner, and bringing up the other waiter to
look. I gave him a halfpenny for himself, and I wish he
hadn't taken it.

We had half-an-hour, I think, for tea. When I had money
enough, I used to get half-a-pint of ready-made coffee and a
slice of bread and butter. When I had none, I used to look
at a venison-shop in Fleet Street ; or I have strolled, at such
a time, as far as Covent Garden Market, and stared at the
pineapples. I was fond of wandering about the Adelphi, be-
cause it was a mysterious place, with those dark arches. I see
myself emerging one evening from some of these arches, on a
little public-house close to the river, with an open space before
it, where some coal-heavers were dancing ; to look at whom
I sat down upon a bench. I wonder what they thought of
me !

I was such a child, and so little, that frequently when I
went into the bar of a strange public-house for a glass of ale
or porter, to moisten what I had had for dinner, they w r ere
afraid to give it me. I remember one hot evening I went into
the bar of a public-house, and said to the landlord :

" What is your best — your very best — ale a glass ? " For





it was a special occasion. I don't know what. It may have
been my birthday.

" Twopence-half penny," says the landlord, " is the price of
the Genuine Stunning ale."

"Then," says I, producing the money, "just draw me a
glass of the Genuine Stunning, if you please, with a good head
to it."

The landlord looked at me in return over the bar, from
head to foot, with a strange smile on his face ; and instead of
drawing the beer, looked round the screen and said something
to his wife. She came out from behind it, with her work in
her hand, and joined him in surveying me. Here we stand,
all three, before me now. The landlord in his shirt sleeves,
leaning against the bar window-frame ; his wife looking over
the little half-door ; and I, in some confusion, looking up at
them from outside the partition. They asked me a good many
questions ; as, what my name was, how old I was, where I
lived, how I was employed, and how I came there. To all of
which, that I might commit nobody, I invented, I am afraid,
appropriate answers. They served me with the ale, though I
suspect it was not the Genuine Stunning; and the landlord's
wife, opening the little half -door of the bar, and bending down,
gave me my money back, and gave me a kiss that was half
admiring, and half compassionate, but all womanly and good,
I am sure.

I know I do not exaggerate, unconsciously and uninten-
tionally, the scantiness of my resources or the difficulties of
my life. I know that if a shilling were given me by Mr.
Quinion at any time, I spent it in a dinner or a tea. I know
that I worked from morning until night, with common men
and boys, a shabby child. I know that I lounged about the
streets, insufficiently and unsatisfactorily fed. I know that
but for the mercy of God, I might easily have been, for any
care that was taken of me, a little robber or a little vagabond.

Yet I held some station at Murdstone and Grinby's too.
Besides that Mr. Quinion did what a careless man so occupied,
and dealing with a thing so anomalous, could, to treat me as
one upon a different footing from the rest, I never said, to
man or boy, how it was that I came to be there, or gave the



176 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

least indication of being sorry that I was there. That I suf-
fered in secret; and that I suffered exquisitely, no one ever
knew but I. How much I suffered, it is, as I have said
already, utterly beyond my power to tell. But I kept my own
counsel, and I did my work. I knew from the first, that, if I
could not do my work as well as any of the rest, I could not
hold myself above slight and contempt. I soon became at
least as expeditious and as skilful as either of the other boys.
Though perfectly familiar with them, my conduct and manner
were different enough from theirs to place a space between us.
They and the men generally spoke of me as "the little gent,"
or "the young Suffolker." A certain man named Gregory,
who was foreman of the packers, and another named Tipp,
who was the carman, and wore a red jacket, used to address
me sometimes as " David : " but I think it was mostly when
we were very confidential, and when I had made some efforts
to entertain them, over our work, with some results of the old
readings — which were fast perishing out of my remembrance.
Mealy Potatoes uprose once, and rebelled against my being so
distinguished; but Mick Walker settled him in no time.

My rescue from this kind of existence I considered quite
hopeless, and abandoned, as such, altogether. I am solemnly
convinced that I never for one hour was reconciled to it, or
was otherwise than miserably unhappy; but I bore it; and
even to Peggotty, partly for the love of her and partly for
shame, never in any letter (though many passed between us)
revealed the truth.

Mr. Micawber's difficulties were an addition to the distressed
state of my mind. In my forlorn state I became quite attached
to the family, and used to walk about, busy with Mrs. Micaw-
ber's calculations of ways and means, and heavy with the
weight of Mr. Micawber's debts. On a Saturday night, which
was my grand treat, — partly because it was a great thing to
walk home with six or seven shillings in my pocket, looking
into the shops and thinking what such a sum would buy, and
partly because I went home early, — Mrs. Micawber would make
the most heart-rending confidences to me ; also on a Sunday
morning, when I mixed the portion of tea or coffee I had
bought over-night, in a little shaving-pot, and sat late at my





breakfast. It was nothing at all unusual for Mr. Micawber to
sob violently at the beginning of one of these Saturday night
conversations, and sing about Jack's delight being his lovely
Nan, towards the end of it. I have known him come home
to supper with a flood of tears, and a declaration that nothing
was now left but a jail; and go to bed making a calculation of
the expense of putting bow- windows to the house, "in case
anything turned up," which was his favorite expression. And
Mrs. Micawber was just the same.

A curious equality of friendship, originating, I suppose, in
our respective circumstances, sprung up between me and these
people notwithstanding the ludicrous disparity in our years.
But I never allowed myself to be prevailed upon to accept
any invitation to eat and drink with them out of their stock
(knowing that they got on badly with the butcher and baker,
and had often not too much for themselves), until Mrs. Micaw-
ber took me into her entire confidence. This she did one
evening as follows :

"Master Copperfield," said Mrs. Micawber, "I make no
stranger of you, and therefore do not hesitate to say that Mr.
Micawber's difficulties are coming to a crisis."

It made me very miserable to hear it, and I looked at Mrs.
Micawber's red eyes with the utmost sympathy.

"With the exception of the heel of a Dutch cheese — which
is not adapted to the wants of a young family " — said Mrs.
Micawber, "there is really not a scrap of anything in the
larder. I was accustomed to speak of the larder when I lived
with papa and mamma, and I used the word almost uncon-
sciously. What I mean to express, is, that there is nothing
to eat in the house."

" Dear me ! " I said, in great concern.

I had two or three shillings of my week's money in my
pocket — from which I presume that it must have been on
a Wednesday night when we held this conversation — and I
hastily produced them, and with heartfelt emotion begged
Mrs. Micawber to accept them as a loan. But that lady, kiss-
ing me, and making me put ' them back in my pocket, replied
that she couldn't think of it.

"No, my dear Master Copperfield/' said she, "far be it
vol. i — 12



178 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

from my thoughts ! But you have a discretion beyond your
years, and can render me another kind of service, if you will ;
and a service I will thankfully accept of."

I begged Mrs. Micawber to name it.

"I have parted with the plate myself," said Mrs. Micawber.
u Six tea, two salt, and a pair of sugars, I have at different
times borrowed money on, in secret, with my own hands. But
the twins are a great tie ; and to me, with my recollections of
papa and mamma, these transactions are very painful. There
are still a few trifles that we could part with. Mr. Micawber' s
feelings would never allow him to dispose of them ; and
Clickett" — this was the girl from the workhouse — " being
of a vulgar mind, would take painful liberties if so much con-
fidence was reposed in her. Master Copperfield, if I might
ask you v —

I understood Mrs. Micawber now, and begged her to make
use of me to any extent. I began to dispose of the more port-
able articles of property that very evening ; and went out on
a similar expedition almost every morning, before I went to
Murdstone and Grinby's.

Mr. Micawber had a few books on a little chiffonier, which
he called the library ; and those went first. I carried them,
one after another, to a bookstall in the City-road — one part
of which, near our house, was almost all bookstalls and bird-
shops then — and sold them for whatever they would bring.
The keeper of this bookstall who lived in a little house behind
it, used to get tipsy every night, and to be violently scolded
by his wife every morning. More than once, when I went
there early, I had audience of him in a turn-up bedstead,
with a cut in his forehead or a black eye, bearing witness to
his excesses over night (I am afraid he was quarrelsome in
his drink), and he, with a shaking hand, endeavoring to find
the needful shillings in one or other of the pockets of his
clothes, which lay upon the floor, while his wife, with a baby
in her arms and her shoes down at heel, never left off rating
him. Sometimes he had lost his money, and then he would
ask me to call again ; but his wife had always got some — had
taken his, I dare say, while he was drunk — and secretly com-
pleted the bargain on the stairs, as we went down together.






OF DAVID COPPEEFIELD. 179

*t the pawnbroker's shop, too, I began to be very well
known. The principal gentleman who officiated behind the
counter, took a good deal of notice of me ; and often got me, I
recollect, to decline a Latin noun or adjective, or to conjugate
a Latin verb, in his ear, while he transacted my business.
After all these occasions Mrs. Micawber made a little treat,
which was generally a supper ; and there was a peculiar relish
in these meals which I well remember.

At last Mr. Micawber's difficulties came to a crisis, and he
was arrested -early one morning, and carried over to the King's
Bench Prison in the Borough. He told me, as he went out of
the house, that the God of day had now gone down upon him
— and I really thought his heart was broken and mine too.
But I heard, afterwards, that he was seen to play a lively
game of skittles, before noon.
^On the first Sunday after he was taken there, I was to go
and see him, and have dinner with him. I was to ask my
way to such a place, and just short of that place I should see
such another place, and just short of that I should see a yard,
which I was to cross, and keep straight on until I saw a turn-
key. All this I did ; and when at last I did see a turnkey
(poor little fellow that I was !), and thought how, when Rod-
erick Random was in a debtors' prison, there was a man there
Avith nothing on him but an old rug, the turnkey swam before
my dimmed eyes and my beating heart.

Mr. Micawber was waiting for me within the gate, and we
went up to his room (top story but one), and cried very much.
He solemnly conjured me, I remember, to take warning by
his fate ; and to observe that if a man had twenty pounds
a-year for his income, and spent nineteen pounds nineteen
shillings and sixpence, he would be happy, but that if he spent
twenty pounds one he would be miserable. After which he
borrowed a shilling of me for porter, gave me a written order
on Mrs. Micawber for the amount, and put away his pocket-
handkerchief, and cheered up.

We sat before a little fire, with two bricks put within the
rusted grate, one on each side, to prevent its burning too many
coals ; until another debtor, who shared the room with Mr.
Micawber, came in from the bakehouse with the loin of mutton



180 THE PEBSONAL HISTOBY AND EXPEBIENCE

which was our joint-stock repast. Then I was sent up to
" Captain Hopkins " in the room overhead, with Mr. Micaw-
ber's compliments, and I was his young friend, and would
Captain Hopkins lend me a knife and fork.

Captain Hopkins lent me the knife and fork, with his com-
pliments to Mr. Micawber. There was a very dirty lady in
his little room, and two wan girls, his daughters, with shock
heads of hair. I thought it was better to borrow Captain Hop-
kins's knife and fork, than Captain Hopkins's comb. The cap-
tain himself was in the last extremity of shabbiness, with
large whiskers, and an old, old brown greatcoat with no other
coat below it. I saw his bed rolled up in a corner ; and what
plates and dishes and pots he had, on a shelf ; and I divined
(God knows how) that though the two girls with the shock
heads of hair were Captain Hopkins's children, the dirty lady
was not married to Captain Hopkins. My timid station on
his threshold was not occupied more than a couple of minutes
at most ; but I came down again with all this in my knowl-
edge, as surely as the knife and fork were in my hand.

There was something gipsy-like and agreeable in the dinner,
after all. I took back Captain Hopkins's knife and fork early
in the afternoon, and went home to comfort Mrs. Micawber
with an account of my visit. She fainted when she saw me
return, and made a little jug of egg-hot afterwards to console
us while we talked it over.

I don't know how the household furniture came to be sold
for the family benefit, or who sold it, except that I did not.
Sold it was, however, and carried away in a van ; except the
beds, a few chairs, and the kitchen table. With these posses-
sions we encamped, as it were, in the two parlors of the
emptied house in Windsor Terrace; Mrs. Micawber, the chil-
dren, the Orfling, and myself ; and lived in those rooms night
and day. I have no idea for how long, though it seems to me
for a long time. At last Mrs. Micawber resolved to move into
the prison, where Mr. Micawber had now secured a room to
himself. So I took the key of the house to the landlord, who
was very glad to get it ; and the beds were sent over to the
King's Bench, except mine, for which a little room was hired
outside the walls in the neighborhood of that Institution, very



OF DAVID COPPJSBFIELD. 181

much to my satisfaction, since the Micawbers and I had
become too used to one another, in our troubles, to part. The
Orfling was likewise accommodated with an inexpensive lodg-
ing in the same neighborhood. Mine was a quiet back-garret
with a sloping roof, commanding a pleasant prospect of a tim-
ber-yard ; and when I took possession of it, with the reflection
that Mr. Micawber's troubles had come to a crisis at last, I
thought it quite a paradise.

All this time I was working at Murdstone and Grinby's in
the same common way, and with the same common companions,
and with the same sense of unmerited degradation as at first.
But 1 never, happily for me no doubt, made a single acquaint-
ance, or spoke to any of the many boys whom I saw daily in going
to the warehouse, in coming from it, and in prowling about the
streets at meal-times. I led the same secretly unhappy life ;
but I led it in the same lonely, self-reliant manner. The only
changes I am conscious of are, first, that I had grown more
shabby,, and secondly, that I was now relieved of much of the
weight of Mr. and Mrs. Micawber's cares ; for some relatives
or friends had engaged to help them at their present pass, and
they lived more comfortably in the prison than they had lived
for a long while out of it. I used to breakfast with them now,
in virtue of some arrangement, of which I have forgotten the
details. I forget, too, at what hour the gates were opened in
the morning, admitting of my going in ; but I know that I was
often up at six o'clock, and that my favorite lounging-place in
the interval was old London Bridge, where I was wont to sit
in one of the stone recesses, watching the people going by, or to
look over the balustrades at the sun shining in the water, and
lighting up the golden flame on the top of the Monument.
The Orfling met me here sometimes, to be told some astonish-
ing fictions respecting the wharves and the Tower ; of which I
can say no more than that I hope I believed them myself. In
the evening I used to go back to the prison, and walk up and
down the parade with Mr. Micawber ; or play casino with Mrs.
Micawber, and hear reminiscences of her papa and mamma.
Whether Mr. Murdstone knew where I was, I am unable to
say. I never told them at Murdstone and Grinby's.

Mr. Micawber' s affairs, although past their crisis, were very



182 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

much involved by reason of a certain " Deed," of which I used
to hear a great deal, and which I suppose now, to have been
some former composition with his creditors, though I was so
far from being clear about it then, that I am conscious of hav-
ing confounded it with those demoniacal parchments which
are held to have, once upon a time, obtained to a great^ extent
in Germany. At last this document appeared to be got out of
the way, somehow ; at* all events, it ceased to be the rock
a-head it had been ; and Mrs. Micawber informed me that " her
family" had decided that Mr. Micawber should apply for his
release under the Insolvent Debtors' Act, which would set him
free, she expected, in about six weeks.

"And then," said Mr. Micawber, who was present, "I have
no doubt I shall, please Heaven, begin to be beforehand with
the world, and to live in a perfectly new manner, if — in
short, if anything turns up."

By way of going in for anything that might be on the cards,
I call to mind that Mr. Micawber, about this time, composed
a petition to the House of Commons, praying for an alteration
in the law of imprisonment for debt. I set down this remem-
brance here, because it is an instance to myself of the manner
in which I fitted my old books to my altered life, and made
stories for myself, out of the streets, and out of men and
women ; and how some main points in the character I shall
unconsciously develop, I suppose, in writing my life, were
gradually forming all this while.

There was a club in the prison, in which Mr. Micawber, as
a gentleman, was a great authority. Mr. Micawber had stated
his idea of this petition to the club, and the club had strongly
approved of the same. Wherefore Mr. Micawber (who was a
thoroughly good-natured man, and as active a creature about
everything but his own affairs as ever existed, and never so
happy as when he was busy about something that could never
be of any profit to him) set to work at the petition, invented
it, engrossed it on an immense sheet of paper, spread it out on
a table, and appointed a time for all the club, and all within
the walls if they chose, to come up to his room and sign it.

When I heard of this approaching ceremony, I was so
anxious to see them all come in, one after another, though I





knew the greater part of them already, and they me, that I
got an hour's leave of absence from Murdstone and Grinby's,
and established myself in a corner for that purpose. As many
of the principal members of the club as could be got into the
small room without filling it, supported Mr. Micawber in front
of the petition, while my old friend Captain Hopkins (who had
washed himself, to do honor to so solemn an occasion) stationed
himself close to it, to read it to all who were unacquainted
with its contents. The door was then thrown open, and the
general population began to come in, in a long file; several
waiting outside, while one entered, affixed his signature, and
went out. To everybody in succession, Captain Hopkins said :
"Have you read it? " — "No." "Would you like to hear it
read ? " If he weakly showed the least disposition to hear it,
Captain Hopkins, in a loud sonorous voice, gave him every
word of it. The Captain would have read it twenty thousand
times, if twenty thousand people would have heard him, one by
one. I remember a certain luscious roll he gave to such phrases
as "The people's representatives in parliament assembled,"
"Your petitioners therefore humbly approach your honorable
house," "His gracious Majesty's unfortunate subjects," as if
the words were something real in his mouth, and delicious to
taste ; Mr. Micawber, meanwhile, listening with a little of an
author's vanity, and contemplating (not severely) the spikes
on the opposite wall.

As I walked to and fro daily between Southwark and Black-
frairs, and lounged about at meal-times in obscure streets, the
stones of which may, for anything I know, be worn at this
moment by my childish feet, I wonder how many of these
people were wanting in the crowd that used to come filing
before me in review again, to the echo of Captain Hopkins's
voice ! When my thoughts go back now, to that slow agony
of my youth, I wonder how much of the histories I invented
for such people hangs like a mist of fancy over well-remem-
bered facts ! When I tread the old ground, I do not wonder
that I seem to see and pity, going on before me, an innocent,
romantic boy, making his imaginative world out of such
strange experiences and sordid things.



184 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE'



CHAPTER XII.

LIKING LIFE ON MY OWK ACCOUNT NO BETTER, I FORM A

GREAT RESOLUTION.

In due time Mr. Micawber's petition was ripe for hearing ;
and that gentleman was ordered to be discharged under the
Act, to my great joy. His creditors were not implacable;
and Mrs. Micawber informed me that even the revengeful
boot-maker had declared in open court that he bore him no
malice, but th^t when money was owing to him he liked to
be paid. He said he thought it was human nature.

Mr. Micawber returned to the King's Bench when his case
was over, as some fees were to be settled, and some formalities
observed, before he could be actually released. The club
received him with transport, and held an harmonic meeting
that evening in his honor ; while Mrs. Micawber and I had
a lamb's fry in private, surrounded by the sleeping family.

" On such an occasion I will give you, Master Copperfield,"
said Mrs. Micawber, " in a little more flip," for we had been
having some already, "the memory of my papa and mamma: 3

"Are they dead, ma'am?" I inquired, after drinking th*
toast in a wineglass.

" My mamma departed this life," said Mrs. Micawber, " bef 01*
Mr. Micawber's difficulties commenced, or at least before the]
became pressing. My papa lived to bail Mr. Micawber several
times, and then expired, regretted by a numerous circle."

Mrs. Micawber shook her head, and dropped a pious tear
upon the twin who happened to be in hand.

As I could hardly hope for a more favorable opportunity
of putting a question in which I had a near interest, I said to
Mrs. Micawber:

" May I ask, ma'am, what you and Mr. Micawber intend to
do, now that Mr. Micawber is out of difficulties and at liberty ?
Have you settled yet ? "






OF DAVID COPPJSRFIELD. 185

"My family," said Mrs. Micawber, who always said those
two words with an air, though I never could discover who
came under the denomination, " my family are of opinion that
Mr. Micawber should quit London, and exert his talents in
the country. Mr. Micawber is a man of great talent, Master
Copperfield."

I said I was sure of that.

"Of great talent," repeated Mrs. Micawber. "My family
are of opinion, that, with a little interest, something might
be done for a man of his ability in the Custom House. The
influence of my family being local, it is their wish that Mr.
Micawber should go down to Plymouth. They think it indis-
pensable that he should be upon the spot."

" That he may be ready ? " I suggested.

"Exactly," returned Mrs. Micawber. "That he may be
ready — in case of anything turning up."

" And do you go too, ma'am ? "

The events of the day, in combination with the twins, if not
with the flip, had made Mrs. Micawber hysterical, and she
shed tears as she replied :

"I never will desert Mr. Micawber. Mr. Micawber may
have concealed his difficulties from me in the first instance,
but his sanguine temper may have led him to expect that he
would overcome them. The pearl necklace and bracelets which
I inherited from mamma, have been disposed of for less than
half their value ; and the set of coral, which was the wedding
gift of my papa, has been actually thrown away for nothing.
But I never will desert Mr. Micawber. No ! " cried Mrs.
Micawber, more affected than before, "I never will do it!
It's of no use asking me ! "

I felt quite uncomfortable — as if Mrs. Micawber supposed
I had asked her to do anything of the sort ! — and sat looking
at her in alarm.

"Mr. Micawber has his faults. I do not deny that he is
improvident. I do not deny that he has kept me in the dark
as to his resources and his liabilities, both," she went on,
looking at the wall ; "but I never will desert Mr. Micawber !"

Mrs. Micawber having now raised her voice into a perfect
scream, I was so frightened that I ran off to the club-room



186 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

and disturbed Mr. Micawber in the act of presiding at a long
table, and leading the chorus of

Gee up, Dobbin,

Gee ho, Dobbin,

Gee up, Dobbin,

Gee up, and gee ho — o — o !

— with the tidings that Mrs. Micawber was in an alarming
state, upon which he immediately burst into tears, and came
away with me with his waistcoat full of the heads and tails of
shrimps, of which he had been partaking.

"Emma, my angel!" cried Mr. Micawber, running into
the room ; " what is the matter ? "

" I never will desert you, Micawber ! h she exclaimed.

" My life'! " said Mr. Micawber, taking her in his arms, " I
am perfectly aware of it."

" He is the parent of my children ! He is the father of
my twins ! He is the husband of my affections," cried Mrs.
Micawber, struggling; "and I ne — ver — will desert Mr.
Micawber ! "

Mr. Micawber was so deeply affected by this proof of her
devotion (as to me, I. was dissolved in tears), that he hung
over her in a passionate manner, imploring her to look up, and
to be calm. But the more he asked Mrs. Micawber to look
up, the more she fixed her eyes on nothing ; and the more he
asked her to compose herself, the more she wouldn't. Conse-
quently Mr. Micawber was soon so overcome, that he mingled
his tears with hers and mine ; until he begged me to do him
the favor of taking a chair on the staircase, while he got her
into bed. I would have taken my leave for the night, but he
would not hear of my doing that until the strangers' bell
should ring. So I sat at the staircase window, until he came
out with another chair and joined me.

" How is Mrs. Micawber now, sir ? " I said.

" Very low," said Mr. Micawber, shaking his head ; " reac-
tion. Ah, this has been a dreadful day ! We stand alone now

— everything has gone from us ! "

Mr. Micawber pressed my hand, and groaned, and after-
wards shed tears. I was greatly touched, and disappointed
too, for I had expected that we should be quite gay on



I



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 187

this happy and long-looked for occasion. But Mr. and Mrs.
Micawber were so used to their old difficulties, I think, that
they felt quite shipwrecked when they came to consider
that they were released from them. All their elasticity was
departed, and I never saw them half so wretched as on this
night ; insomuch that when the bell rang, and Mr. Micawber
walked with me to the lodge, and parted from me there with
a blessing, I felt quite afraid to leave him by himself, he was
so profoundly miserable.

But through all the confusion and lowness of spirits in
which he had been, so unexpectedly to me, involved, I plainly
discerned that Mr. and Mrs. Micawber and their family were
going away from London, and that a parting between us was
near at hand. -It was in my walk home that night, and in
the sleepless hours which followed when I lay in bed, that the
thought first occurred to me — though I don't know how it
came into my head — which afterwards shaped itself into a
settled resolution.

I had grown to be so accustomed to the Micawbers, and had
been so intimate with them in their distresses, and was so
utterly friendless without them, that the prospect of being
thrown upon some new shift for a lodging, and going once
more among unknown people, was like being that moment
turned adrift into my present life, with such a knowledge of
it ready made, as experience had given me. All the sensitive
feelings it wounded so cruelly, all the shame and misery it
kept alive within my breast, became more poignant as I
thought of this ; and I determined that the life was unen-
durable.

That there was no hope of escape from it, unless the escape
was my own act, I knew quite well. I rarely heard from
Miss Murdstone, and never from Mr. Murdstone : but two or
three parcels of made or mended clothes had come up for me,
consigned to Mr. Quinion, and in each there was a scrap of
paper to the effect that J. M. trusted D. G. was applying him-
self to business, and devoting himself wholly to his duties —
not the least hint of my ever being anything else than the
common drudge into which I was fast settling down.

The very next day showed me, while my mind was in the



188 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

first agitation of what it had conceived, that Mrs. Micawber
had not spoken of their going away without warrant. They
took a lodging in the house where I lived, for a week ; at the
expiration of which time they were to start for Plymouth.
Mr. Micawber himself came down to the counting-house, m
the afternoon, to tell Mr. Quinion that he must relinquish me
on the day of his departure, and to give me a high character,
which I am sure I deserved. And Mr. Quinion, calling in
Tipp the carman, who was a married man, and had a room to
let, quartered me prospectively on him — by our mutual
consent, as he had every reason to think; for I said nothing,
though my resolution was now taken.

I passed my evenings with Mr. and Mrs. Micawber, during
the remaining term of our residence under the. same roof ; and
I think we became fonder of one another as the time went on.
On the last Sunday, they invited me to dinner ; and we had
a loin of pork and apple sauce, and a pudding. I had bought
a spotted wooden horse over-night as a parting gift to little
Wilkins Micawber — that was the boy — and a doll for little
Emma. I had also bestowed a shilling on the Orfling, who
was about to be disbanded.

"We had a very pleasant day, though we were all in a tender
state about our approaching separation.

"I shall never, Master Copperfield," said Mrs. Micawber,
" revert to the period when Mr. Micawber was in difficulties,
without thinking of you. Your conduct has always been of
the most delicate and obliging description. You have never
been a lodger. You have been a friend."

"My dear," said Mr. Micawber; " Copperfield," for so he
had been accustomed to call me of late, "has a heart to feel
for the distresses of his fellow creatures when they are behind
a cloud, and a head to plan, and a hand to — in short, a gen-
eral ability to dispose of such available property as could be
made away with."

I expressed my sense of this commendation, and said I was
very sorry we were going to lose one another.

" My dear young friend," said Mr. Micawber, " I am older
than you ; a man of some experience in life, and — and of
some experience, in short, in difficulties, generally speaking.





At present; and until something turns up (which I am, I may
say, hourly expecting), I have nothing to bestow but advice.
Still my advice is so far worth taking that — in short, that I
have never taken it myself, and am the " — here Mr. Micawber,
w r ho had been beaming and smiling, all over his head and face,
up to the present moment, checked himself and frowned —
"the miserable wretch you behold."

" My dear Micawber ! " urged his wife.

" I say," returned Mr. Micawber, quite forgetting himself,
and smiling again, "the miserable wretch you behold. My
advice is, never do to-morrow what you can do to-day. Pro-
crastination is the thief of time. Collar him."

"My poor papa's maxim," Mrs. Micawber observed.

" My dear," said Mr. Micawber, " your papa was very well
in his way, and Heaven forbid that I should disparage him.
Take him for all in all, we ne'er shall — in short, make the
acquaintance, probably, of anybody else possessing, at his
time of life, the same legs for gaiters, and able to read the
same description of print, without spectacles. But he applied
that maxim to our marriage, my dear ; and that was so far
prematurely entered into, in consequence, that I never re-
covered the expense."

Mr. Micawber looked aside at Mrs. Micawber, and added :
"Not that I am sorry for it.. Quite the contrary, my love."
After which he was grave for a minute or so.

"My other piece of advice, Copperfield," said Mr. Micawber,
" you know. Annual income twenty pounds, annual expendi-
ture nineteen nineteen six, result happiness. Annual income
twenty pounds, annual expenditure twenty pounds aught and
six, result misery. The blossom is blighted, the leaf is
withered, the God of day goes down upon the dreary scene,
and — and in short you are for ever floored. As I am ! "

To make his example the more impressive, Mr. Micawber
drank a glass of punch with an air of great enjoyment and
satisfaction, and whistled the College Hornpipe.

I did not fail to assure him that I would store these precepts
in my mind, though indeed I had no need to do so, for, at the
time, they affected me visibly. Next morning I met the whole



190 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

family at the coach-office, and saw them, with a desolate heart,
take their places outside, at the back.

"Master Copperfield," said Mrs. Micawber, " God bless you!
I never can forget all that, you know, and I never would if I
could."

" Copperfield," said Mr. Micawber, " farewell ! Every hap-
piness and prosperity ! If, in the progress of revolving years,
I could persuade myself that my blighted destiny had been
a warning to you, I should feel that I had not occupied
another man's place in existence altogether in vain. In case
of anything turning up (of which I am rather confident), I
shall be extremely happy if it should be in my power to
improve your prospects."

I think, as Mrs. Micawber sat at the back of the coach, with
the children, and I stood in the road looking wistfully at them,
a mist cleared from her eyes, and she saw what a little creature
I really was. I think so, because she beckoned to me to climb
up, with quite a new and motherly expression in her face, and
put her arm round my neck, and gave me just such a kiss as
she might have given to her own boy. I had barely time to
get down again before the coach started, and I could hardly
see the family for the handkerchiefs they waved. It was gone
in a minute. The Orfling and I stood looking vacantly at
each other in the middle of the road, and then shook hands
and said good by ; she going back, I suppose, to St. Luke's
workhouse, as I went to begin my weary day at Murdstone
and Grinby's.

But with no intention of passing many more weary days
there. No. I had resolved to run away. — To go, by some
means or other, down into the country, to the only relation I
had in the world, and tell my story to my aunt, Miss Betsey.

I have already observed that I don't know how this desperate
idea came into my brain. But, once there, it remained there ;
and hardened into a purpose than which I have never enter-
tained a more determined purpose in my life. I am far from
sure that I believed there was anything hopeful in it, but my
mind was thoroughly made up that it must be carried into
execution.

Again, and again, and a hundred times again, since the night



OF DAVID COPPUBFIELD. 191

when the thought had first occurred to me and banished sleep,
I had gone over that old story of my poor mother's about my
birth, which it had been one of my great delights in the old
time to hear her tell, and which I knew by heart. My aunt
walked into that story, and walked out of it, a dread and.
awful personage ; but there was one little trait in her behavior
which I liked to dwell on, and which gave me some faint
shadow of encouragement. I could not forget how my mother
had thought that she felt her touch her pretty hair with no
ungentle hand ; and though it might have been altogether my
mother's fancy, and might have had no foundation whatever in
fact, I made a little picture, out of it, of my terrible aunt
relenting towards the girlish beauty that I recollected so well,
and loved so much, which softened the whole narrative. It is
very possible that it had been in my mind a long, time, and
had gradually engendered my determination.

As I did not even know where Miss Betsey lived, I wrote %
long letter to Peggotty, and asked her, incidentally, if she
remembered ; pretending that I had heard of such a lady living
at a certain place I named at random, and had a curiosity to
know if it were the same. In the course of that letter I told
Peggotty that I had a particular occasion for half a guinea ;
and that if she could lend me that sum until I could repay it, I
should be very much obliged to her, and would tell her after-
wards what I had wanted it for.

Peggotty's answer soon arrived, and was, as usual, full of
affectionate devotion. She enclosed the half guinea (I was
afraid she must have had a world of trouble to get it out of
Mr. Barkis's box), and told me that Miss Betsey lived near
Dover, but whether at Dover itself, at Hythe, Sandgate, or
Folkstone, she could not say. One of our men, however,
informing me on my asking him about these places, that they
were all close together, I deemed this enough for my object,
and resolved to set out at the end of that week. '

Being a very honest little creature, and unwilling to disgrace
the memory I was going to leave behind me at Murdstone and
Grinby's, I considered myself bound to remain until Saturday
night ; and, as I had been paid a week's wages in advance
when I first came there, not to present myself in the counting-



192 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

house at the usual hour to receive my stipend. For this express
reason, I had borrowed the half-guinea, that I might not be
without a fund for my travelling-expenses. Accordingly, when
the Saturday night came, and we were all waiting in the ware-
house to be paid, and Tipp, the carman, who always took
precedence, went in first to draw his money, I shook Mick
Walker by the hand ; asked him when it came to his turn to
be paid, to say to Mr. Quinion that I had gone to move my box
to Tipp's ; and, bidding a last good night to Mealy Potatoes,
ran away.

My box was at my old lodging over the water, and I had writ-
ten a direction for it on the back of one of our address cards that
we nailed on the casks : " Master David, to be left till called
for at the coach-office, Dover." This I had in my pocket
ready to put on the box, after I should have got it out of the
house ; and as I went towards my lodging I looked about me
for some one who would help me to carry it to the booking-
office.

There was a long-legged young man with a very little empty
donkey-cart, standing near the Obelisk, in the Blackfriars
Road, whose eye I caught as I was going by, and who, address-
ing me as u Sixpenn'orth of bad ha'pence," hoped " I should
know him agin to swear to " — in allusion, I have no doubt, to
my staring at him. I stopped to xassure him that I had not
done so in bad manners, but uncertain whether he might or
might not like a job. . *

"Wot job ? " said the long-legged young man.

"To move a box," I answered.

"Wot box ? " said the long-legged young man.

I told him mine, which was down that street there, and
which I wanted him to take to the Dover coach-office for six-
pence.

" Done with you for a tanner ! " said the long-legged young
man, and directly got upon his cart, which was nothing but a
large wooden tray on wheels, and rattled away at such a rate
that it was as much as I could do to keep pace with the
donkey.

There was a defiant manner about this young man, and par-
ticularly about the way in which he chewed straw as he spoke





to me, that I did not much like ; as the bargain was made,
however, I took him up stairs to the room I was leaving, and
we brought the box down, and put it on his cart. Now, I was
unwilling to put the direction-card on there, lest any of my
landlord's family should fathom what I was doing, and detain
me ; so I said to the young man that I would be glad if he
would stop for a minute, when he came to the dead-wall of the
King's Bench Prison. The words were no sooner out of my
mouth, than he rattled away, as if he, my box, the cart, and
the donkey, were all equally mad; and I was quite out of
breath with running and calling after him, when I caught him
at the place appointed.

Being much flushed and excited I tumbled my half-guinea
out of my pocket in pulling the card out. I put it in my
^aouth for safety, and though my hands trembled a good deal,
had just tied the card on very much to my satisfaction, when
T felt myself violently chucked under the chin by the long-
iegged young man, and saw my half-guinea fly out of my
mouth into his hand.

" Wot ! " said the young man, seizing me by my jacket
collar, with a frightful grin. " This is a pollis case, is it ?
You're a going to bolt, are you? Come to the pollis, you
young warmin, come to the pollis ! "

" You give me my money back, if you please," said I, very
much frightened; "and leave me alone."

" Come to the pollis ! " said the young man. " You shall
prove it yourn to the pollis."

" Give me my box and money, will you," I cried, bursting
into tears.

The young man still replied : " Come to the pollis ! " and
was dragging me against the donkey in a violent manner, as if
there were any affinity between that animal and a magistrate,
when he changed his mind, jumped into the cart, sat upon my
box, and exclaiming that he would drive to the pollis straight,
rattled away harder than ever.

I ran after him as fast as I could, but I had no breath to
call out with, and should not have dared to call out, now, if I
had. I narrowly escaped being run over, twenty times at
least, in half a mile. Now I lost him, now I saw him, now I

VOL. I — 13



194 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

lost him, now I was cut, at with a whip, now shouted at, now
down in the mud, now up again, now running into somebody's
arms, now running headlong at a post. At length, confused
by fright and heat, and doubting whether half London might
not by this time be turning out for my apprehension, I left
the young man to go where he would with my box and money ;
and, panting and crying, but never stopping, faced about for
Greenwich, which I had understood was on the Dover Eoad :
taking very little more out of the world, towards the retreat
of my aunt, Miss Betsey, than I had brought into it, on the
night when my arrival gave her so much umbrage.







CHAPTEE XIIL

THE SEQUEL OF MY RESOLUTION.

For anything I know, I may have had some wild idea of
running all the way to Dover, when I gave up the pursuit of
the young man with the donkey cart, and started for Green-
wich. My scattered senses were soon collected as to that
point, if I had ; for I came to a stop in the Kent Koad, at a
terrace with a piece of water before it, and a great foolish
image in the middle, blowing a dry shell. Here I sat down
on a door-step, quite spent and exhausted with the efforts I
had already made, and with hardly breath enough to cry for
the loss of my box and half-guinea.

It was by this time dark ; I heard the clock strike ten, as
I sat resting. But it was a summer night fortunately, and
fine weather. When I had recovered my breath, and had got
rid of a stifling sensation in my throat, I rose up and went on.
In the midst of my distress, I had no notion of going back. I
doubt if I should have had any, though there had been a Swiss
snow-drift in the Kent Eoad.

But my standing possessed of only three-halfpence in the
world (and I am sure I wonder how they came to be left in
my pocket on a Saturday night !) troubled me none the less
because I went on. I began to picture to myself, as a scrap
of newspaper intelligence, my being found dead in a day or
two, under some hedge ; and I trudged on miserably, though
as fast as I could, until I happened to pass a little shop, where
it was written up that ladies 5 and gentlemen's wardrobes,
were bought, and that the best price was given for rags, bdhes,
and kitchen-stuff. The master of this shop was sitting at the
door in his shirt sleeves, smoking ; and as there were a great
many coats and pairs of trousers dangling from the low ceiling,
and only two feeble candles burning inside to show what they
were, I fancied that he looked like a man of a revengeful dis-



196 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

position, who had hung all his enemies, and was enjoying
himself.

My late experiences with Mr. and Mrs. Micawber suggested
to me that here might be a means of keeping off the wolf for
a little while. I went up the next by-street, took off my
waistcoat, rolled it neatly under my arm, and came back to
the shop door. "If you please, sir," I said, "I am to sell this
for a fair price."

Mr. Dolloby — Dolloby was the name, over the shop door, at
least — took the waistcoat, stood his pipe on its head against
the door-post, went into the shop, followed by me, snuffed the
two candles with his fingers, spread the waistcoat on the
counter, and looked at it there, held it up against the light,
and looked at it there, and ultimately said :

" What do you call a price, now, for this here little weskit ? "

" Oh ! you know best, sir," I returned, modestly.

" I can't be buyer and seller too," said Mr. Dolloby. " Put
a price on this here little weskit."

"Would eighteenpence be" — I hinted, after some hesita-
tion.

Mr. Dolloby rolled it up again, and gave it me back. " I
should rob my family," he said, " if I was to offer ninepence
for it."

This was a disagreeable way of putting the business ; because
it imposed upon me, a perfect stranger, the unpleasantness of
asking Mr. Dolloby to rob his family on my account. My cir-
cumstances being so very pressing, however, I said I would
take ninepence for it, if he pleased. Mr. Dolloby, not without
some grumbling, gave ninepence. I wished him good night,
and walked out of the shop, the richer by that sum, and the
poorer by a waistcoat. But when I buttoned my jacket, that
was not much.

Indeed, I foresaw pretty clearly that my jacket would go
next, and that I should have to make. the best of my way to
Dover in a shirt and a pair of trousers, and might deem myself
lucky if I got there even in that trim. But my mind did not
run so much on this as might be supposed. Beyond a general
impression of the distance before me, and of the young man
with the donkey-cart having used me cruelly, I think I had





no very urgent sense of my difficulties when I once again set
off with my ninepence in my pocket.

A plan had occurred to me for passing the night, which I
was going to carry into execution. This was, to lie behind
the wall at the back of my old school, in a corner where there
used to be a haystack. I imagined it would be a kind of com-
pany to have the boys, and the bedroom where I used to tell
the stories, so near me : although the boys would know noth-
ing of my being there, and the bedroom would yield me no
shelter.

I had had a hard day's work, and was pretty well jaded
when I came climbing out, at last, upon the level of Black-
heath. It cost me some trouble to find out Salem House ; but
I found it, and I found a haystack in the corner, and I lay
down by it ; having first walked round the wall, and looked up
at the windows, and seen that all was dark and silent within.
Never shall I forget the lonely sensation of first lying down,
without a roof above my head !

Sleep came upon me as it came on many other outcasts,
against whom house-doors were locked, and house-dogs barked,
that night — and I dreamed of lying on my old school-bed,
talking to the boys in my room ; and found myself sitting up-
right, with Steerforth's name upon my lips, looking wildly at
the stars that were glistening and glimmering above me.
When I remembered where I was at that untimely hour, a
feeling stole upon me that made me get up, afraid of I don't
know what, and walk about. But the fainter glimmering of the
stars, and the pale light in the sky where the day was coming,
reassured me : and my eyes being very heavy, I lay down
again, and slept — though with a knowledge in my sleep that
it was cold — until the warm beams of the sun, and the ring-
ing of the getting-up bell at Salem House, awoke me. If I
could have hoped that Steerforth was there, I would have
lurked about until he came out alone; but I knew he must
have left long since. Tr addles still remained, perhaps, but it
was very doubtful ; and I had not sufficient confidence in his
discretion or good luck, however strong my reliance was on
his good-nature, to wish to trust him with my situation. So I
crept away from the wall as Mr. Oreakle's boys were getting



198 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

up, and struck into the long dusty track which I had first
known to be the Dover Eoad when I was one of them, and
when I little expected that any eyes would ever see me the
wayfarer I was now, upon it.

What a different Sunday morning from the old Sunday
morning at Yarmouth ! In due time I heard the church-bells
ringing, as I plodded on: and I met people who were going to
church ; and I passed a church or two where the congregation
were inside, and the sound of singing came out into the sun-
shine, while the beadle sat and cooled himself in the shade of
the porch, or stood beneath the yew-tree, with his hand to his
forehead, glowering at me going by. But the peace and rest
of the old Sunday morning were on everything, except me.
That was the difference. I felt quite wicked in my dirt and
dust, and with my tangled hair. But for the quiet picture I
had conjured up, of my mother in her youth and beauty, weep-
ing by the fire, and my aunt relenting to her, I hardly think I
should have had courage to go on until next day. But it
always went before me, and I followed.

I got. that Sunday, through three-and-twenty miles on the
straight road, though not very easily, for I was new to that
kind of toil. I see myself, as evening closes in, coming over
the bridge at Kochester, footsore and tired, and eating bread
that I had bought for supper. One or two little houses, with
the notice, " Lodgings for Travellers," hanging out, had tempted
me ; but I was afraid of spending the few pence I had, and was
even more afraid of the vicious looks of the trampers I had
met or overtaken. I sought no shelter, therefore, but the sky ;
and toiling into Chatham, — which, in that night's aspect, is a
mere dream of chalk, and drawbridges, and mastless ships in a
muddy river, roofed like Noah's arks, — crept, at last, upon a
sort of grass-grown battery overhanging a lane, where a sentry
was walking to and fro. Here I lay down, near a cannon ;
and, happy in the society of the sentry's footsteps, though he
knew no more of my being above him than the boys at Salem
House had known of my lying by the wall, slept soundly until
morning.

Very stiff and sore of foot I was in the morning, and quite
dazed by the beating of drums and marching of troops, which



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 199

seemed to hem me in on every side when I went down towards
the long narrow street. Feeling that I could go but a very
little way that day, if I were to reserve any strength for get-
ting to my journey's end, I resolved to make the sale of my
jacket its principal business. Accordingly, I took the jacket
off, that I might learn to do without it; and carrying it
under my arm, began a tour of inspection of the various
slop-shops.

^^It was a likely place to sell a jacket in ; for the dealers in
second-hand clothes were numerous, and were, generally speak-
ing, on the look-out for customers at their shop doors. But,
as most of them had, hanging up among their stock, an officer's
coat or two, epaulettes and all, I was rendered timid by the
costly nature of their dealings, and walked about for a long
time without offering my merchandise to any one.

This modesty of mine directed my attention to the marine-
store shops, and such shops as Mr. Dolloby's, in preference to
the regular dealers. At last I found one that I thought looked
promising, at the corner of a dirty lane, ending in an inclosure
full of stinging nettles, against the palings of which some
second-hand sailors' clothes, that seemed to have overflowed
the shop, were fluttering among some cots, and rusty guns,
and oilskin hats, and certain trays full of so many old rusty
keys of so many sizes that they seemed various enough to open
all the doors in the world.

Into this shop, which was low and small, and which was
darkened rather than lighted by a little window, overhung
with clothes, and was descended into by some steps, I went
with a palpitating heart; which was not relieved when an
ugly old man, with the lower part of his face all covered with
a stubbly gray beard, rushed out of a dirty den behind it, and
seized me by the hair of my head. He was a dreadful old
man to look at, in a filthy flannel waistcoat, and smelling terri-
bly of rum. His bedstead, covered with a tumbled and ragged
piece of patchwork, was in the den he had come from, where
another little window showed a prospect of more stinging net-
tles, and a lame donkey.

" Oh, what do you want ? " grinned this old man, in a fierce,
monotonous whine. "Oh, my eyes and limbs, what do you



200 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

want? Oh, my lungs and liver, what do you want? Oh,
goroo, goroo ! "

I was so much dismayed by these words, and particularly
by the repetition of the last unknown one, which was a kind
of rattle in his throat, that I could make no answer ; hereupon
the old man, still holding me by the hair, repeated :

" Oh, what do you want ? Oh, my eyes and limbs, what do
you want ? Oh, my lungs and liver, what do you want ? Oh,
goroo ! " which he screwed out of himself, with an energy that
made his eyes start in his head.

" I wanted to know," I said, trembling, u if you would buy
a jacket."

" Oh, let's see the jacket ! " cried the old man. " Oh, my
heart on fire, show the jacket to us ! Oh, my eyes and limbs,
bring the jacket out ! "

With that he took his trembling hands, which were like the
claws of a great bird, out of my hair ; and put on a pair of
spectacles, not at all ornamental to his inflamed eyes.

"Oh, how much for the jacket?" cried the old man, after
examining it. ". Oh — goroo ! — how much for the jacket ? ■ •

" Half-a-crown," I answered, recovering myself.

" Oh, my lungs and liver," cried the old man, " no ! Oh, my
eyes, no ! Oh, my limbs, no ! Eighteenpence. Goroo ! "

Every time he uttered this ejaculation, his eyes seemed to
be in danger of starting out ; and every sentence he spoke, he
delivered in a sort of tune, always exactly the same, and more
like a gust of wind, which begins low, mounts up high, and
falls again, than any other comparison I can find for it.

" Well," said I, glad to have closed the bargain, " Fll take
eighteenpence."

" Oh, my liver ! " cried the old man, throwing the jacket on
a shelf. " Get out of the shop ! Oh, my lungs, get out of the
shop! Oh, my eyes and limbs — goroo ! — don't ask for money
— make it an exchange."

I never was so frightened in my" life, before or since ; but I
told him humbly that I wanted money, and that nothing else
was of any use to me, but that I would wait for it, as he de-
sired, outside, and had no wish to hurry him. So I went out-
side, and sat down in the shade in a corner. And I sat there





so many hours, that the shade became sunlight, and the sun«
light became shade again, and still I sat there waiting for the
money.

There never was such another drunken madman in that line
of business, I hope. That he was well known in the neighbor-
hood, and enjoyed the reputation of having sold himself to the
devil, I soon understood from the visits he received from the
boys, who continually came skirmishing about the shop, shout-
ing that legend, and calling to him to bring out his gold. "You
ain't poor, you know, Charley, as you pretend. Bring out
your gold. Bring out some of the gold you sold yourself to
the devil for. Come ! It's in the lining of the mattress,
Charley. Eip it open and let's have some ! " This, and many
offers to lend him a knife for the purpose, exasperated him to
such a degree, that the whole day was a succession of rushes
on his part, and flights on the part of the boys. Sometimes
in his rage he would take me for one of them, and come at me,
mouthing as if he were going to tear me in pieces; then,
remembering me, just in time, would dive into the shop, and
lie upon his bed, as I thought from the sound of his voice,
yelling in a frantic way, to his own windy tune, the Death of
Nelson ; with an Oh ! before every line, and innumerable
Goroos interspersed. As if this were not bad enough for me,
the boys, connecting me with the establishment, on account of
the patience and perseverance with which I sat outside; half-
dressed, pelted me, and used me very ill all day.

He made many attempts to induce me to consent to an ex-
change ; at one time coming out with a fishing rod, at another
with a fiddle, at another with a cocked hat, at another with a
flute. But I resisted all these overtures, and sat there in
desperation ; each time asking him, with tears in my eyes, for
my money or my jacket. At last he began to pay me in half-
pence at a time ; and he was full two hours getting by easy
stages to a shilling.

" Oh, my eyes and limbs ! " he then cried, peeping hideously
out of the shop, after a long pause, " will you go for twopence
more ? "

" I can't," I said ; " I shall be starved."

" Oh, my lungs and liver, will you go for threepence ? n



202 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

"I would go for nothing if I could/' I said, "but I want the
money badly."

" Oh, go — roo ! " (it is really impossible to express how he
twisted this ejaculation out of himself, as he peeped round the
doorpost at me, showing nothing but his crafty old head) ;
" will you go for f ourpence ? "

I was so faint and weary that I closed with this offer ; and
taking the money out of his claw, not without trembling,
went away more hungry and thirsty than I had ever been, a
little before sunset. But at an expense of threepence I soon
refreshed myself completely ; and, being in better spirits
then, limped seven miles upon my road.

My bed at night was under another haystack, where I rested
comfortably, after having washed my blistered feet in a stream,
and dressed them as well as I was able, with some cool leaves.
When I took the road again next morning, I found that it lay
through a succession of hop-grounds and orchards. It was
sufficiently late in the year for the orchards to be ruddy with
ripe apples ; and in a few places the hop-pickers were already
at work. I thought it all extremely beautiful, and made up
my mind to sleep among the hops that night : imagining some
cheerful companionship in the long perspective of poles, with
the graceful leaves twining round them.

The trampers were worse than ever that day, and inspired
me with a dread that is yet quite fresh in my mind. Some of
them were most ferocious-looking ruffians, who stared at me
as I went by ; and stopped, perhaps, and called after me to
come back and speak to them ; and when I took to my heels,
stoned me. I recollect one young fellow — a tinker, I suppose,
from his wallet and brazier — who had a woman with him,
and who faced about and stared at me thus ; and then roared
to me in such a tremendous voice to come back, that I halted
and looked round.

"Come here when you're called," said the tinker, "or Fll
rip your young body open."

I thought it best to go back. As I drew nearer to them,
trying to propitiate the tinker with my looks, I observed that
the woman had a black eye.



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 203

" Where are you going?" said the tinker, gripping the
bosom of my shirt with his blackened hand.

" I am going to Dover," I said.

" Where do you come from ? " asked the tinker, giving his
hand another turn in my shirt, to hold me more securely.

" I come from London," I said.

" What lay are you upon ? " asked the tinker. " Are you
a prig ? "

" 1ST — no," I said.

" Ain't you, by G- — ? If you make a brag of your honesty
to me," said the tinker, " FU knock your brains out."

With his disengaged hand he made a menace of striking me,
and then looked at me from head to foot.

" Have you got the price of a pint of beer about you ? " said
the tinker. "If you have, out with it, afore I take it away ! "

I should certainly have produced it, but that I met the
woman's look, and saw her very slightly shake her head, and
form " IS[o ! " with her lips.

"I am very poor," I said, attempting to smile, " and have
got no money."

u Why, what do you mean ? " said the tinker, looking so
sternly at me, that I almost feared he saw the money in my
pocket.

" Sir ! " I stammered.

" What do you mean," said the tinker, " by wearing my
brother's silk handkercher ? Give it over here ! " And
he had mine off my neck in a moment, and tossed it to the
woman.

The woman burst into a fit of laughter, as if she thought
this a joke, and tossed it back to me, nodded once, as slightly
as before, and made the word " Go ! " with her lips. Before I
could obey, however, the tinker seized the handkerchief out of
my hand with a roughness that threw me away like a feather,
and putting it loosely round his own neck, turned upon
the woman with an oath, and knocked her down. I never
shall forget seeing her fall backward on the hard road, and
lie there with her bonnet tumbled off, and her hair all
whitened in the dust ; nor, when I looked back from a dis-
tance, seeing her sitting on the pathway, which was a bank



204- THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

by the roadside, wiping the blood from her face with a corner
of her shawl, while he went on ahead.

This adventure frightened me so, that afterwards, when I
saw any of these people coming, I turned back until I could
find a hiding-place, where I remained until they had gone out
of sight; which happened so often, that I was very seriously
delayed. But under this difficulty, as under all the other
difficulties of my journey, I seemed to be sustained and led
on by my fanciful picture of my mother in her youth, before
I came into the world. It always kept me company. It was
there, among the hops, when I lay down to sleep; it was
with me on my waking in the morning; it went before me
all day. I have associated it, ever since, with the sunny
street of Canterbury, dozing as it were in the hot light ; and
with the sight of its old houses and gateways, and the stately,
gray Cathedral, with the rooks sailing round the towers.
When I came, at last, upon the bare, wide downs near Dover,
it relieved the solitary aspect of the scene with hope; and
not until I reached' that first great aim of my journey, and
actually set foot in the town itself, on the sixth day of my
flight, did it desert me. But then, strange to say, when I
stood with my ragged shoes, and my dusty, sunburnt, half-
clothed figure, in the place so long desired, it seemed to vanish
like a dream, and to leave me helpless and dispirited.

I inquired about my aunt among the boatmen first, and
received various answers. One said she lived in the South
Foreland Light, and had singed her whiskers by doing so;
another, that she was made fast to the great buoy outside the
harbor, and could only be visited at half -tide ; a third, that
she was locked up in Maidstone Jail for child-stealing; a
fourth, that she was seen to mount a broom, in the last high
wind, and make direct for Calais. The fly-drivers, among
whom I inquired next, were equally jocose and equally dis-
respectful : and the shopkeepers, not liking my appearance,
generally replied, without hearing what I had to say, that
they had got nothing for me. I felt more miserable and des-
titute than I had done at any period of my running away.
My money was all gone, I had nothing left to dispose of ; I



OF DA VII) COPPERFIELD. 205

was hungry, thirsty, and worn out ; and seemed as distant
from my end as if I had remained in London.

The morning had worn away in these inquiries, and I was
sitting on the step of an empty shop at a street corner,
near the market-place, deliberating upon wandering towards
those other places which had been mentioned, when a fly-
driver, coming by with his carriage, dropped a horsecloth.
Something good-natured in the man's face, as I handed it up,
encouraged me to ask him if he could tell me where Miss
Trotwood lived; though I had asked the question so often,
that it almost died upon my lips.

" Trotwood," said he. " Let me see. I know the name, too.
Old lady ?"

"Yes," I said, "rather."

" Pretty stiff in the back ? " said he, making himself
upright.

" Yes," I said. " I should think it very likely."

"Carries a bag ? " said he — "bag with a dood deal of room
in it — is gruffish, and comes down upon you, sharp ? "

My heart sank within me as I acknowledged the undoubted
accuracy of this description.

"Why then, I tell you what," said he. "If you go up
there," pointing with his whip towards the heights, "and
keep right on till you come to some houses facing the sea, I
think you'll hear of her. My opinion is, she won't stand
anything, so here's a penny for you."

I accepted the gift thankfully, and bought a loaf with it.
Despatching this refreshment by the way, I went in the direc-
tion my friend had indicated, and walked on a good distance
without coming to the houses he had mentioned. At length
I saw some before me ; and approaching them, went into a
little shop (it was what we used to call a general shop, at
home), and inquired if they could have the goodness to tell
me where Miss Trotwood lived. I addressed myself to a man
behind the counter, who was weighing some rice for a young
woman ; but the latter, taking the inquiry to herself, turned
round quickly.

" My mistress ? " she said. " "What do you want with her,
boy ? "



206 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

"I want," I replied, "to speak to her, if you please."

* To beg of her, you mean," retorted the damsel.

"jSTo," I said, "indeed." But suddenly remembering that
in truth I came for no other purpose, I held my peace in
confusion, and felt my face burn.

My aunt's handmaid, as I supposed she was from what she
had said, put her rice in a little basket and walked out of the
shop ; telling me that I could follow her, if I wanted to know
where Miss Trotwood lived. , I needed no second permission ;
though I was by this time in such a state of consternation and
agitation, that my legs shook under me. I followed the young
woman, and we soon came to a very neat little cottage with
cheerful bow-windows : in front of it, a small square gravelled
court or garden full of flowers, carefully tended, and smelling
'deliciously.

"This is Miss Trotwood's," said the young woman. "Xow
you know; and that's all I have got to say." With which
words she hurried into the house, as if to shake off the respon*
sibility of my appearance ; and left me standing at the garden-
gate, looking disconsolately over the top of it towards the
parlor- window, where a muslin curtain partly undrawn in
the middle, a large round green screen or fan fastened on to
the window-sill, a small table, and a great chair, suggested to
me that my aunt might be at that moment seated in awful state.

My shoes were by this time in a woful condition. The
soles had shed themselves bit by bit, and the upper leathers
had broken and burst until the very shape and form of shoes
had departed from them. My hat (which had served me for
a nightcap, too) was so crushed and bent, that no old battered
handleless saucepan on a dunghill need have been ashamed to
vie with it. My shirt and trousers, stained with heat, dew,
grass, and the Kentish soil on which I had slept — and torn
besides — might have frightened the birds from my aunt's
garden, as I stood at the gate. My hair had known no comb
or brush since I left London. My face, neck, and hands, from
unaccustomed exposure to the air and sun, were burnt to a
berry-brown. From head to foot I was powdered almost as
white with chalk and dust, as if I had come out of a lime-kiln.
In this plight, and with a strong consciousness of it, I waited




■^ryS^w'^S



I MAKE MYSELF KNOWN TO MY AUNT.



OF DAVID COPPERFIJELD. 207

to introduce myself to, and make my first impression on, my
formidable aunt.

The unbroken stillness of the parlor-window leading me to
infer, after a while, that she was not there, I lifted up my
eyes to the window above it, where I saw a florid, pleasant-
looking gentleman, with a gray head, who shut up one eye in
a grotesque manner, nodded his head at me several times,
shook it at me as often, laughed, and went away.

I had been discomposed enough before ; but I was so much
the more discomposed by this unexpected behavior, that I was
on the point of slinking off, to think how I had best proceed,
when there came out of the house a lady with her handker-
chief tied over her cap, and a pair of gardening gloves on her
hands, wearing a gardening pocket like a tollman's apron, and
carrying a gre£t knife. I knew her immediately to be Miss
Betsey, for she came stalking out of the house exactly as my
poor mother had so often described her stalking up our garden
at Blunderstone Eookery.

" Go away ! " said Miss Betsey, shaking her head, and mak-
ing a distant chop in the air with her knife. " Go along ! No
boys here ! "

I watched her, with my heart at my lips, as she marched
to a corner of her garden, and stooped to dig up some little
root there. Then, without a scrap of courage, but with a great
deal of desperation, I went softly in and stood beside her,
touching her with my finger.

" If you please, ma'am," I began.

She started and looked up.

" If you please, aunt."

"Eh?" exclaimed Miss Betsey, in a tone of amazement I
have never heard approached.

"If you please, aunt, I am your nephew."

u Oh, Lord ! " said my aunt. And sat flat down in the
garden-path.

"I am David Copperfield, of Blunderstone, in Suffolk —
where you came, on the night when I was born, and saw my
dear mamma. I have been very unhappy since she died. I
have been slighted, and taught nothing, and thrown upon my-
self, and put to work not fit for me. It made me run away to



208 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

you. I was robbed at first setting out, and have walked all
the way, and have never slept in a bed since I began the
journey." Here my self-support gave way all at once; and
with a movement of my hands, intended to show her my
ragged state, and call it to witness that I had suffered some-
thing, I broke into a passion of crying, which I suppose had
been pent up within me all the week.

My aunt, with every sort of expression but wonder dis-
charged from her countenance, sat on the gravel, staring at
me, until I began to cry ; when she got up in a great hurry,
collared me, and took me into the parlor. Her first proceeding
there was to unlock a tall press, bring out several bottles, and
pour some of the contents of each into my mouth. I think
they must have been taken out at random, for I am sure I
tasted aniseed water, anchovy sauce, and salad dressing.
When she had administered these restoratives, as I was still
quite hysterical, and unable to control my sobs, she put me
on the sofa, with a shawl under my head, and the handker-
chief from her own head under my feet, lest I should sully the
cover ; and then, sitting herself down behind the green fan or
screen I have already mentioned, so that I could not see her
face, ejaculated at intervals, " Mercy on us ! " letting those
exclamations off like minute guns.

After a time she rang the bell. "Janet," said my aunt,
w-hen her servant came in. " Go up stairs, give my compli-
ments to Mr. Dick, and say I wish to speak to him."

Janet looked a little surprised to see me lying stiffly on the
sofa (I was afraid to move lest it should be displeasing to my
aunt), but went on her errand. My aunt, with her hands
behind her, walked up and down the room, until the gentleman
w r ho had squinted at me from the upper window came in
laughing.

" Mr. Dick," said my aunt, " don't be a fool, because nobody
can be more discreet than you can, when you choose. We all
know that. So don't be a fool, whatever you are."

The gentleman was serious immediately, and looked at me,
I thought, as if he would entreat me to say nothing about the
window.

"Mr, Dick," said my aunt, "you have heard me mention





David Copperfield ? Now don't pretend not to have a memory,
because you and I know better."

"David Copperfield?" said Mr. Dick, who did not appear
to me to remember much about it. "David Copperfield ? Oh
yes, to be sure, David, certainly."

"Well," said my aunt, "this is his boy — his son. He
would ba as like his father as it's possible to be, if he Avas not
so like his mother, too."

" His son ? " said Mr. Dick. "David's son ? Indeed ! "

" Yes," pursued my aunt, " and he has done a pretty piece
of business. He has run away. Ah ! His sister, Betsey
Trotwood, never would have run away." My aunt shook ,her
head firmly, confident in the character and behavior of the girl
who never was born.

" Oh ! you think she wouldn't have run away ? " said Mr.
Dick.

"Bless and save the man," exclaimed my aunt, sharply,
"how he talks! Don't I know she wouldn't? She would,
have lived with her god-mother, and we should have been de-
voted to one another. Where, in the name of wonder, should
his sister, Betsey Trotwood, have run from, or to ? "

"Nowhere," said Mr. Dick.

"Well then," returned my aunt, softened by the reply,
" how can you pretend to be wool-gathering, Dick, when you
are as sharp as a surgeon's lancet ? Now, here you see young
David Copperfield, and the question I put to you is, what shall
I do with him?"

" What shall you do with him ? " said Mr. Dick, feebly,
scratching his head. " Oh ! do with him ? "

" Yes," said my aunt, with a grave look, and her forefinger
held up. "Come ! I want some very sound advice."

" Why, if I was you," said Mr. Dick, considering, and look-
ing vacantly at me, "I should — " The contemplation of me
seemed to inspire him with' a sudden idea, and he added,
briskly, "I should wash him ! "

" Janet^" said my aunt, turning round with a quiet triumph,
•which I did not then understand, " Mr. Dick sets us all right.
Heat the bath ! "

Although I was deeply interested in this dialogue, I could

VOL. I — 14



210 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

not help observing my aunt, Mr. Dick, and Janet, while it
was in progress, and completing a survey I had already been
engaged in making of the room.

My aunt was a tall, hard-featured lady, but by no means
ill-looking. There was an inflexibility in her face, in her
voice, in her gait and carriage, amply sufficient to account
for the effect she had- made upon a gentle creature, like my
mother ; but her features were rather handsome than other-
wise, though unbending and austere. I particularly noticed
that she had a very quick, bright eye. Her hair, which was
gray, was arranged in two plain divisions, under what I believe
would be called a mob-cap; I mean a cap, much more common
then than now, with side-pieces fastening under the chin. Her
dress was of a lavender color, and perfectly neat ; but scantily
made, as if she desired to be as little encumbered as possible.
I remember that I thought it, in form, more like a riding-
habit with the superfluous skirt cut off, than anything else.
She wore at her side a gentleman's gold watch, if I might
judge from its size and make, with an appropriate chain
and seals ; she had some linen at her throat not unlike a
shirt-collar, and things at her wrists like little shirt-wrist-
bands.

Mr. Dick, as I have already said, was gray-headed and
florid : I should haye said all about him, in saying so, had
not his head been curiously bowed — not by age ; it reminded
me of one of Mr. Creakle's boys' heads after a beating — and
his gray eyes prominent and large, with a strange kind of
watery brightness in them that made me, in combination with
his vacant manner, his submission to my aunt, and his childish
delight when she praised him, suspect him of being a little
mad, though, if he were mad, how he came to be there puzzled
me extremely, He was dressed like any other ordinary gen-
tleman, in a loose gray morning coat and waistcoat, and white
trousers ; and had his watch in his fob, and his money in his
pockets : which he rattled as if he were very proud of it.

Janet was a pretty blooming girl, of about nineteen or
twenty, and a perfect picture of neatness. Though I made
no further observation of her at the moment, I may mention
here what I did not discover until afterwards, namely, that



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 211

she was one of a series of prot6g6es whom my aunt had taken
into her service expressly to educate in a renouncement of
mankind, and who had generally completed their abjuration
by marrying the baker.

The room was as neat as Janet or my aunt. As I laid
down my pen ; a moment since, to think of it, the air from
the sea came blowing in again, mixed with the perfume of the
flowers ; and I saw the old-fashioned furniture brightly rubbed
and polished, my aunt's inviolable chair and table by the round
green fan in the bow-win dow, the drugget-covered carpet , the
cat, the kettle-holder, the two canaries, the old china, the
punch-bowl full of dried rose leaves, the tall press guarding
all sorts of bottles and pots, and, wonderfully out of keeping
with the rest, my dusty self upon the sofa, taking note of
everything.

Janet had gone away to get the bath ready, when my aunt,
to my great alarm, became in one moment rigid with indig-
nation, and had hardly voice to cry out, " Janet ! Donkeys ! "

Upon which, Janet came running up the stairs as if the
house were in flames, darted out on a little piece of green in
front, and warned off two saddle-donkeys, lady ridden, that
had presumed to set hoof upon it ; while my aunt, rushing
out of the house, seized the bridle of a third animal laden
with a bestriding child, turned him, led him forth from those
sacred precincts, and boxed the ears of the unlucky urchin in
attendance who had dared to profane that hallowed ground.

To this hour I don't know whether my aunt had any lawful
right of way over that patch of green ; but she had settled it
in her own mind that she had, and it was all the same to her.
The one great outrage of her life, demanding to be constantly
avenged, was the passage of a donkey over that immaculate
spot. In whatever occupation she was engaged, however
interesting to her the conversation in which she was taking
part, a donkey turned the current of her ideas in a moment,
and she was upon him straight. Jugs of water, and watering-
pots, were kept in secret places ready to be discharged on the
offending boys ; sticks were laid in ambush behind the door ;
sallies were made at all hours ; and incessant war prevailed.
Perhaps this was an agreeable excitement to the donkey-boys ;



212 THE PERSONAL BISTORT AND EXPERIENCE

or perhaps the more sagacious of the donkeys, understanding
how the case stood, delighted with constitutional obstinacy in
coming that way. I only know that there were three alarms
before the bath was ready ; and that on the occasion of the
last and most desperate of all, I saw my aunt engage, single-
handed, with a sandy-headed lad of fifteen, and bump his
sandy head against her own gate, before he seemed to com-
prehend what was the matter. These interruptions were the
more ridiculous to me, because she was giving me broth out
of a table-spoon at the time (having, firmly persuaded herself
that I was actually starving, and must receive nourishment
at first in very small quantities), and, while my mouth was
yet open to receive the spoon, she would put it back into the
basin, cry " Janet ! Donkeys ! " and go out to the assault.

The bath was a great comfort. For I began to be sensible
of acute pains in my limbs from lying out in the fields, and
was now so tired and low that I could hardly keep myself
awake for five minutes together. When I had bathed they
(I mean my aunt and Janet) enrobed me in a shirt and a pair
of trousers belonging to Mr. Dick, and tied me up in two or
three great shawls. What sort of bundle I looked like, I
don't know, but I felt a very hot one. Feeling also very
faint and drowsy, I soon lay down on the sofa again and fell
asleep.

It might have been a dream, originating in the fancy which
had occupied my mind so long, but I awoke with the impression
that my aunt had come and bent over me, and had put my
hair away from my face, and laid my head more comfortably,
and had then stood looking at me. The words, " Pretty,
/ellow," or " Poor fellow," seemed to be in my ears, too ; but
certainly there was nothing else, when I awoke, to lead me to
believe that they had been uttered by my aunt, who sat in the
bow-window gazing at the sea from behind the green fan,
which was mounted on a kind of swivel, and turned any way.

We dined soon after I awoke, off a roast fowl and a pud-
ding j I sitting at table, not unlike a trussed bird myself, and
moving my arms with considerable difficulty. But as my
aunt had swathed me up, I made no complaint of being incon-
venienced. All this time, I was deeply anxious to know what





she was going to do with me ; but she took her dinner in pro-
found silence, except when she occasionally fixed her eyes on
me sitting opposite, and said, " Mercy upon us ! " which did
not by any means relieve my anxiety.

The cloth being drawn, and some sherry put upon the
table (of which I had a glass), my aunt sent up for Mr. Dick
again, who joined us, and looked as wise as he could when
she requested him to attend to my story, which she elicited
from me, gradually, by a course of questions. During my
recital, she kept her eyes on Mr. Dick, who I thought would
have gone to sleep but for that, and who, whensoever he
lapsed into a smile, was checked by a frown from my aunt.

" Whatever possessed that poor unfortunate Baby, that she
must go and be married again," said my aunt, when I had
finished, "/can't conceive."

"Perhaps she fell in love with her second husband," Mr.
Dick suggested.

" Fell in love ! " repeated my aunt, " What do you mean ?
What business had she to do it ? "

"Perhaps," Mr. Dick simpered, after thinking a little, "she
did it for pleasure."

" Pleasure, indeed ! " replied my aunt. " A mighty pleas-
ure for the poor baby to fix her simple faith upon any dog of
a fellow, certain to ill-use her in some way or other. What
did she propose to herself, I should like to know ! She had
had one husband. She had seen David Copperfield out of the
world, who was always running after wax dolls from his
cradle. She had got a baby — oh, there were a pair of babies
when she gave birth to this child sitting here, that Friday
night ! — and what more did she want ? "

Mr. Dick secretly shook his head at me, as if he thought
there was no getting over this.

" She couldn't even have a baby like anybody else," said
my aunt. " Where was this child's sister, Betsey Trotwood !
Not forthcoming. Don't tell me ! "

Mr. Dick seemed quite frightened.

"That little man of a doctor, with his head on one side,"
said my aunt, " Jellips, or whatever his name was, what was
he about ? All he could do, was to say to me, like a robin



214 THE PEBSONAL HISTOBT AND EXPERIENCE

redbreast — as he is — ' It's a boy.' A boy ! Yah, the im-
becility of the whole set of 'em ! n

The heartiness of the ejaculation startled Mr. Dick exceed-
ingly ; and me, too, if I am to tell the truth.

"And then, as if this was not enough, and she had not
stood sufficiently in the light of this child's sister, Betsey
Trotwood," said my aunt, "she marries a second time — goes
and marries a Murderer — or a man with a name like it — and
stands in this child's light ! And the natural consequence is,
as anybody but a baby might have foreseen, that he prowls
and wanders. He's as like Cain before he was grown up, as
he can be."

Mr. Dick looked hard at me, as if to identify me in this
character.

"And then there's that woman with the Pagan name,"
said my aunt, "that Peggotty, she goes and gets married
next. Because she has not seen enough of the evil attending
such things, she goes and gets married next, as the child re-
lates. I only hope," said my aunt, shaking her head, "that
her husband is one of those Poker husbands who abound in
the newspapers, and will beat her well with one."

I could not bear to hear my old nurse so described, and made
the subject of such a wish. I told my aunt that indeed she
was mistaken. That, Peggotty was the best, the truest, the
most faithful, most devoted, and most self-denying friend and
servant in the world ; who had ever loved me dearly, who had
ever loved my mother dearly; who had held my mother's
dying head upon her arm, on whose face my mother had im-
printed her last grateful kiss. And my remembrance of them
both, choking me, I broke down as I was trying to say that
her home was my home, and that all she had was mine, and
that I would have gone to her for shelter, but for her humble
station, which made me fear that I might bring some trouble
on her — I broke down, I say, as I was trying to say so, and
laid my face in my hands upon the table.

" Well, well ! " said my aunt, " the child is right to stand
by those who have stood by him — Janet ! Donkeys ! "

I thoroughly believe that but for those unfortunate donkeys,
we should have come to a good understanding; for my aunt



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 215

had laid her hand on my shoulder, and the impulse was upon
me, thus emboldened, to embrace her and beseech her protec-
tion. But the interruption, and the disorder she was thrown
into by the struggle outside, put an end to all softer ideas for
the present ; and kept my aunt indignantly declaiming to Mr.
Dick about her determination to appeal for redress to the laws
of her country, and to bring actions for trespass against the
whole donkey proprietorship of Dover, until tea-time.

After tea, we sat at the window — on the look out, as I
imagined, from my aunt's sharp expression of face, for more
invaders — until dusk, when Janet set candles, and a back-
gammon-board, on the table, and pulled down the blinds.

" Now, Mr. Dick," said my aunt, with her grave look, and
her forefinger up as before, " I am going to ask you another
question. Look at this child."

" David's son ? " said Mr. Dick, with an attentive, puzzled
face.

"Exactly so," returned my aunt. "What would you do
with him, now ? "

" Do with David's son ? " said Mr. Dick.

" Ay," replied my aunt, " with David's son ? "

"Oh!" said Mr. Dick. "Yes. Do with — I should put
him to bed."

" Janet ! " cried my aunt, with th^e same complacent triumph
that I had remarked before. " Mr. Dick sets us all right. If
the bed is ready, we'll take him up to it."

Janet reporting it to be quite ready, I was taken up to it ;
kindly, but in some sort like a prisoner; my aunt going in
front, and Janet bringing up the rear. The only circumstance
which gave me any new hope, was my aunt's stopping on the
stairs to inquire about a smell of fire that was prevalent there ;
and Janet replying that she had been making tinder down in
the kitchen, of my old shirt. But there were no other clothes
in my room than the odd heap of things I wore ; and when
I was left there, with a little taper which my aunt fore-warned
me would burn exactly five minutes, I heard them lock my
door on the outside. Turning these things over in my mind,
I deemed it possible that my aunt, who could know nothing
of me, might suspect that I had a habit of running ayay,



216 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

and took precautions, on that account, to have me in safe
keeping. '

The room was a pleasant one, at the top of the house, over-
looking the sea, on which the moon was shining brilliantly.
After I had said my prayers, and the candle had burnt out, I
remember how I still sat looking at the moonlight on the
water, as if I could hope to read my fortune in it, as in a
bright book ; or to see my mother with her child, coining from
Heaven, along that shining path, to look upon me as she had
looked when I last saw her sweet face. I remember how the
solemn feeling with which at length I turned my eyes away,
yielded to the sensation of gratitude and rest which the sight
of the white-curtained bed — and how much more the lying
softly down upon it, nestling in the snow-white sheets ! —
inspired. I remember how I thought of all the solitary places
under the night sky where I had slept, and how I prayed that
I never might be houseless any more, and never might forget
the houseless. I remember how I seem to float, then, down
the melancholy glory of that track upon the sea, away into the
world of dreams.



OF DAVID COPPEEFIELD. 217



CHAPTER XIV.

MY AUNT MAKES UP HER MIND ABOUT ME.

On going down in the morning, I found my aunt musing
so profoundly over the breakfast-table, with her elbow on the
tray, that the contents of the urn had overflowed the teapot
and were laying the whole table-cloth under water, when my
entrance put her meditations to flight. I felt sure that I had
been the subject of her reflections, and was more than ever
anxious to know her intentions towards me. Yet I dared not
express my anxiety, lest it should give her offence.

My eyes, however, not being so much under control as my
tongue, were attracted towards my aunt very often during
breakfast. I never could look at her for a few moments
together but I found her looking at me — in an odd thoughtful
manner, as if I were an immense way off, instead of being on
the other side of the small round table. When she had finished
her breakfast, my aunt very deliberately leaned back in her
chair, knitted her brows, folded her arms, and contemplated me
at her leisure, with such a fixedness of attention that I was
quite overpowered by embarrassment. Not having as yet
finished my own breakfast, I attempted to hide my confusion
by proceeding with it ; but my knife tumbled over my fork,
my fork tripped up my knife, I chipped bits of bacon a
surprising height into the air instead of cutting them for my
own eating, and choked myself with my tea, which persisted in
going the wrong way instead of the right one, until I gave in
altogether, and sat blushing under my aunt's close scrutiny.

" Hallo !" said my aunt, after a long time.

I looked up, and met her sharp bright glance respectfully.

" I have written to him," said my aunt.

« To ? "

" To your father-in-law," said my aunt. " I have sent him



218 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

a letter that I'll trouble him to attend to, or he and I will fall
out, I can tell him ! "

" Does he know where I am, aunt ? " I inquired, alarmed.

" I have told him," said my aunt, with a nod.

" Shall I — be — given up to him ? " I faltered.

" I don't know," said my aunt. " We shall see."

" Oh ! I can't think what I shall do," I exclaimed, " if I have
to go back to Mr, Murdstone ! "

"I don't know anything about it," said my aunt, shaking
her head. "I can't say, I am sure. We shall see."

My spirits sank under these words, and I became very down-
cast and heavy of heart. My aunt, without appearing to take
much heed of me, put on a coarse apron with a bib, which she
took out of the press ; washed up the teacups with her own
hands ; and, when everything was washed and set in the tray
again, and the cloth folded and put on the top of the whole,
rang for Janet to remove it. She next swept up the crumbs
with a little broom (putting on a pair of gloves first), until
there did not appear to be one microscopic speck left on the
carpet ; next dusted and arranged the room, which was dusted
and arranged to a hair's breadth already. When all these
tasks were performed to her satisfaction, she took off the
gloves and apron, folded them up, put them in the particular
corner of the press from which they had been taken, brought
out her work-box to her own table in the open window, and sat
down, with the green fan between her and the light, to work.

" I wish you'd go up stairs," said my aunt, as she threaded
her needle, " and give my compliments to Mr. Dick, and I'll
be glad to know how he gets on with his Memorial."

I rose with all alacrity, to acquit myself of this commission.

"I suppose," said my aunt, eyeing me as narrowly as she
had eyed the needle in threading it, " you think Mr. Dick a
short name, eh ? "

"I thought it was rather a short name, yesterday," I
confessed.

" You are not to suppose that he hasn't got a longer name, if
he chose to use it," said my aunt, with a loftier air. " Babley
— Mr. Eichard Babley — that's the gentleman's true name."

I was going to suggest, with a modest sense of my youth





and the familiarity I had already been guilty of, that I had
better give him the full benefit of that name, when my aunt
went on to say :

" But don't you call him by it, whatever you do. He can't
bear his name. That's a peculiarity of his. Though I don't
know that it's much of a peculiarity, either ; for he has been
ill-used enough, by some that bear it, to have a mortal antip-
athy for it, Heaven knows. Mr. Dick is his name here, and
everywhere else, now — if he ever went anywhere else, which
he don't. So take care, child, you don't call him anything
but Mr. Dick."

I promised to obey, and went up stairs with my message ;
thinking, as I went, that if Mr. Dick had been working at his
Memorial long, at the same rate as I had seen him working at
it, through the open door, when I came down, he was probably
getting on very well indeed. I found him still driving at it
with a long pen, and his head almost laid upon the paper. He
was so intent upon it, that I had ample leisure to observe the
large paper kite in a corner, the confusion of bundles of manu-
script, the number of pens, and, above all, the quantity of ink
(which he seemed to have in, in half gallon jars by the dozen),
before he observed my being present.

" Ha ! Phoebus ! " said Mr. Dick, laying down his pen. " How
does the world go ? I'll tell you what," he added, in a lower
tone, " I shouldn't wish it to be mentioned, but it's a — " here
he beckoned to me, and put his lips close to my ear — " it's a
mad world. Mad as bedlam, boy ! " said Mr. Dick, taking
snuff from a round box on the table, and laughing heartily.

Without presuming to give my opinion on this question, I
delivered my message.

" Well," said Mr. Dick, in answer, " my compliments to her,
and I — I believe I have made a start. I think I have made
a start," said Mr. Dick, passing his hand among his gray hair,
and casting anything but a confident look at his manuscript.
"You have been to school ? "

"Yes, sir," I answered, "for a short time."

" Do you recollect the date," said Mr. Dick, looking earnestly
at me, and taking up his pen to note it down, "when King
Charles the First had his head cut off ? "



220 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

I said I believed it happened in the year sixteen hundred
and forty-nine.

"Well," returned Mr. Dick, scratching his ear with his
pen, and looking dubiously at me. " So the books say ; but I
don't see how that can be. Because, if it was so long ago,
how could the people about him have made that mistake of
putting some of the trouble out of his head, after it was taken
off ; into mine ?"

I was very much surprised by the inquiry ; but could give
no information on this point.

" It's very strange," said Mr. Dick, with a despondent look
upon his papers, and with his hand among his hair again,
" that I never can get that quite right. I never can make
that perfectly clear. But no matter, no matter ! " he said
cheerfully, and rousing himself, "there's time enough! My
compliments to Miss Trotwood, I am getting on very well
indeed."

I was going away, when he directed my attention to the kite.

" What do you think of that for a kite ? " he said.

I answered that it was a beautiful one. I should think it
must have been as much as seven feet high.

" I made it. We'll go and fly it, you and I," said Mr. Dick.
" Do you see this ? "

He showed me that it was covered with manuscript, very
closely and laboriously written; but so plainly, that as I
looked along the lines, I thought I saw some allusion to King
Charles the First's head again, in one or two places.

"There's plenty of string," said Mr. Dick, "and when it
flies high it takes the facts a long way. That's my manner of
diffusing 'em. I don't know where they may come down. It's
according to circumstances, and the wind, and so forth ; but I
take my chance of that."

His face was so very mild and pleasant, and had something
so reverend in it, though it was hale and hearty, that I was
not sure but that he was having a good-humored jest with me.
So I laughed, and he laughed, and we parted the best friends
possible.

"Well, child," said my aunt, when I went down stairs.
"And what of Mr. Dick, this morning ? "



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 221

I informed her that he sent his compliments, and was get-
ting on very well indeed.

" What do you think of him ? " said my aunt.

I had some shadowy idea of endeavoring to evade the ques-
tion by replying that I thought him a very nice gentleman ;
but my aunt was not to be so put off, for she laid her work
down in her lap, and said, folding her hands upon it :

" Come ! Your sister Betsey Trotwood would have told me
what she thought of any one, directly. Be as like your sister
as you can, and speak out ! "

" Is he — is Mr. Dick — I ask because I don't know, aunt —
is he at all out of his mind, then f }> I stammered ; for I felt I
was on dangerous ground.

"Not a morsel," said my aunt.

" Oh, indeed ! " I observed, faintly.

"If there is anything in the world," said my aunt, with
great decision and force of manner, "that Mr. Dick is not, it's
that."

I had nothing better to offer, than another timid " Oh, in-
deed ! "

" He has been called mad," said my aunt. " I have a selfish
pleasure in saying he has been called mad, or I should not
have had the benefit of his society and advice for these last
ten years and upwards — in fact, ever since your sister, Betsey
Trotwood, disappointed me."

" So long as that ? " I said.

" And nice people they were, who Jiad the audacity to call
him mad," pursued my aunt. " Mr. Dick is a sort of distant
connection of mine — it doesn't matter how ; I needn't enter
into that. If it hadn't been for me, his own brother would
have shut him up for life. That's all."

I am afraid it was hypocritical in me, but seeing that my
aunt felt strongly on the subject, I tried to look as if I felt
strongly too.

" A proud fool ! " said my aunt. " Because his brother was
a little eccentric — though he is not half so eccentric as a good
many people — he didn't like to have him visible about his
house, and sent him away to some private asylum-place;
though he had been left to his particular care by their deceased



222 THE PEBSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

father, who thought him almost a natural. And a wise man
he must have been to think so ! Mad himself, no doubt."

Again, as my aunt looked quite convinced, I endeavored to
look quite convinced also.

" So I stepped in," said my aunt, * and made him an offer.
I said, your brother's sane — a great deal more sane than you
are, or ever will be, it is to be hoped. Let him have his little
income, and come and live with me. / am not afraid of him,
I am not proud, I am ready to take care of him, and shall not
ill-treat him as some people (besides the asylum- folks) have
done. After a good deal of squabbling," said my aunt, "I got
him ; and he has been here ever since. He is the most
friendly and amenable creature in existence ; and as for advice !
— But nobody knows what that man's mind is, except myself."

My aunt smoothed her dress and shook her head, as if she
smoothed defiance of the whole world out of the one, and
shook it out of the other.

" He had a favorite sister," said my aunt, " a good creature,
and very kind to him. But she did what they all do — took a
husband. And he did what they all do — made her wretched.
It had such an effect upon the mind of Mr. Dick (that's not
madness I hope !) that, combined Avith his fear of his brother,
and his sense of his unkindness, it threw -him into a fever.
That was before he came to me, but the recollection of it is
oppressive to him even now. Did he say anything to you
about King Charles the First, child ? "

"Yes, aunt."

" Ah ! " said my aunt, rubbing her nose as if she were a
little vexed. " That's his allegorical way of expressing it.
He connects his illness with great disturbance and agitation,
naturally, and that's the figure, or the simile, or whatever it's
called, which he chooses to use. And why shouldn't he, if he
thinks proper ! "

I said : " Certainly, aunt."

" It's not *a business-like way of speaking," said my aunt,
"nor a worldly way. I am aware of that; and that's the rea-
son why I insist upon it, that there sha'n't be a word about it
in his Memorial."





* Is it a Memorial about his own history that he is writing,
aunt ? "

" Yes, child," said my aunt, rubbing her nose again. " He
is memorializing the Lord Chancellor, or the Lord Somebody
or other — one of those people, at all events, who are paid to
be memorialized — about his affairs. I suppose it will go in,
one of these days. He hasn't been able to draw it up yet,
without introducing that mode of expressing himself ; but it
don't signify ; it keeps him employed." *

In fact, I found out afterwards that Mr. Dick had been for
upwards of ten years endeavoring to keep King Charles the
First out of the Memorial ; but he had been constantly getting
into it, and was there now.

"I say again," said my aunt, " nobody knows what that
man's mind is except myself ; and he's the most amenable and
friendly creature in existence. If he likes to fly a kite some-
times, what of that ! Franklin used to fly a kite. He was a
Quaker, or something of that sort, if I am not mistaken. And
a Quaker flying a kite is a much more ridiculous object than
anybody else."

If I could have supposed that my aunt had recounted these
particulars for my especial behoof, and as a piece of confidence
in me, I should have felt very much distinguished, and should
have augured favorably from such a mark of her good opinion.
But I could hardly help observing that she had launched into
them, chiefly because the question was raised in her own mind,
and with very little reference to me, though she had addressed
herself to me in the absence of anybody else.

At the same time, I must say that the generosity of her
championship of poor harmless Mr. Dick, not only inspired
my young breast with some selfish hope for myself, but
warmed it unselfishly towards her. I believe that I began to
know that there was something about my aunt, notwithstand-
ing her many eccentricities and odd humors, to be honored and
trusted in. Though she was just as sharp that day, as on the
day before, and was in and out about the donkeys just as
often, and was thrown into a tremendous state of indignation,
when a young man, going by, ogled Janet at a window (which
was one of the gravest misdemeanors that could be committed



224 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

against my aunt's dignity), she seemed to me to command
more of my respect, if not less of my fear.

The anxiety I underwent, in the interval which necessarily
elapsed before a reply could be received to her letter to Mr.
Murdstone, was extreme ; but I made an endeavor to suppress
it, and to be as agreeable as I could in a quiet way, both to
my aunt and Mr. Dick. The latter and I would have gone
out to fly the great kite ; but that I had still no other clothes
than the anything but ornamental garments with which I had
been decorated on the first day, and which confined me to the
house, except for an hour after dark, w r hen my aunt, for my
health's sake, paraded me up and down on the cliff outside
before going to bed. At length the reply from Mr. Murdstone
came, and my aunt informed me, to my infinite terror, that he
was coming to speak to her himself on the next day. On the
next day, still bundled up in my curious habiliments I sat
counting the time, flushed and heated by the conflict of sinking
hopes and rising fears within me; and waiting to be startled
by the sight of the gloomy face, whose non-arrival startled me
every minute.

My aunt was a little more imperious and stern than usual,
but I observed no other token of her preparing herself to
receive the visitor so much dreaded by me. She sat at work
in the window, and I sat by, with my thoughts running astray
on all possible and impossible results of Mr. Murdstone's visit,
until pretty late in the afternoon. Our dinner had been
indefinitely postponed; but it was growing so late, that my
aunt had ordered it to be got ready, when she gave a sudden
alarm of donkeys, and to my consternation and amazement, I
beheld Miss Murdstone, on a side-saddle, ride deliberately
over the sacred piece of green, and stop in front of the house,
looking about her.

" Go along with you ! " cried my aunt, shaking her head
and her fist at the window. "You have no business there.
How dare you trespass? Go along! Oh, you bold-faced
thing ! "

My aunt was so exasperated by the coolness with which
Miss Murdstone looked about her, that I really believe she
was motionless ; and unable for the moment to dart out accord-





ing to custom. I seized the opportunity to inform her who it
was ; and that the gentleman now coming near the offendei
(for the way up was very steep, and he had dropped behind),
was Mr. Murdstone himself.

"I don't care who it is ! " cried my aunt, still shaking her
head, and gesticulating anything but welcome from the bow-
window. "I won't be trespassed upon. I won't allow it.
Go away ! Janet, turn him round. Lead him off ! " and I
saw, from behind my aunt, a sort of hurried battle-piece, in
which the donkey stood resisting everybody, with all his four
legs planted different ways, while Janet tried to pull him round
by the bridle, Mr. Murdstone tried to lead him on, Miss
Murdstone struck at Janet with a parasol, and several boys,
who had come to see the engagement, shouted vigorously.
But my aunt, suddenly descrying among them the young
malefactor who was the donkey's guardian, and who was one
of the most inveterate offenders against her, though hardly in
his teens, rushed out to the scene of action, pounced upon him,
captured him, dragged him, with his jacket over his head, and
his heels grinding the ground, into the garden, and, calling
upon Janet to fetch the constables and justices that he might
be taken, tried, and executed on the spot, held him at bay
there. This part of the business, however, did not last long ;
for the young rascal, being expert at a variety of feints and
dodges, of which my aunt had no conception, soon went
whooping away, leaving some deep impressions of his nailed
boots in the flower-beds, and taking his donkey in triumph
with him.

Miss Murdstone, during the latter portion of the contest,
had dismounted, and was now waiting with her brother at the
bottom of the steps, until my aunt should be at leisure to
receive them. My aunt, a little ruffled by the combat,
marched past them into the house, with great dignity, and
took no notice of their presence, until they were announced
by Janet.

u Shall I go away/ aunt ? " I asked, trembling.

" No, sir," said my aunt. " Certainly not ! " With which
she pushed me into a corner near her, and fenced me in with
a chair, as * if it were a prison or a bar of justice. This
vol.i— 15



226 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

position I continued to occupy during the whole interview, and
from it I now saw Mr. and Miss Murdstone enter the room.

a 0h!" said my aunt, "I was not aware at first to whom
I had the pleasure of objecting. But I don't allow anybody
to ride over that turf. I make no exceptions. I don't allow
anybody to do it."

"Your regulation is rather awkward to strangers/' said
Miss Murdstone.

" Is it ! " said my aunt.

Mr. Murdstone seemed afraid of a renewal of hostilities,
and interposing began :

"Miss Trotwood!"

" I beg your pardon/' observed my aunt, with a keen look.
"You are the Mr. Murdstone who married the widow of my
late nephew, David Copperfield, of Blunderstone Rookery ? —
Though why Kookery, I don't know ! "

64 1 am," said Mr. Murdstone.

" You'll excuse my saying, sir," returned my aunt, " that I
think it would have been a much better and happier thing if
you had left that poor child alone."

"I so far agree with what Miss Trotwood has remarked,"
observed Miss Murdstone, bridling, "that I consider our
lamented Clara to have been, in all essential respects, a mere
child."

"It is a comfort to you and me, ma'am," said my aunt,
"who are getting on in life, and are not likely to be made
unhappy by our personal attractions, that nobody can say the
same of us."

" No doubt ! " returned Miss Murdstone, though, I thought,
not with a very ready or gracious assent. " And it certainly
might have been, as you say, a better and happier thing for
my brother if he had never entered into such a marriage. I
have always been of that opinion."

"I have no doubt you have," said my aunt. "Janet,"
ringing the bell, " my compliments to Mr. Dick, and beg him
to come down."

Until he came, my aunt sat perfectly upright and stiff,
frowning at the wall. When he came my aunt performed the
ceremony of introduction.



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 227

" Mr Dick. An old and intimate friend. On whose judg-
ment," said my aunt, with emphasis, as an admonition to Mr.
Dick, who was biting his forefinger, and looking rather foolish,
"I rely."

Mr. Dick took his finger out of his mouth, on this hint, and
stood among the group, with a grave and attentive expression
of face. My aunt inclined her head to Mr. Murdstone, who
went on :

" Miss Trotwood : on the receipt of your letter, I considered
it an act of greater justice to myself, and perhaps of more
respect to you — "

" Thank you," said my aunt, still eyeing him keenly. "You
needn't mind me."

" To answer it in person, however inconvenient the journey,"
pursued Mr. Murdstone, "rather than by letter. This urf-
happy boy who has run away from his friends and his occu-
pation — "

"And whose appearance," interposed his sister, directing
general attention to me in my indefinable costume, "is
perfectly scandalous and disgraceful."

"Jane Murdstone," said her brother, "have the goodness
not to interrupt me. This unhappy boy, Miss Trotwood, has
been the occasion of much domestic trouble and uneasiness ;
both during the lifetime of my late dear wife, and since. He
has a sullen, rebellious spirit; a violent temper; and an
untoward, intractable disposition. Both my sister and myself
have endeavored to correct his vices, but ineffectually. And I
have felt — we both have felt, I may say; my sister being
fully in my confidence — that it is right you should receive
this grave and dispassionate assurance from our lips."

" It can hardly be necessary for me to confirm anything
stated by my brother," said Miss Murdstone ; " but I beg to
observe, that, of all the boys in the world, I believe this is
the worst boy."

" Strong ! " said my aunt, shortly.

"But not at all too strong for the facts," returned Miss
Murdstone.

" Ha ! " said my aunt. " Well, sir ? "

"I have my own opinions," resumed Mr. Murdstone, whose



228 THE PUB SON AL HIBTOBT AND EXPERIENCE

face darkened more and more, the more he and my aunt
observed each other, which they did very narrowly, "as to
the best mode of bringing him up; they are founded, in
part, on my knowledge of him, and in part on my knowledge
of my own means and resources. I am responsible for them
to myself, I act upon them, and I say no more about them.
It is enough that I place this boy under the eye of a friend
of my own, in a respectable business ; that it does not please
him ; that he runs away from it ; makes himself a common
vagabond about the country ; and comes here, in rags, to
appeal to you, Miss Trot wood. I wish to set before you,
honorably, the exact consequences — so far as they are within
my knowledge — of your abetting him in this appeal."

"But about the respectable business first," said my aunt.
" If he had been your own boy you would have put him to it,
just the same I suppose ? "

"If he had been my brother's own boy," returned Miss
Murdstone, striking in, "his character, I trust, would have
been altogether different."

" Or if the poor child, his mother, had been alive, he would
still have gone into the respectable business, would he ? " said
my aunt.

"I believe," said Mr. Murdstone, with an inclination of his
head, " that Clara would have disputed nothing which myself
and my sister Jane Murdstone were agreed was for the best."

Miss Murdstone confirmed this with an audible murmur.

" Humph ! " said my aunt. * " Unfortunate baby ! "

Mr. Dick, who had been rattling his money all this time,
was rattling it so loudly now, that my aunt felt it necessary to
check him with a look, before saying :

" The poor child's annuity died with her ? "

" Died with her," replied Mr. Murdstone.

" And there was no settlement of the little property — the
house and garden — the what's-its-name Eookery without any
rooks in it — upon her boy ? "

" It had been left to her, unconditionally, by her first hus-
band," Mr. Murdstone began, when my aunt caught him up
with the greatest irascibility and impatience.

" Good Lord, man, there's no occasion to say that. Left to



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 229

her unconditionally ! I think I see David Copperfield looking
forward to any condition of any sort or kind, though it stared
him point-blank in the face ! Of course, it was left to her
unconditionally. But when she married again — when she
took that most disastrous step of marrying you, in short,"
said my aunt, " to be plain — did no one put in a word for the
boy at that time ? "

" My late wife loved her second husband, madam," said Mr.
Murdstone, "and trusted implicitly in him."

" Your late wife, sir, was a most unworldly, most unhappy,
most unfortunate baby," returned my aunt, shaking her head
at him. "That's what she was. And, now, what have you
got to say next ? "

" Merely, this, Miss Trotwood," he returned. " I am here
to take David back — to take him back unconditionally, to dis-
pose of him as I think proper, and to deal with him as I think
right. I am not here to make any promise, or give any pledge
to anybody. You may possibly have some idea, Miss Trot-
wood, of abetting him in his running away, and in his com-
plaints to you. Your manner, which I must say does not seem
intended to propitiate, induces me to think it possible. Now
I must caution you that if you abet him once, you abet him
for good and all ; if you step in between him and me, now, you
must step in, Miss Trotwood, for ever. I cannot trifle, or be
trifled with. I am here, for the first and last time, to take him
away. Is he ready to go ? If he is not — and you tell me he
is not ; on any pretence ; it is indifferent to me what — my
doors are shut against him henceforth, and yours, I take it for
granted, are open to him."

To this address, my aunt had listened with the closest
attention, sitting perfectly upright, with her hands folded on
one knee, and looking grimly on the speaker. When he had
finished, she turned her eyes so as to command Miss Murd-
stone, without otherwise disturbing her attitude, and said :

"Well, ma'am, have you got anything to remark ? "

" Indeed, Miss Trotwood," said Miss Murdstone, " all that I
could say has been so well said by my brother, and all that
I know to be the fact has been so plainly stated by him, that
I have nothing to add except my thanks for your politeness.



230 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

For your very great politeness, I am sure/' said Miss Murd-
stone ; with, an irony which no more affected my aunt than it
discomposed the cannon I had slept by at Chatham.

"And what does the boy say ? " said my aunt. " Are you
ready to go, David ? "

I answered no, and entreated her not to let me go. I said
that neither Mr. nor Miss Murdstone had ever liked me, or had
ever been kind to me. That they had made my mamma, who
always loved me dearly, unhappy about me, and that I knew
it well, and that Peggotty knew it. I said that I had been
more miserable than I thought anybody could believe who only
knew how young I was. And I begged and prayed my aunt
— I forget in what terms now, but I remember that they
affected me very much then — to befriend and protect me, f o?
my father's sake.

" Mr. Dick/' said my aunt, " what shall I do with this child ? r

Mr. Dick considered, hesitated, brightened, and rejoined,
" Have him measured for a suit of clothes, directly."

"Mr. Dick/' said my aunt, triumphantly, "give me your
hand, for your common sense is invaluable." Having shaken
it with great cordiality, she pulled me towards her, and said to
Mr. Murdstone :

" You can go when you like ; I'll take my chance with the
boy. If he's all you say he is, at least I can do as much for
him then, as you have done. But I don't believe a word of it."

"Miss Trotwood," rejoined Mr. Murdstone, shrugging his
shoulders, as he rose, " if you were a gentleman — "

" Bah ! stuff and nonsense ! " said my aunt. " Don't talk to
me ! " ,

" How exquisitely polite ! " exclaimed Miss Murdstone,
rising. " Overpowering, really ! "

" Do you think I don't know," said my aunt, turning a deaf
ear to the sister, and continuing to address the brother, and
to shake her head at him with infinite expression, " what kind
of life you must have led that poor, unhappy, misdirected
baby ? Do you think I don't know what a woful day it was
for the soft little creature when you first came in her way —
smirking, and making great eyes at her, I'll be bound, as if
you couldn't say boh ! to a goose!"



OF DAVID COPPEEFIELD. 231

"I never heard anything so elegant !" said Miss Murdstone.

"Do you think I can't understand you as well as if I had
aeen you," pursued my aunt, "now that I do see and hear
you — which I tell you candidly, is anything but a pleasure to
rae ? Oh yes, bless us ! who so smooth and silky as Mr.
Murdstone at first ! The poor, benighted innocent had never
seen such a man. He was made of sweetness. He worshipped
her. He doted on her boy — tenderly £oted on him ! He was
to be another father to him, and they were all to live together
in a garden of roses, weren't they ? Ugh ! Get along with
you, do ! " said my aunt.

" I never heard anything like this person in my life ! "
exclaimed Miss Murdstone.

"And when you had made sure of the poor little fool,"
said my aunt — " God forgive me that I should call her so, and
she gone where you won't go in a hurry — because you had
not done wrong enough to her and hers, you must begin to
train her, must you ? begin to break her, like a poor caged
bird, and wear her deluded life away, in teaching her to sing
your notes ? "

"This is either insanity or intoxication," said Miss Murd-
stone, in a perfect agony at not being able to turn the current
of my aunt's address towards herself ; " and my suspicion is>
that it's intoxication."

Miss Betsey, without taking the least notice of the interrup-
tion, continued to address herself to Mr. Murdstone, as if there
had been no such thing.

"Mr. Murdstone," she said, shaking her finger at him, "you
were a tyrant to the simple baby, and you broke her heart.
She was a loving baby — I know that ; I knew it years before
you ever saw her — and through the best part of her weakness,
you gave her the wounds she died of. There is the truth for
your comfort, however you like it. And you and your instru-
ments may make the most of it."

"Allow me to inquire, Miss Trotwood," interposed Miss
Murdstone, " whom you are pleased to call, in a choice of words
in which I am not experienced, my brother's instruments ? "

Still stone deaf to the voice, and utterly unmoved by it,
Miss Betsey pursued her discourse.



232 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" It was clear enough, as I have told you, years before you
ever saw her — and why in the mysterious dispensations of
Providence, you ever did see her, is more than humanity can
comprehend — it was clear enough that the poor soft little
thing would marry somebody, at some time or other ; but I
did hope it wouldn't have been as bad as it has turned out.
That was the time, Mr. Murdstone, when she gave birth to her
boy here," said my aunt ; " to the poor child you sometimes
tormented her through afterwards, which is a disagreeable
remembrance, and makes the sight of him odious now. Aye,
aye ! you needn't wince ! " said my aunt. " I know it's true
without that."

He had stood by the door, all this while, observant of her
with a smile upon his face, though his black eyebrows were
heavily contracted. I remarked now, that, though the smile
was on his face still, his color had gone in a moment, and he
seemed to breathe as if he had been running.

"Good day, sir," said my aunt, "and good by ! Good day
to you, too, ma'am," said my aunt, turning suddenly upon
his sister. "Let me see you ride a donkey over my green
again, and as sure as you have a head upon your shoulders,
I'll knock your bonnet off, and tread upon it ! "

It would require a painter, and no common painter too, to
depict my aunt's face as she delivered herself of this very
unexpected sentiment, and Miss Murdstone's face as she heard
it. But the manner of the speech, no less than the matter,
was so fiery, that Miss Murdstone, without a word in answer,
discreetly put her arm through her brother's, and walked
haughtily out of the cottage; my aunt remaining in the
window looking after them; prepared, I have no doubt, in
case of the donkey's re-appearance, to carry her threat into
instant execution.

No attempt at defiance being made, however, her face
gradually relaxed, and became so pleasant that I was embold-
ened to kiss and thank her ; which I did with great heartiness,
and with both my arms clasped round her neck. I then shook
hands with Mr. Dick, who shook hands with me a great many
times, and hailed this happy close of the proceedings with
repeated bursts of laughter.



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 233

" You'll consider yourself guardian, jointly with me, of this
child, Mr. Dick," said my aunt.

" I shall be delighted," said Mr. Dick, " to be the guardian
of David's son."

"Very good," returned my aunt, "that's settled. I have
been thinking, do you know, Mr. Dick, that I might call him
Trotwood ? "

" Certainly, certainly. Call him Trotwood, certainly," said
Mr. Dick. " David's son's Trotwood."

" Trotwood Copperfield, you mean," returned my aunt.

"Yes, to be sure. Yes. Trotwood Copperfield," said Mr.
Dick, a little abashed.

My aunt took so kindly to the notion, that some ready-made
clothes, which were purchased^ for me that afternoon, were
marked " Trotwood Copperfield," in her own handwriting, and
in indelible marking-ink, before I put them on; and it was
settled that all the other clothes which were ordered to be
made for me (a complete outfit was bespoke that afternoon)
should be marked in the same way.

Thus I began my new life, in a new name, and with every-
thing new about me. Now that the state of doubt was over, I
felt, for many days, like one in a dream. I never thought that
I had a curious couple of guardians, in my aunt and Mr. Dick.
I never thought of anything about myself, distinctly. The two
things clearest in my mind were, that a remoteness had come
upon the old Blunderstone life — which seemed to" lie in the
haze of an immeasurable distance ; and that a curtain had for
ever fallen on my life at Murdstone and Grinby's. No one
has ever raised that curtain since. I have lifted it for a
moment, even in this narrative with a reluctant hand, and
dropped it gladly. The remembrance of that life is fraught
with so much pain to me, with so much mental suffering and
want of hope, that I have never had the courage even to
examine how long I was doomed to lead it. Whether it lasted
for a year, or more, or less, I do not know. I only know that
it was, and ce.ased to be j and that I have written, and there I
leave it.



234 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE



CHAPTER XV.

I MAKE ANOTHER BEGINNING.

Mr. Dick and I soon became the best of friends, and very
often, when his day's work was done, went out together to fly
the great kite. Every day of his life he had a long sitting at
the Memorial, which never made the least progress, however
hard he labored, for King Charles the First always strayed
into it, sooner or later, and then it was thrown aside, and
another one begun. The patience and hope with which he
bore these perpetual disappointments, the mild perception he
had that there was something wrong about King Charles the
Eirst, the feeble efforts he made to keep him out, and the cer-
tainty with which he came in, and tumbled the Memorial out
of all shape, made a deep impression on me. What Mr. Dick
supposed would come of the Memorial, if it were completed ;
where he thought it was to go, or r what he thought it was to
do ; he knew no more than anybody else, I believe. ISTor was
it at all necessary that he should trouble himself with such
questions, for if anything were certain under the sun, it was
certain that the Memorial never would be finished.

It was quite an affecting sight, I used to think, to see him
with the kite when it was up a great height in the air. What
he had told me, in his room, about his belief in its dissemi-
nating the statements pasted on it, which were nothing but
old leaves of abortive Memorials, might have been a fancy
with him sometimes; but not when he was out, looking up
at the kite in the sky, and feeling it pull and tug at his hand.
He never looked so serene as he did then. I used to fancy, as
I sat by him of an evening, on a green slope, and saw him
watch the kite high in the quiet air, that it lifted his mind
out of its confusion, and bore it (such was my boyish thought)
into the skies. As he wound the string in, and it came lower
and lower down out of the beautiful light, until it fluttered to



OF DAVID C0PPERF1ELD. 235

the ground, and lay there like a dead thing, he seemed to
wake gradually out of a dream ; and I remember to have seen
him take it up, and look about him in a lost way, as if they
had both come down togther, so that I pitied him with all my
heart.

While I advanced in friendship and intimacy with Mr.
Dick, I did not go backward in the favor of his staunch friend,
my aunt. She took so kindly to me, that, in the course of a
few weeks, she shortened my adopted name of Trotwood into
Trot ; and even encouraged me to hope that if I went on as I
had begun, I might take equal rank in her affections with my
sister Betsey Trotwood.

" Trot," said my aunt one evening, when the backgammon-
board was placed as usual for herself and Mr. Dick, " we must
not forget your education."

This was my only subject of anxiety, and I felt quite de-
lighted by her referring to it.

" Should you like to go to school at Canterbury ? " said my
aunt.

I replied that I should like it very much, as it was so near
her.

" Good," said my aunt. " Should you like to go to-morrow ? "

Being already no stranger to the general rapidity of my
aunt's evolutions, I was . not surprised by the suddenness of
the proposal, and said : " Yes."

" Good," said my aunt again. " Janet, hire the gray pony
and chaise to-morrow morning at ten o'clock, and pack up
Master Trotwood 5 s clothes to-night."

I was greatly elated by these orders ; but my heart smote
me for my selfishness, when I witnessed their effect on Mr.
Dick, who was so low-spirited at the prospect of our separa-
tion, and played so ill in consequence, that my aunt, after giv-
ing him several admonitory raps 01^ the knuckles with her
dicebox, shut up the board, and declined to play with him any-
more. But, on hearing from'my aunt that I should sometimes
come over on a Saturday, and that he could sometimes come
over and see me on a Wednesday, he revived; and vowed to
make another kite for those occasions, of proportions greatly
surpassing the present one. In the morning he was down-



236 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

hearted again, and would have sustained himself by giving me
all the money he had in his possession, gold and silver too, if
my aunt had not interposed, and limited the gift to five shil-
lings, which, at his earnest petition, were afterwards increased
to ten. We parted at the garden gate in a most affectionate
manner, and Mr. Dick did not go into the house until my aunt
had driven me out of sight of it.

My aunt, who was perfectly indifferent to public opinion,
drove the gray pony through Dover in a masterly manner ;
sitting high and stiff like a stage coachman, keeping a steady
eye upon him wherever he went, and making a point of not
letting him have his own way in any respect. When we came
into the country road, she permitted him to relax a little, how-
ever ; and looking at me down in a valley of cushion by her
side, asked me whether I was happy.

"Very happy indeed, thank you, aunt," I said.

She was much gratified ; and both her hands being occupied,
patted me on the head with her whip.

"Is it a large school, aunt ? n I asked.

" Why, I don't know," said my aunt. * We are going to Mr.
Wickfield's first."

" Does he keep a school ? " I asked.

" No, Trot," said my aunt. " He keeps an office."

I asked for no more information about Mr. Wickfield, as
she offered none, and we conversed on other subjects until we
came to Canterbury, where, as it was market-day, my aunt had
a great opportunity of insinuating the gray pony among carts,
baskets, vegetables, and hucksters' goods. The hair-breadth
turns and twists we made, drew down upon us a variety of
speeches from the people standing about, which were not
always complimentary; but my aunt drove on with perfect
indifference, and I dare say would have taken her own way
with as much coolness through an enemy's country.

At length we stopped before a very old house bulging out
over the road ; a house with longlow lattice-windows bulging
out still farther, and beams with carved heads on the ends bulg-
ing out too, so that I fancied the whole house was leaning for-
ward trying to see who was passing on the narrow pavement
below. It was quite spotless in its cleanliness. The old-fash-





ioned brass knocker on the low arched door, ornamented with
carved garlands of fruit and flowers, twinkled like a star ; the
two stone steps descending to the door were as white as if
they had been covered with fair linen ; and all the angles and
corners, and carvings and mouldings, and quaint little panes of
glass, and quainter little windows, though as old as the hills,
were as pure as any snow that ever fell upon the hills.

When the pony-chaise stopped at the door, and my eyes were
intent upon the house, I saw a cadaverous face appear at a
small window on the ground floor (in a little round tower that
formed one side of the house), and quickly disappear. The
low arched door then opened, and the face came out. It was
quite as cadaverous as it had looked in the window, though in
the grain of it there was that tinge of red which is sometimes
to be observed in the skins of red-haired people. It belonged
to a red-haired person — a youth of fifteen, as I take it now,
but looking much older — whose hair was cropped as close as the
closest stubble; who had hardly any eyebrows, and no eye-
lashes, and eyes of a red-brown ; so unsheltered and unshaded,
that I remember wondering how he w T ent to sleep. He was
high-shouldered and bony; dressed in decent black, with a
white wisp of a neckcloth ; buttoned up to the throat ; and
had a long, lank, skeleton hand, which particularly attracted
my attention, as he stood at the pony's head, rubbing his chin
with it, and looking up at us in the chaise.

" Is Mr. Wickfield at home, Uriah Heep ? " said my aunt.

"Mr. Wickfield's at home, ma ; am," said Uriah Heep, "If
you'll please to walk in there ?. — pointing with his long hand
to the room he meant.

We got out ; and leaving him to hold the pony, went into a
long low parlor looking towards the street, from the window
of which I caught a glimpse, as I went in, of Uriah Heep
breathing into the pony's nostrils, and immediately covering
them with his hand, as if he were putting some spell upon
him. Opposite to the tall old chimney-piece, were two por-
traits : one of a gentleman with gray hair (though not by any
means an old man) and black eyebrows, who was looking over
some papers tied together with red tape ; the other, of a lady,



238 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

with a very placid and sweet expression of face, who was look-
ing at me.

I believe I was turning about in search of Uriah's picture,
when, a door at the farther end of the room opening, a gentle-
man entered, at sight of whom I turned to the first-mentioned
portrait again, to make quite sure that it had not come out of
its frame. But it was stationary ; and as the gentleman ad-
vanced into the light, I saw that he was some years older than
when he had had his picture painted.

" Miss Betsey Trotwood," said the gentleman, " pray walk
in. I was engaged for the moment, but you'll excuse my
being busy. You know my motive. I have but one in life."

Miss Betsey thanked him, and we went into his room, which
was furnished as an office, with books, papers, tin boxes, and
so forth. It looked into a garden, and had an iron safe let
into the wall; so immediately over the mantel-shelf that I
wondered, as I sat down, how the sweeps got round it when
they swept the chimney.

"Well, Miss Trotwood," said Mr. Wickfield ; for I soon
found that it was he, and that he was a lawyer, and steward
of the estates of a rich gentleman of the county; "what wind
blows you here ? Not an ill wind, I hope ? "

" No/' replied my aunt, " I have not come for any law."

"That's right, ma'am," said Mr. Wickfield. "You had bet-
ter come for anything else."

His hair was quite white now, though his eyebrows were
still black. He had a very agreeable face, and, I thought, was
handsome. There was a certain richness in his complexion,
which I had been long accustomed, under Peggotty's tuition,
to connect with port wine ; and I fancied it was in his voice
too, and referred his growing corpulency to the same cause.
He was very cleanly dressed, in a blue coat, striped waistcoat,
and nankeen trousers ; and his fine frilled shirt and cambric
neckcloth looked unusually soft and white, reminding my
strolling fancy (I call to mind) of the plumage on the breast
of a swan.

" This is my nephew," said my aunt.

" Wasn't aware you had . one, Miss Trotwood," said Mr.
Wickfield.





"My grand-nephew, that is to say," observed my aunt.

"Wasn't aware you had a grand-nephew, I give you my
word," said Mr. Wickfield.

" I have adopted him," said my aunt, with a wave of her
hand, importing that his knowledge and his ignorance were all
one to her, " and I have brought him here, to put him to a
school where he may be thoroughly well taught, and well
treated. Now tell me where that school is, and what it is,
and all about it."

" Before I can advise you properly," said Mr. Wickfield, —
" the old question you know. What's your motive in this ? ' ;

" Deuce take the man ! " exclaimed my aunt. ¥ Always
fishing for motives, when they're on the surface ! Why, to
make the child happy and useful."

" It must be a mixed motive, I think," said Mr. Wickfield,
shaking his head and smiling incredulously.
. " A mixed fiddlestick ! " returned my aunt. " You claim
to have one plain motive in all you do yourself. You don't
suppose, I hope, that you are the only plain dealer in the
world?"

" Ay, but I have only one motive in life, Miss Trotwood,"
he rejoined, smiling. " Other people have dozens, scores,
hundreds. I have only one. There's the difference. How-
ever, that's beside the question. The best school ? What-
ever the motive, you want the best ? "

My aunt nodded assent.

"At the best we have," said Mr. Wickfield, considering,
"your nephew couldn't board just now."

" But he could board somewhere else, I suppose ? " sug-
gested my aunt.

Mr. Wickfield thought I could. After a little discussion,
he proposed to take my aunt to the school, that she might see
it and judge for herself; also, to take her, with the same
object, to two or three houses where he thought I could be
boarded. My aunt embracing the proposal, we were all three
going out together, when he stopped and said :

" Our little friend here might have some motive, perhaps,
for objecting to the arrangements. I think we had better
leave him behind ? "



240 THE PERSONAL HISTOET AND EXPERIENCE

My aunt seemed disposed to contest the point ; but to facili-
tate matters I said I would gladly remain behind, if they
pleased ; and returned into Mr. Wickfield's office, where I sat
down again, in the chair I had first occupied,- to await their
return.

It so happened that this chair was opposite a narrow pas-
sage, which ended in the little circular room where I had seen
Uriah Heep's pale face looking out of window. Uriah,
having taken the pony to a neighboring stable, was at work
at a desk in this room, which had a brass frame on the top to
hang papers upon, and on which the writing he was making
a copy of was then hanging. Though his face was towards
me, I thought, for some time, the writing being between us,
that he could not see me ; but looking that way more atten-
tively, it made me uncomfortable to observe that, every now
and then, his sleepless eyes would come below the writing,
like two red suns, and stealthily stare at me for I dare say <a
whole minute at a time, during which his pen went, or pre-
tended to go, as cleverly as ever. I made several attempts to
get out of their way — such as standing on a chair to look at
a map on the other side of the room, and poring over the
columns of a Kentish newspaper — but they always attracted
me back again ; and whenever I looked towards those two red
suns, I was sure to find them, either just rising or just
setting.

At length, much to my relief, my aunt and Mr. Wickfield
came back, after a pretty long absence. They were not so
successful as I could have wished ; for though the advantages
of the school were undeniable, my aunt had not approved of
any of the boarding-houses proposed for me.

"It's very unfortunate," said my aunt. "I don't know
what to do, Trot."

" It does happen unfortunately," said Mr. Wickfield. " But
I'll tell you what you can do, Miss Trotwood."

" What's that ? " inquired my aunt.

"Leave your nephew here, for the present. He's a quiet
fellow. He won't disturb me at all. It's a capital house
for study. As quiet as a monastery, and almost as roomy.
Leave him here."



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 241

My aunt evidently liked the offer, though she was delicate
of accepting it. So did I.

"Come, Miss Trotwood," said Mr. Wickfield. "This is
the way out of the difficulty. It's only a temporary arrange-
ment, you know. If it don't act well, or don't quite accord
with our mutual convenience, he can easily go to the right
about. There will be time to find some better place for him
in the meanwhile. You had better determine to leave him
here for the present ! "

" I am very much obliged to you/' said my aunt ; " and so
is he, I see ; but — "

" Come ! I know what you mean," cried Mr. Wickfield.
"You shall not be- oppressed by the receipt of favors, Miss
Trotwood. You may pay for him if you like. We won't be
hard about terms, but you shall pay if you will."

" On that understanding," said my aunt, " though it doesn't
lessen the real obligation, I shall be very glad to leave him."

" Then come and see my little housekeeper," said Mr. Wick-
field.

We accordingly went up a wonderful old staircase — with a
balustrade so broad that we might have gone up that, almost
as easily — and into a shady old drawing-room, lighted by
some three or four of the quaint windows I had looked up at
from the street : which had old oak seats in them, that seemed
to have come of the same trees as the shining oak floor, and
the great beams in th§ ceiling. It was a prettily furnished
room, with a piano and some lively furniture in red and green,
and some flowers. It seemed to be all old nooks and corners ;
and in every nook and corner . there was some queer little
table, or cupboard, or bookcase, or seat, or something or other,
that made me think there was not such another good corner in
the room ; until I looked at the next one, and found it equal
to it, if not better. On everything there was the same air of
retirement and cleanliness that marked the house outside.

Mr. Wickfield tapped at a door in a corner of the panelled
wall, and a girl of about my own age came quickly out and
kissed him. On her face, I saw immediately the placid and
sweet expression of the lady whose picture had looked at me
down stairs. It seemed to my imagination as if the portrait
vol. x — 16



242 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

had grown womanly, and the original remained a child.
Although her face was quite bright and happy, there was a
tranquillity about it, and about her — a quiet, good, calm
spirit, — that I never have forgotten; that I never shall
forget.

This was his little housekeeper, his daughter Agnes, Mr.
Wickfield said. When I heard how he said it, and saw how
he held her hand, I guessed what the one motive of his life
was.

She had a little basket-trifle hanging at her side, with keys
in it ; and she looked as staid and as discreet a housekeeper
as the old house could have. She listened to her father as he
told her about me, with a pleasant face ; and when he had con-
cluded, proposed to my aunt that we should go up stairs and
see my room. We all went together ; she before us. And a
glorious old room it was, with more oak beams, and diamond
panes, and the broad balustrade going all the way up to it.

I cannot call to mind where or when, in my childhood, I
had seen a stained glass window in a church. Xor do I recol-
lect its subject. But I know that when I saw her turn round,
in the grave light of the old staircase, and wait for us, above,
I thought of that window ; and that I associated something of
its tranquil brightness with Agnes Wickfield ever afterwards.

My aunt was as happy as I was, in the arrangement made
for me ; and we went down to the drawing-room again, well
pleased and gratified. As she would not hear of staying to
dinner, lest she should by any chance fail to arrive at home
with the gray pony before dark; and as I apprehend Mr.
Wickfield knew her too well, to argue any point with her;
some lunch was provided for her there, and Agnes went back
to her governess, and Mr. Wickfield to his office. So we were
left to take leave of one another without any restraint.

She told me that everything would be arranged for me by
Mr. Wickfield, and that I should want for nothing, and gave
me the kindest words and the best advice.

"Trot," said my aunt in conclusion, "be a credit to your-
self, to me, and Mr. Dick, and Heaven be with you ! "

I was greatly overcome, and could only thank her, again
and again, and send my love to Mr. Dick.





" jSTever," said my aunt, "be mean in anything; never be
false ; never be cruel. Avoid those three vices, Trot, and I
can always be hopeful of you."

I promised, as well as I could, that I would not abuse her
kindness or forget her admonition.

"The pony's at the door," said my aunt, "and I am off!
Stay here."

With these words she embraced me hastily, and went out
of the room, shutting the door after her. At first I was star-
tled by so abrupt a departure, and almost feared I had dis-
pleased her ; but when I looked into the street, and saw how
dejectedly she got into the chaise, and drove away without
looking up, I understood her better, and did not do her that
injustice.

By five o'clock, which was Mr. Wickfield's dinner-hour, I
had mustered up my spirits again, and was ready for my knife
and fork. The cloth was only laid for us two; but Agnes
was waiting in the drawing-room before dinner, went down
with her father, and sat opposite to him at table. I doubted
whether he could have dined without her.

We did not stay there, after dinner, but came up stairs into
the drawing-room again : in one snug corner of which, Agnes
set glasses for her father, and a decanter of port wine. I
thought he would have missed its usual flavor, if it had been
put there for him by any other hands.

There he sat, taking his wine, and taking a good deal of it,
for two hours ; while Agnes played on the piano, worked, and
talked to him and me. He was, for the most part, gay and
cheerful with us ; but sometimes his eyes rested on her, and he
fell into a brooding state, and was silent. She always observed
this -quickly, as I thought, and always roused him with a ques-
tion or caress. Then he came out of his meditation, and drank
more wine.

Agnes* made the tea, and presided over it; and the time
passed away after it, as after dinner, until she went to bed ;
when her father took her in his arms and kissed her, and, she
Demg gone, ordered candles in his office. Then I went to bed
too.

But in the course of the evening I had rambled down to the



244 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

door, and a little way along the street, that I might have
another peep at the old houses, and the gray Cathedral ; and
might think of my coming through that old city on my jour-
ney, and of my passing the very house I 'lived in, without
knowing it. As I came back, I saw Uriah Heep shutting up
the office; and feeling friendly towards everybody, went in
and spoke to him, and at parting, gave him my hand. But
oh, what a clammy hand his was ! as ghostly to the touch as
to the sight ! I rubbed mine afterwards, to warm it, and to
rub his off

It was such an uncomfortable hand, that, when I went to
my room, it was still cold and wet upon my memory. Lean-
ing out of window, and seeing one of the faces on the beam-
ends looking at me sideways, I fancied it was Uriah Heep got
up there somehow, and shut him out in a hurry.







CHAPTER XVI.

I AM A NEW BOY IN MORE SENSES THAN ONE.

Next morning, after breakfast, I entered on school life
again. I went, accompanied by Mr. Wickfield, to the scene
of my future studies — a grave building in a court-yard, with
a learned air about it that seemed very well suited to the
stray rooks and jackdaws who came down from the Cathedral
towers to walk with a clerkly bearing on the grass-plot — and
was introduced to my new master, Dr. Strong.

Dr. Strong looked almost as rusty, to my thinking, as the
tall iron rails and gates outside the house ; and almost as stiff
and heavy as the great stone urns that flanked them, and were
set up, on the top of the red-brick wall, at regular distances
all round the court, like sublimated skittles, for Time to play
at. He was in his library (I mean Dr. Strong was), with his
clothes not particularly well brushed, and his hair not partic-
ularly well combed ; his knee-smalls unbraced ; his long black
gaiters unbuttoned ; and his shoes yawning like two caverns
on the hearth-rug. Turning upon me a lustreless eye, that
reminded me of a long-forgotten blind old horse who once used
to crop the grass, and tumble over the graves in Blunderstone
churchyard, he said he was glad to see me : and then he gave
me his hand ; which I didn't know what to do with, as it did
nothing for itself.

But, sitting at work, not far off from Dr. Strong, was a very
pretty young lady — whom he called Annie, and who was his
daughter, I supposed — who got me out of my difficulty by
kneeling down to put Dr. Strong's shoes on, and button his
gaiters, which she did with great cheerfulness and quickness.
When she had finished, and we were going out to the school-
room, I was much surprised to hear Mr. Wickfield, in bidding
her good morning, address her as " Mrs. Strong ; " and I was
wondering could she be Doctor Strong's son's wife, or could



246 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

she be Mrs. Doctor Strong, when Dr. Strong himself uncon-
sciously enlightened rue.

"By the by, Wickfield," he said, stopping in a passage
with his hand on my shoulder; "you have not found any
suitable provision for my wife's cousin yet ? "

"No," said Mr. Wickfield. "No. Not yet."

" I could wish it done as soon as it can be done, Wickfield,"
said Doctor Strong, " for Jack Maldon is needy, and idle ;
and of those two bad things, worse things sometimes come.
What does Doctor Watts say," he added, looking at me, and
moving his head to the time of his quotation, " c Satan finds
some mischief still for idle hands to do/ "

"Egad, doctor," returned Mr. Wickfield, "if Doctor Watts
knew mankind, he might have written, with as much truth,
' Satan finds some mischief still, for busy hands to do.' The
busy people achieve their full share of mischief in the world,
you may rely upon it. What have the people been about
who have been the busiest in getting money, and in getting
power, this century or two ? No mischief ? "

" Jack Maldon will never be very busy in getting either, I
expect," said Doctor Strong, rubbing his chin thoughtfully. *

"Perhaps not," said Mr. Wickfield; "and you bring me
back to the question, with an apology for digressing. No, I
have not been able to dispose of Mr. Jack Maldon yet. I
believe," he said this with some hesitation, "I penetrate your
motive, and it makes the thing more difficult."

"My motive," returned Doctor Strong, "is to make some
suitable provision for a cousin, and an old playfellow of
Annie's."

" Yes, I know," said Mr. Wickfield ; " at home or abroad."

" Aye ! " replied the Doctor, apparently wondering why he
emphasized those words so much. " At home or abroad."

"Your own expression, you know," said Mr. Wickfield.
" Or abroad."

" Surely," the Doctor answered. " Surely. One or other."

" One or other ? Have you no choice ? " asked Mr.
Wickfield.

"No," returned the Doctor.

" No ? " with astonishment.





"Not the least."

"No motive," said Mr. Wickfield, "for meaning abroad, and
not at home ? "

" No," returned the Doctor.

"I am bound to believe you, and of course I do believe
you," said Mr. Wickfield. "It might have simplified my
office very much, if I had known it before. But I confess I
entertained another impression."

Doctor Strong regarded him with a puzzled and doubting
look, which almost immediately subsided into a smile that
gave me great encouragement; for it was full of amiability
and sweetness, and there was a simplicity in it, and indeed in
his whole manner, when the studious, pondering frost upon
it was got through, very attractive and hopeful to a young
scholar like me. Repeating " no," and " not the least," and
other short assurances to the same purport, Doctor Strong
jogged on before us, at a queer, uneven pace; and we
followed : Mr. Wickfield looking grave, I observed, and shak-
ing his head to himself, without knowing that I saw him.

The school-room was a pretty large hall, on the quietest
side of the house, confronted by the stately stare of some
half-dozen of the great urns, and commanding a peep of an
old secluded garden belonging to the Doctor, where the
peaches were ripening on the sunny south wall. There were
two great aloes, in tubs, on the turf outside the windows ; the
broad hard leaves of which plant (looking as if they were
made of painted tin) have ever since, by association, been
symbolical to me of silence and retirement. About five-and-
twenty boys were studiously engaged at their books when we
went in, but they rose to give the Doctor good morning, and
remained standing when they saw Mr. Wickfield and me.

" A new boy, young gentlemen," said the Doctor ; " Trot-
wood Copperfield."

One Adams, who was the head-boy, then stepped out of
his place and welcomed me. He looked like a young clergy-
man, in his white cravat, but he was very affable and good-
humored ; and he showed me my place, and presented me to
the masters in a gentlemanly way that would have put me
at my ease, if anything could.



248 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

It seemed to me so long, however, since I had been among
such boys, or among any companions of my own age, except
Mick Walker and Mealy Potatoes, that I felt as strange as ever
I have done in all my life. I was so conscious of having
passed through scenes of which they could have no knowledge,
and of having acquired experiences foreign to my age, appear-
ance, and condition as one of them, that I half believed it was
an imposture to come there as an ordinary little schoolboy. I
had become, in the Murdstone and Grinby time, however short
or long it may have been, so unused to the sports and games
of boys, that I knew I was awkward and inexperienced in the
commonest things belonging to them. Whatever I had learnt,
had so slipped away from me in the sordid cares of my life
from day to night, that now, when I was examined about what
I knew, I knew nothing, and was put into the lowest form of
the school. But, troubled as I was, by my want of boyish
skill, and of book-learning too, I was made infinitely more
uncomfortable by the consideration, that, in what I did know,
I was much farther removed from my companions than in
what I did not. My mind ran upon what they would think,
if they knew of my familiar acquaintance with the King's
Bench Prison ? Was there anything about me which would
reveal my proceedings in connection with the Micawber family
— all those pawnings, and sellings, and suppers — in spite of
myself? Suppose some of the boys had seen me coming
through Canterbury, wayworn and ragged, and should find me
out ? What would they say, who made so light of money, if
they could know how I scraped my halfpence together, for
the purchase of my daily saveloy and beer, or my slices of
pudding ? How would it affect them, who were so innocent
of London life, and London streets, to discover how knowing
I was (and was ashamed to be) in some of the meanest phases
of both ? All this ran in my head so much, on that first day
at Dr. Strong's, that I felt distrustful of my slightest look
and gesture ; shrunk within myself whensoever I was ap-
proached by one of my new school-fellows ; and hurried off the
minute school was over, afraid of committing myself in my
response to any friendly notice or advance.

But there was such an influence in Mr. Wickfield's old



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 249

house, that when I knocked at it, with my new school-books
under my arm, I began to feel my uneasiness softening away.
As I went up to my airy old room, the grave shadow of the
staircase seemed to fall upon my doubts and fears, and to make
the past more indistinct. I sat there, sturdily conning my
books, until dinner time (we were out of school for good at
three) ; and went down, hopeful of becoming a passable sort
of boy yet.

Agnes was in the drawing-room, waiting for her father, who
was detained by some one in his office. She met me with her
pleasant smile, and asked me how I liked the school. I told
her I should like it very much, I hoped ; but I was a little
strange to it at first.

" You have never been to school," I said, "have you ?"

" Oh yes ! Every day."

" Ah, but you mean here, at your own home ? "

" Papa couldn't spare me to go anywhere else," she answered,
smiling and shaking her head. " His housekeeper must be in
his house, you know."

" He is very fond of you, I am sure," I said.

She nodded " Yes," and went to the door to listen for his
coming up, that she* might meet him on the stairs. But, as he
was not there, she came back again.

" Mamma has been dead ever since I was born," she said, in
her quiet way. "I only know her picture, down stairs. I
saw you looking at it yesterday. Did you think whose it
was ? " I told h6r yes, because it was so like herself.

"Papa says so, too," said Agnes, pleased. " Hark ! 'That's
papa now ? "

Her bright calm face lighted up with pleasure as she went
to meet him, and as they came in, hand in hand. He greeted
me cordially ; and told me I should certainly be happy under
Doctor Strong, who was one of the gentlest of men.

" There may me some, perhaps — I don't know that there
are — who abuse his kindness," said Mr. Wickfield. "Never
be one of those, Trotwood, in anything. He is the least suspi-
cious of mankind ; and whether that's a merit, or whether it's
a blemish, it deserves consideration in all dealings with the
Doctor, great or small."



250 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

He spoke, I thought, as if he were weary, or dissatisfied
with something; but I did not pursue the question in my
mind, for dinner was just then announced, and we went down
and took the same seats as before.

We had scarcely done so, when Uriah Heep put in his red
head and his lank hand at the door, and said :

" Here's Mr. Maldon begs the favor of a word, sir."

"I am but this moment quit of Mr. Maldon," said his
master.

" Yes, sir," returned Uriah ; " but Mr. Maldon has come
back, and he begs the favor of a word."

As he held the door open w T ith his hand, Uriah looked at
me, and looked at Agnes, and looked at the dishes, and looked
at the plates, and looked at every object in the room, I thought,
— yet seemed to look at nothing ; he made such an appearance
all the while of keeping his red eyes dutifully on his master.

HI beg your pardon. It's only to say, on reflection," ob-
served a voice behind Uriah, as Uriah's head was pushed
away, and the speaker's substituted — " pray excuse me for
this intrusion — that as it seems I have no choice in the matter,
the sooner I go abroad the better. My cousin Annie did say,
when we talked of it, that she liked to have her friends
within reach rather than to have them banished, and the old
Doctor — "

" Doctor Strong, was that ? " Mr. Wickfield interposed,
gravely.

" Doctor Strong of course," returned the other ; " I call him
the old Doctor — it's all the same you know."

" I donH know," returned Mr. Wickfield.

"Well, Doctor Strong," said the other — u Doctor Strong
was of the same mind, I believed. But as it appears from the
course you take with me that he has changed his mind, why
there's no more to be said, except that the sooner I am off the
better. Therefore, I thought I'd come back and say, that
the sooner I am off the better. When a plunge is to be made
into the water, it's of no use lingering on the bank."

" There shall be as little lingering as possible, in your case,
Mr. Maldon, you may depend upon it," said Mr. Wickfield.

"Thank'ee," said the other. "Much obliged. I don't



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 251

want to look a gift-horse in the mouth, which is not a gracious
thing to do; otherwise, I dare say, my cousin Annie could
easily arrange it in her own way. I suppose Annie would
only have to say to the old Doctor — "

" Meaning that Mrs. Strong would only have to say to her
husband — do I follow you ? " said Mr. Wickfield.

" Quite so," returned the other, " — would only have to say,
that she wanted such and such a thing to be so and so ; and
it would be so and so, as a matter of course."

" And why as a matter of course, Mr. Maldon ? " asked Mr.
Wickfield, sedately eating his dinner,

a Why, because Annie's a charming young girl, and the old
Doctor — Doctor Strong, I mean — is not quite a charming
young boy," said Mr. Jack Maldon, laughing. " ~No offence to
anybody, Mr. Wickfield. I only mean that I suppose some
compensation is fair and reasonable in that sort of marriage."

" Compensation to the lady, sir ? " asked Mr. Wickfield,
gravely.

"To the lady, sir," Mr. Jack Maldon answered, laughing.
But appearing to remark that Mr. Wickfield went on with his
dinner in the same sedate, immovable manner, and that there
was no hope of making him relax a muscle of his face, he
added :

"'However, I have said what I came back to say, and, with
another apology for this intrusion, I may take myself off. Of
course I shall observe your directions, in considering the matter
as one to be arranged between you and me solely, and not to
be referred to, up at the Doctor's."

" Have you dined ? " asked Mr. Wickfield, with a motion of
his hand towards the table.

" Thank'ee. I am going to dine," said Mr. Maldon ; " with
my cousin Annie. Good by ! "

Mr. Wickfield, without rising, looked after him thought-
fully as he went out. He was rather a shallow sort of young
gentleman, I thought, with a handsome face, a rapid utterance,
and a confident bold air. And this was the first I ever saw of
Mr. Jack Maldon ; whom I had not expected to see so soon,
when I heard the Doctor speak of him that morning.

When we had dined, we went up stairs again, where every-



252 THE PERSONAL HISTOBY AND EXPERIENCE

thing went on exactly as on the previous day. Agnes set the
glasses and decanters in the same corner, and Mr. Wickfield
sat down to drink, and drank a good deal. Agnes played the
piano to hini, sat by him, and worked and talked, and played
some games at dominoes with me. In good time she made
tea ; and afterwards, when I brought down my books, looked
into them, and showed me what she knew of them (which was
no slight matter, though she said it was), and what was the
best way to learn and understand them. I see her, with her
modest, orderly, placid manner, and I hear her beautiful calm
voice, as I write these words. The influence for all good,
which she came to exercise over me at a later time, begins
already to descend upon my breast. I love little Em'ly, and
I don't love Agnes — no, not at all in that way — but I feel
that there are goodness, peace, and truth, wherever Agnes is ;
and that the soft light of the colored window in the church,
seen long ago, falls on her always, and on me when I am near
her, and on everything around.

The time having come for her withdrawal for the night,
and she having left us, I gave Mr. Wickfield my hand, pre-
paratory to going away myself. But he checked me and said :
" Should you like to stay with us, Trotwood, or to go else-
where ? "

" Tq stay," I answered, quickly.

" You are sure ? "

"If you please. If I may ! "

"Why, it's but a dull life that we lead here, boy, I am
afraid," he said.

" Not more dull for me than Agnes, sir. Not dull at all ! "

"Than Agnes," he repeated, walking slowly to the great
chimney-piece, and leaning against it. " Than Agnes ! "

He had drank wine that evening (or I-fancied it), until his
eyes were blood-shot. Not that I could see them now, for
they were cast down, and shaded by his hand; tjut I had
noticed them a little while before.

m Now I wonder," he muttered, " whether my Agnes tires
of me. When should I ever tire of her ! But that's different
— that's quite different."

He was musing — not speaking to me ; so I remained quiet.



OF DAVID COPPUBFIELD. 253

" A dull old house," lie said, " and a monotonous life ; but
I must have her near me. I must keep her near me. If the
thought that I may die and leave my darling, or that my
darling may die and leave me, comes, like a spectre to distress
my happiest hours, and is only to be drowned in — "

He did not supply the word; but pacing slowly to the place
where he had sat, and mechanically going through the action
of pouring wine from the empty decanter, set it down and
paced back again.

" If it is miserable to bear when she ' is here," he said,
" what would it be and she away ? No, no, no. I cannot
try that."

He leaned against the chimney-piece, brooding so long that
I could not decide whether to run the risk of disturbing him
by going, or to remain quietly where I was, until he should
come out of his reverie. At length he roused himself, and
looked about the room until his eyes encountered mine.
* " Stay with us, Trotwood, eh ? " he said in his usual
manner, and as if he were answering something I had just
said. "I am glad of it. You are company to us both. It
is wholesome to have you here. Wholesome for me, whole-
some for Agnes, wholesome perhaps for all of us."

"I am sure it is for me, sir," I said. "I am so glad to
be here."

" That's a fine fellow ! " said Mr. Wickfield. " As long as
you are glad to be here, you shall stay here." He shook
hands with me upon it, and clapped me on the back; and told
me that when I had anything to do at night after Agnes had
left us, or when I wished to read for my own pleasure, I was
free to come down to his room, if he were there, and if I
desired it for company's sake, and to sit with him. I thanked
him for his consideration ; and, as he went down soon after-
wards, and I was not tired, went down too, with a book in
my hand, to avail myself, for half-an-hour, of his permission.

But, seeing a light in the little round office, and imme-
diately feeling myself attracted towards Uriah Heep, who had
a sort of fascination for me, I went in there instead. I found
Uriah reading a great fat book, with such demonstrative
attention, that his lank forefinger followed up every line as



254 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

he read, and made clammy tracks along the page (or so I
fully believed) like a snail.

" You are working late to-night, Uriah," says I,

" Yes, Master Copperfield," says Uriah.

As I was getting on the stool opposite, to talk to him more
conveniently, I observed that he had not such a thing as a
smile about him, and that he could only widen his mouth and
make two hard creases down his cheeks, one on each side, to
stand for one.

"I am not doing office-work, Master Copperfield," said
Uriah.

" What work, then ? " I asked.

"I am improving my legal knowledge, Master Copperfield,"
said Uriah. " I am going through Tidd's Practice. Oh, what
a writer Mr. Tidd is, Master Copperfield ! "

My stool was such a tower of observation, that as I watched
him reading on again, after this rapturous exclamation, and
following up the lines with his forefinger, I observed that his
nostrils, which were thin and pointed, with sharp dints in
them, had a singular and most uncomfortable way of expand-
ing and contracting themselves — that they seemed to twinkle
instead of his eyes, which hardly ever twinkled at all.

" I suppose you are quite a great lawyer ? " I said, after
looking at him for some time.

"Me, Master Copperfield?" said Uriah. "Oh, no! Pm
a very umble person."

It was no fancy of mine about his hands, I observed ; for
he frequently ground the palms against each other as if to
squeeze them dry and warm, besides often wiping them, in a
stealthy way, on his pocket-handkerchief.

"I am well aware that I am the umblest person going,"
said Uriah Heep, modestly ; "let the other be where he may.
My mother is likewise a very umble person. We live in a
umble abode, Master Copperfield, but have much to be thank-
ful for. My father's former calling was umble. He was a
sexton."

" What is he now ? " I asked.

" He is a partaker of glory at present, Master Copperfield,"
said Uriah Heep. "But we have much to be thankful for.



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 255

How much have I to be thankful for in living with Mr. Wick-
field!"

I asked Uriah if he had been with Mr. Wickfield long ?

" I have been with him going on four year, Master Copper-
field;" said Uriah; shutting up his book, after carefully mark-
ing the place where he had left off. " Since a year after my
father's death. How much have I to be thankful for, in that !
How much have I to be thankful for, in Mr. Wickfield's kind
intention to give me my articles, which would otherwise not
lay within the umble means of mother and self ! "

"Then, when your articled time is over, you'll be a regular
lawyer, I suppose ? " said I.

"With, the blessing of Providence, Master Copperfield/'
returned Uriah.

"Perhaps you'll be a partner in Mr. Wickfield's business,
one of these days," I said, to make myself agreeable ; " and it
will be Wickfield and Heep, or Heep late Wickfield."

" Oh, no, Master Copperfield," returned Uriah, shaking his
head, " I am much too umble for that ! "

He certainly did look uncommonly like the carved face on
the beam outside my window, as he sat, in his humility, eyeing
me sideways, with his mouth widened, and the creases in his
cheeks.

"Mr. Wickfield is a most excellent man, Master Copper-
field," said Uriah. " If you have known him long, you know
it, I am sure, much better than I can inform you."

I replied that I was certain he was ; but that I had not
known him long myself, though he was a friend of my aunt's.

" Oh, indeed, Master Copperfield," said Uriah. " Your aunt
is a sweet lady, Master Copperfield ! "

He had a way of writhing when he wanted to express en-
thusiasm which was very ugly ; and which diverted my atten-
tion from the compliment he had paid my relation, to the
snaky twistings of his throat and body.

" A sweet lady, Master Copperfield ! " said Uriah Heep.
" She has a great admiration for Miss Agnes, Master Copper-
field, I believe ? "

I said " Yes," boldly ; not that I knew anything about it,
Heaven forgive me !



256 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" I hope you have, too, Master Copperfield," said Uriah.
"But I am sure you must have."

" Everybody must have/' I returned.

"Oh, thank you, Master Copperfield," said Uriah Heep,
"for that remark ! It is so true ! Umble as I am, I know it
is so true ! Oh, thank you, Master Gopperfield ! "

He writhed himself quite off his stool in the excitement of
his feelings, and, being off, began to make arrangements for
going home.

" Mother will be expecting me," he said, referring to a pale,
inexpressive-faced watch in his pocket, " and getting uneasy ;
for though we are very umble, Master Copperfield, we are
much attached to one another. If you would come and see us,
any afternoon, and take a cup of tea at our lowly dwelling,
mother would be as proud of your company as I should be."

I said I should be glad to come.

"Thank you, Master Copperfield," returned Uriah, putting
his book away upon a shelf. — "I suppose you stop here, some
time, Master Copperfield ? "

I said I was going to be brought up there, I believed, as
long as I remained at school.

"Oh, indeed!" exclaimed Uriah. "I should think you
would come into the business at last, Master Copperfield ! "

I protested that I had no views of that sort, and that no
such scheme was entertained in my behalf by anybody ; but
Uriah insisted on blandly replying to all my assurances, " Oh,
yes, Master Copperfield, I should think you would, indeed ! "
and, "Oh, indeed, Master Copperfield, I should think you
would, certainly ! " over and over again. Being, at last, ready to
leave the office for the night, he asked me if it would suit my
convenience to have the light put out ; and on my answering
"Yes," instantly extinguished it. After shaking hands with
me — his hand felt like a fish, in the dark — he opened the
door into the street a very little, and crept out, and shut it,
leaving me to grope my way back into the house : which cost
me some trouble and a fall over his stool. This was the prox-
imate cause, I suppose, of my dreaming about him, for what
appeared to me to be .half the night ; and dreaming, among
other things, that he had launched Mr. Peggotty's house on a



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 257

piratical expedition, with a black flag at the mast head, bearing
the inscription "Tidd's Practice/' under which diabolical
ensign he was carrying me and little Em'ly to the Spanish
Main, to be drowned.

I got a little the better of my uneasiness when I went to
school next day, and a good deal the better next day, and so
shook it off by degrees that in less than a fortnight I was
quite at home, and happy, among my new companions. I was
awkward enough in their games, and backward enough in
their studies ; but custom would improve me in the first respect,
I hoped, and hard work in the second. Accordingly, I went
to work very hard, both in play and in earnest, and gained
great commendation. And, in a very little while the Murd-
stone and Grinby life became so strange to me that I hardly
believed in it, while my present life grew so familiar, that I
seemed to have been leading it a long time.

Doctor Strong's was an excellent school ; as different from
Mr. Creakle's as good is from evil. It was very gravely and
decorously ordered, and on a sound system ; with an appeal,
in everything, to the honor and good faith of the boys, and an
avowed intention to rely on their possession of those qualities
unless they proved themselves unworthy of it, which worked
wonders. We all felt that we had a part in the management,
of the place, and in sustaining its character and 'dignity.
Hence, we soon became warmly attached to it — I am sure I
did for one, and I never knew, in all my time, of any other
boy being otherwise — and learnt with a good will, desiring to
do it credit. We had noble games out of hours, and plenty
of liberty ; but even then, as I remember, we were well spoken
of in the town, and rarely did any disgrace, by our appearance
or manner, to the reputation of Doctor Strong and Doctor
Strong's boys.

Some of the higher scholars boarded in the Doctor's house,
and through them I learned, at second hand, some particulars
of the Doctor's history — as how he had not yet been married
twelve months to the beautiful young lady I had seen in the
study, whom he had married for love ; as she had not a six-
pence, and had a world of poor relations (so our fellows said)
ready to swarm the Doctor out of house and home. Also, how

VOL. 1—17



258 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

the Doctor's cogitating manner was attributable to his being
always engaged in looking out for Greek roots ; which, in my
innocence and ignorance, I supposed to be a botanical furor on
the Doctor's part, especially as he always looked at the ground
when he walked about, until I understood that they were roots
of words, with a view to a new Dictionary which he had in
contemplation. Adams, bur head-boy, who had a turn for
mathematics, had made a calculation, I was informed, of the
time this Dictionary would take in completing, on the Doctor's
plan, and at the Doctor's rate of going. He considered that it
it might be done in one thousand six hundred and forty-nine
years, counting from the Doctor's last, or sixty-second, birth-
day.

But the Doctor himself was the idol of the whole school :
and it must have been a badly composed school if he had been
anything else, for he was the kindest of men ; with a simple
faith in him that might have touched the stone hearts of the
very urns upon the wall. As he walked up and down that
part of the court-yard which was at the side of the house, with
the stray rooks and jackdaws looking after him with their
heads cocked slily, as if they knew how much more knowing
they were in worldly affairs than he, if any sort of vagabond
could only get near enough to his creaking shoes to attract
his attention to one sentence of a tale of distress, that vaga-
bond was made for the next two days. It was so notorious
in the house, that the masters and head-boys took pains to cut
these marauders off at angles, and to get out of windows, and
turn them out of the court-yard, before they could make the
Doctor aware of their presence ; which was sometimes hap-
pily effected within a few yards of him, without his knowing
anything of the matter, as he jogged to and fro. Outside his
own domain, and unprotected, he was a very sheep for the
shearers. He would have taken his gaiters off his legs, to
give away. In fact, there was a story current among us (I
have no idea, and never had, on what authority, but I have
believed it for so many years that I feel quite certain it is
true), that on a frosty day, one winter time, he actually did
bestow his -gaiters on a beggar-woman, who occasioned some
scandal in the neighborhood by exhibiting a fine infant from








door to door, wrapped in those garments, which were uni-
versally recognized, being as well known in the vicinity as the
Cathedral. The legend added that the only person who did
not identify them was the Doctor himself, who, when they
were shortly afterwards displayed at the door of a little second-
hand shop of no very good repute, where such things were
taken in exchange for gin, was more than once observed to
handle them approvingly, as if admiring some curious novelty
in the pattern, and considering them an improvement on his
own.

It was very pleasant to see the Doctor with his pretty young
wife. He had a fatherly, benignant way of showing his fond-
ness for her, which seemed in itself to express a good man. I
often saw them walking in the garden where the peaches
were, and I sometimes had a nearer observation of them in the
study or the parlor. She appeared to me to take great care of
the Doctor, and to like him very much, though I never thought
her vitally interested in the Dictionary : some cumbrous frag-
ments of which work the Doctor always carried in his pockets,
and in the lining of his hat, and generally seemed to be ex-
pounding to her as they walked about.

I saw a good deal of Mrs. Strong, both because she had taken
a liking for me on the morning of my introduction to the
Doctor, and was always afterwards kind to me, and interested
in me; and because she was very fond of Agnes, and was
often backwards and forwards at our house. There was a
curious constraint between her and Mr. Wickfield, I thought
(of whom she seemed to be afraid), that never wore off.
When she came there of an evening, she always shrunk from
accepting his escort home, and ran away with me instead.
And sometimes, as we were running gaily across the Cathedral
yard together, expecting to meet nobody, we would meet Mr.
Jack Maldon, who was always surprised to see us.

Mrs. Strong's mamma was a lady I took great delight in.
Her name was Mrs. Markleham ; but our boys used to call
her the Old Soldier, on account of her generalship, and the
skill with which she marshalled great forces of relations
against the Doctor. She was a little, sharp-eyed woman, who
used to wear, when she was dressed, one unchangeable cap,



260 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

ornamented with some artificial flowers, and two artificial
butterflies supposed to be hovering above the flowers. There
was a superstition among us that this cap had come from
France, and could only originate in the workmanship of that
ingenious nation : but all I certainly know about it is, that it
always made its appearance of an evening, wheresoever Mrs.
Markleham made her appearance; that it was carried about
to friendly meetings in the Hindoo basket ; that the butterflies
had the gift of trembling constantly; and that they improved
the shining hours at Dr. Strong's expense, like busy bees.

I observed the Old Soldier — not to adopt the name dis-
respectfully — to pretty good advantage, on a night which is
made memorable to me by something else I shall relate. It
was. the night of a little party at the Doctor's, which was given
on the occasion of Mr. Jack Maldon's departure for India,
whither he was going as a cadet, or something of that kind :
Mr. Wickfield having at length arranged the business. It
happened to be the Doctor's birthday, too. We had had a
holiday, had made presents to him in the morning, had made
a speech to him through the head-boy, and had cheerpd him
until we were hoarse, and until he had shed tears. And now,
in the evening, Mr. "Wickfield, Agnes, and I, went to have tea
with him in his private capacity.

Mr. Jack Maldon was there, before us. Mrs. Strong, dressed
in white, with cherry-colored ribbons, was playing the piano,
when we went in ; and he was leaning over her to turn the
leaves. The clear red and white of her complexion was not
so blooming and flower-like as usual, I thought, when she
turned round ; but she looked very pretty, wonderfully pretty.

"I have forgotten, Doctor," said Mrs. Strong's mamma, when
we were seated, " to pay you the compliments of the day —
though they are, as you may suppose, very far from being
mere compliments in my case. Allow me to wish you many
happy returns."

" I thank you, ma'am," replied the Doctor.

"Many, many, many, happy returns," said the Old Soldier.
"Xot only for your own sake, but for Annie's, and John
Maiden's, and many other people's. It seems but yesterday
to me, John, when you were a little creature, a head shorter





than Master Copperfield, making baby love to Annie behind
the gooseberry bushes in the back-garden."

"My dear mamma/' said Mrs. Strong, "never mind that
now."

" Annie, don't be absurd/' returned her mother. " If you
are to blush to hear of such things, now you are an old mar-
ried woman, when are you not to blush to hear of them ? "

" Old ? " exclaimed Mr. Jack Maldon. " Annie ? Come ? "

" Yes, John/' returned the Soldier. " Virtually, an old
married woman. Although not old by years — for when did
you ever hear me say, or who has ever heard me say, that a
girl of twenty was old by years ! — your cousin is the wife of
the Doctor, and, as such, what I have described her. It is
well for you, John, that your cousin is the wife of the Doctor.
You have found in him an influential and kind friend, who
will be kinder yet, I venture to predict, if you deserve it. I
have no false pride. I never hesitate to admit, frankly, that
there are some members of our family who want a friend. -
You were one yourself, before your cousin's influence raised
up one for you."

The Doctor, in the goodness of his heart, waved his hand as
if to make light of it, and save Mr. Jack Maldon from any
further reminder. But Mrs. Markleham changed her chair for
one next the Doctor's, and putting her fan on his coatsleeve,
said:

"No, really, my dear Doctor, you must excuse me if I
appear to dwell on this rather, because I feel so very strongly.
I call it quite my monomania, it is such a subject of mine.
You are a blessing to us. You really are a boon, you know."

"Nonsense, nonsense," said the Doctor.

"No, no, I beg your pardon," retorted the Old Soldier.
"With nobody present, but our dear and confidential friend
Mr. Wickfield, I cannot consent to be put down. I shall
begin to assert the privileges of a mother-in-law, if you go on
like that, and scold you. I am perfectly honest and out-
spoken. What I am saying, is what I said when you first
overpowered me with surprise — you remember how surprised
I was ? — by proposing for Annie. Not that there was any-
thing so very much out of the ivay, in the mere fact of the



262 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

proposal — it would be ridiculous to say that ! — but because,
you having known her poor father and having known her
from a baby six months old, I hadn't thought of you in such
a light at all, or indeed as a marrying man in any way, — sim-
ply that, you know."

" Ay, ay," returned the Doctor, good-humoredly. " Never
mind."

" But I do mind," said the Old Soldier, laying her fan upon
his lips. " I mind very much. I recall these things that I
may be contradicted if I am wrong. Well ! Then I spoke to
Annie, and I told her what had happened. I said, c My dear,
here's Doctor Strong has positively been and made you the
subject of a handsome declaration and an offer.' Did I press
it in the least ? No. I said, ' Now, Annie, tell me the truth
this moment ; is your heart free ? ' ' Mamma/ she said, cry-
ing, ( I am extremely young' — which was perfectly true — ■
' and I hardly know if I have a heart at all.' ' Then, my dear/
* I said, ' you may rely upon it, it's free. At all events, my
love/ said I, ' Doctor Strong is in an agitated state of mind,
and must be answered. He cannot be kept in his present
state of suspense.' c Mamma/ said Annie, still crying,
1 would he be unhappy without me ? If he would, I honor
and respect him so much, that I think I will have him.' So
it was settled. And then, and not till then, I said to Annie,
' Annie, Doctor Strong will not only be your husband, but he
will represent your late father : he will represent the head of
our family, he will represent the wisdom and station, and I
may say the means, of our family; and will be, in short, a
Boon to it.' I used the word at the time, and I have used it
again, to-day. If I have any merit it is consistency."

The daughter had sat quite silent and still during this
speech, with her eyes fixed on the ground; her cousin stand-
ing near her, and looking on the ground too. She now said
very softly, in a trembling voice :

" Mainma, I hope you have finished ? "

"No, my dear Annie/' returned the Soldier, "I have not
quite finished. Since you ask me, my love, I reply that I
have not I complain that you realty are a little unnatural
towards your own family; and, as it is of no use complaining



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 263

to you, I mean to complain to your husband. Now, my dear
Doctor, do look at that silly wife of yours."

As the Doctor turned his kind face, with its smile of sim-
plicity and gentleness, towards her, she drooped her head
more. I noticed that Mr. Wickfield looked at her steadily.

" When I happened to say to that naughty thing, the other
day," pursued' her mother, shaking her head and her fan at
her playfully, "that there was a family circumstance she
might mention to you — indeed, I think, was bound to men-
tion — she said, that to mention it was to ask a favor ; and
that, as you were too generous, and as for her to ask was
always to have, she wouldn't."

"Annie, my dear," said the Doctor. "That was wrong. It
robbed me of a pleasure."

"Almost the very words I said to her!" exclaimed her
mother. " Now really, another time, when I know what she
would tell you but for this reason, and won't, I have a great
mind, my dear Doctor, to tell you myself."

"I shall be glad if you will," returned the Doctor.

"Shall I?"

"Certainly."

"Well, then, I will! " said the Old Soldier. "That's a bar-
gain." And having, I suppose, carried her point, she tapped
the Doctor's hand several times with her fan (which she
kissed first), and returned triumphantly to her former station.

Some more company coming in, among whom were the two
masters and Adams, the talk became general ; and it naturally
turned on Mr. Jack Maldon, and his voyage, and the country
he was going to, and his various plans and prospects. He was
to leave that night, after supper, in a postchaise, for Grave-
send; where the ship, in which he was to make the voyage,
lay; and was .to be gone — unless he came home on leave,
or for his health — I don't know how many years. I recollect
it was settled by general consent that India was quite a mis-
represented country, and had nothing objectionable in it, but
a tiger or two, and a little heat in the warm part of the day.
For my own part, I looked on Mr. Jack Maldon as a modern
Sinbad, and pictured him the bosom friend of all the Kajahs



264 THE PERSONAL HISTOBT AND EXPERIENCE

in the east, sitting under canopies, smoking curly golden pipes
— a mile long, if they could be straightened out.

Mrs. Strong was a very pretty singer : as I knew, who often
heard her singing by herself. But, whether she was afraid of
singing before people, or was out of voice that evening, it was
certain that she couldn't sing at all. She tried a duet, once,
with her cousin Maldon, but could not so much as begin ; and
afterwards, when she tried to sing by herself, although she
began sweetly, her voice died away on a sudden, and left her
quite distressed, with her head hanging down over the keys.
The good Doctor said she was nervous, and, to relieve her,
proposed a round game at cards, of which he knew as much
as of the art of playing the trombone. But I remarked that
the Old Soldier took him into custody directly, for her partner,
and instructed him, as the first preliminary of initiation, to
give her all the silver he had in his pocket.

We had a merry game, not made the less merry by the
Doctor's mistakes, of which he committed * an innumerable
quantity, in spite of the watchfulness of the butterflies, and
to their great aggravation. Mrs. Strong had declined to play,
on the ground of not feeling very well ; and her cousin Maldon
had excused himself because he had some packing to do.
When he had done it, however, he returned, and they sat
together, talking, on the sofa. Prom time to time she came
and looked over the Doctor's hand, and told him what to play.
She was very pale, as she bent over him, and I thought her
finger trembled as she pointed out the cards ; but the Doctor
was quite happy in her attention, and took no notice of this,
if it were so.

At supper, we were hardly so gay. Every one appeared to
feel that a parting of that sort was an awkward thing, and
that the nearer it approached, the more awkward it was. Mr.
Jack Maldon tried to be very talkative, but was not at his
ease, and made matters worse. And they were not improved,
as it appeared to me, by the Old Soldier: who continually
recalled passages of Mr. Jack Maldon's youth.

The Doctor, however, who felt, I am sure, that he was
making everybody happy, ~was well pleased, and had no sus-
picion, but that we were all at the utmost height of enjoyment.





" Annie, my dear/' said he, looking at his .watch, and filling
his glass, " it is past your cousin Jack's time, and we must not
detain him, since time and tide — both concerned in this case
— wait for no man. Mr. Jack Maldon, you have a long voy-
age, and a strange country, before you ; but many men have
had both, and many men will have both, to the end of time.
The winds you are going to tempt, have wafted thousands
upon thousands to fortune, and brought thousands upon thou-
sands happily back."

" It's an affecting thing," said Mrs. Markleham — " however
it's viewed, it's affecting — to see a fine young man one has
known from an infant, going away to the other end of the
world, leaving all he knows behind, and not knowing what
before him. A young man really well deserves constant
support and patronage," looking at the Doctor, " who makes
such sacrifices."

"Time will go fast with you, Mr. Jack Maldon," pursued
the Doctor, "and fast with all of us. Some of us can hardly
expect, perhaps, in the natural course of things, to greet you
on your return. The next best thing is to hope to do it, and
that's my case. I shall not weary you with good advice.
You have long had a good model before you, in your cousin
Annie. Imitate her virtues as nearly as you can."

Mrs. Markleham fanned herself, and shook her head.

"Farewell, Mr. Jack," said the Doctor, standing up; on
which we all stood up. " A prosperous voyage out, a thriving
career abroad, and a happy return home ! "

We all drank the toast, and all shook hands with Mr. Jack
Maldon ; after which he hastily took leave of the ladies who
were there, and hurried to the door, where he was received,
as he got into the chaise, with a tremendous broadside of
cheers discharged by our boys, who had assembled on the
lawn for the purpose. Eunning in among them to swell the
ranks, I was very near the chaise when it rolled away ; and I
had a lively impression made upon me, in the midst of the
noise and dust, of having seen Mr. Jack Maldon rattle past
with an agitated face, and something cherry-colored in his
hand.

After another broadside for the Doctor, and another for the



266 'THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

Doctor's wife, the boys dispersed, and I went back into the
house, where I found the guests all standing in a group about
the Doctor, .discussing how Mr. Jack Maldon had gone away,
and how he had borne it, and how he had felt it, and all the
rest of it. In the midst of these remarks, Mrs. Markleham
cried: "Where's Annie ! "

No Annie was there ; and when they called to her, no Annie
replied. But all pressing out of the room, in a crowd, to see
what was the matter, we found her lying on the hall floor.
There was great alarm at first, until it was found that she was
in a swoon, and that the swoon was yielding to the usual means
of recovery ; when the Doctor, who had lifted her head upon
his knee, put her curls aside with his hand, and said, looking
around :

" Poor Annie ! She's so faithful and tender-hearted ! It's
the parting from her old playfellow and friend - — her favorite
cousin — that has done this. Ah ! It's a pity ! I am very
sorry ! "

When she opened her eyes, and saw where she was, and
that we were all standing about her, she arose with assistance :
turning her head, as she did so, to lay it on the Doctor's
shoulder — or to hide it, I don't know which. We went into
the drawing-room, to leave her with the Doctor and her
mother ; but she said, it seemed, that she was better than she
had been since morning, and that she would rather be brought
among us; so they brought her in, looking very white and
weak, I thought, and sat her on a sofa.

" Annie, my dear," said her mother, doing something to her
dress. " See here ! You have lost a bow. Will anybody
be so good as find a ribbon ; a cherry-colored ribbon ? "

It was the one she had worn at her bosom. We all looked
for it — I myself looked everywhere, I am certain — but
nobody could find it.

" Do you recollect where you had it last, Annie ? " said her
mother.

I wondered how I could have thought she looked white, or
anything but burning red, when she answered that she had
had it safe, a little while ago, she thought, but it was not
worth looking for.





Nevertheless, it was looked for again, and still not found.
She entreated that there might be no more searching ; but it
was still sought for in a desultory way, until she was quite
well, and the company took their departure.

We walked very slowly home, Mr. Wickfield, Agnes, and I
— Agnes and I admiring the moonlight, and Mr. Wickfield
scarcely raising his eyes from the ground. When we, at last,
reached our own door, Agnes discovered that she had left her
little reticule behind. Delighted to be of any service to her,
I ran back to fetch it.

I went into the supper-room where it had been left, which
was deserted and dark. But a door of communication between
that and the Doctor's study, where there was a light, being
open, I passed on there, to say what I wanted, and to get a
candle.

The Doctor was sitting in his easy-chair by the fireside, and
his young wife was on a stool at his feet. The Doctor, with
a complacent smile, was reading aloud some manuscript
explanation or statement of a theory out of that interminable
Dictionary, and she was looking up at him. But with such a
face as I never saw. It was so beautiful in its form, it was so
ashy pale, it was so fixed in its abstraction, it was so full of a
wild, sleep-walking, dreamy horror of I don't know what.
The eyes were wide open, and her brown hair fell in two rich
clusters on her shoulders, and on her white dress, disordered
by the want of the lost ribbon. Distinctly as I recollect her
look, I cannot say of what it was expressive. I cannot even
say of what it is expressive to me now, rising again before my
older judgment. Penitence, humiliation, shame, pride, love,
and trustfulness — I see them all ; and in them all, I see that
horror of I don't know what.

My entrance, and my saying what I wanted, roused her.
It disturbed the Doctor too, for when I went back to replace
the candle I had taken from the table, he was patting her
head, in his fatherly way, and saying he was a merciless drone
to let her tempt him into reading on ; and he would have her
go to bed.

But she asked him, in a rapid, urgent manner, to let her
stay — to let her feel assured (I heard her murmur some broken



268 THE PEE SON AL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

words to this effeet) that she was in his confidence that night.
And, as she turned again towards him, after glancing at me
as I left the room and went out at the door, I saw her cross
her hands upon his knee, and look up at him with the same
face, something quieted, as he resumed his reading.

It made a great impression on me, and I remembered it a
long time afterwards, as I shall have occasion to narrate when
the time comes.



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 269



CHAPTER XVII-

SOMEBODY TURNS UP.

It has not occurred to me to mention Peggotty since I ran
away ; but, of course, I wrote her a letter almost as soon as I
was housed at Dover, and another and a longer letter, contain-
ing all particulars fully related, when my aunt took me for-
mally under her protection. On my being settled at Doctor
Strong's I wrote to her again, detailing my happy condition
and prospects. I never could have derived anything like the
pleasure from spending the money Mr. Dick had given me,
that I felt in sending a gold half-guinea to Peggotty, per post,
inclosed in this last letter, to discharge the sum I had borrowed
of her: in which epistle, not before, I mentioned about the
young man with the donkey-cart.

To these communications Peggotty replied as promptly, if
not as concisely, as a merchant's clerk. Her utmost powers
of expression (which were certainly not great in ink) were
exhausted in the attempt to write what she felt on the subject
of my journey. Pour sides of incoherent and inter jectional
beginnings of sentences, that had no end, except blots, were
inadequate to afford her any relief. But the blots were more
expressive to me than the best composition ; for they showed
me that Peggotty had been crying all over the paper, and what
could I have desired more ?

I made out, without much difficulty, that she could not take
quite kindly to my aunt yet. The notice was too short after so
long a prepossession the other way. We never knew a person,
she wrote ; but to think that Miss Betsey should seem to be so
different from what she had been thought to be, was a Moral !
— that was her word. She was evidently still afraid of Miss
Betsey, for she sent her grateful duty to her but timidly ; and
she was evidently afraid of me, too, and entertained the proba-
bility of my running away again soon ; if I might judge from






270 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

the repeated hints she threw out, that the coach-fare to Yar-
mouth was always to be had of her for the asking.

She gave me one piece of intelligence which affected me
very much, namely, that there had been a sale of the furniture
at our old home, and that Mr. and Miss Murdstone were gone
away, and the house was shut up, to be let or sold. God
knows I had had no part in it awhile they remained there, but
it pained me to think of the dear old place as altogether aban-
doned ; of the weeds growing tall in the garden, and the fallen
leaves lying thick and wet upon the paths. I imagined how
the winds of winter would howl round it, how the cold rain
would beat upon the window-glass, how the moon would make
ghosts on the walls of the empty rooms, watching their soli-
tude all night. I thought afresh of the grave in the church-
yard, underneath the tree : and it seemed as if the house were
dead too, now, and all connected with my father and mother
were faded away.

There was no other news in Peggotty's letters. Mr. Barkis
was an excellent husband, she said, though still a little near ;
but we all had our faults, and she had plenty (though I am
sure I don't know what they were) ; and he sent his duty, and
my little bedroom was always ready for me. Mr. Peggotty
was well, and Ham was well, and Mrs. Gummidge was but
poorly, and little Em'ly wouldn't send her love, but said that
Peggotty might send it, if she liked.

All this intelligence I dutifully imparted to my aunt, only
reserving to myself the mention of little Em'ly, to whom I
instinctively felt that she would not very tenderly incline.
While I was yet new at Doctor Strong's, she made several
excursions over to Canterbury to see me, and always at unsea-
sonable hours : with the view, I suppose, of taking me by
surprise. But, finding me well employed, and bearing a good
character, and hearing on all hands that I rose fast in the
school, she soon discontinued these visits. I saw her on a
Saturday, every third or fourth week, when I went over to
Dover for a treat ; and I saw Mr. Dick every alternate Wed-
nesday, when he arrived by stage-coach at noon, to stay until
next morning.

On these occasions Mr. Dick never travelled without a



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 271

leathern writing-desk, containing a supply of stationary &nd
the Memorial ; in relation to which document he had a notion
that time was beginning to press now, and that it really must
be got out of hand.

Mr. Dick was very partial to ginger-bread. To render his
visits the more agreeable, my aunt had instructed me to open
a credit for him at a cake-shop, which was hampered with the
stipulation that he should not be served with more than one
shilling's-worth in the course of any one day. This, and the
reference of all his little bills at the county inn where he slept,
to my aunt, before they were paid, induced me to suspect that
he was only allowed to rattle his money, and not to spend it.
I found on further investigation that this was so, or at least
there was an agreement between him and my aunt that he
should account to her for all his disbursements. As he had
no idea of deceiving her,- and always desired to please her, he
was thus made chary of launching into expense. On this
point, as well as on all other possible points, Mr. Dick was
convinced that my aunt was the wisest and most wonderful of
women ; as he repeatedly told me with infinite secrecy, and
always in a whisper.

"Trotwood," said Mr. Dick, with an air of mystery, after
imparting this confidence to me, one Wednesday ; " who's the
man that hides near our house and frightens her ? "

" Frightens my aunt, sir ? "

Mr. Dick nodded. " I thought nothing would have fright-
ened her," he said, "for she's — "here he whispered softly,
"don't mention it — the wisest and most wonderful of women."
Having said which, he drew back, to observe the effect which
this description of her made upon me.

"The first time he came," said Mr. Dick> "was — let me
see — sixteen hundred and forty-nine was the date of King
Charles's execution. I think you said sixteen hundred and
forty-nine ? "

"Yes, sir."

"I don't know how it can be," said Mr. Dick, sorely
puzzled and shaking his head. "I don't think I am as old
as that."

" Was it in that year that the man appeared, sir ? " I asked.



272 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" Why, really," said Mr. Dick, " I don't see how it can have
been in that year, Trotwood. Did you get that date out of
history ? "

"Yes, sir."

" I suppose history never lies, does it ? " said Mr. Dick, with
a gleam of hope.

" Oh dear, no, sir ! " I replied, most decisively. I was
ingenuous and young, and I thought so.

"I can't make it out," said Mr. Dick, shaking his head.
" There's something wrong, somewhere. However, it was
very soon after the mistake was made of putting some of the
trouble out of King Charles's head into my head, that the
man first came. I was walking out with Miss Trotwood after
tea, just at dark, and there he was, close to our house."

"Walking about ? " I inquired.

" Walking about ? " repeated Mr. Dick. " Let me see. I
must recollect a bit. jST — no, no ; he was not walking about."

I asked, as the shortest way to get at it, what he was
doing.

"Well, he wasn't there at all," said Mr. Dick, "until he
came up behind her, and whispered. Then she turned round
and fainted, and I stood still and looked at him, and he
walked away ; but that he should have been hiding ever since
(in the ground or somewhere), is the most extraordinary
thing ! "

" Has he been hiding ever since ? " I asked.

" To be sure he has," retorted Mr. Dick, nodding his head
gravely. " Never came out, till last night ! We were Avalk-
ing last night and he came up behind her again, and I knew
him again."

" And did he frighten my aunt again ? "

" All of a shiver," said Mr. Dick, counterfeiting that affec-
tion and making his teeth chatter. "Held by the palings.
Cried. But Trotwood, come here," getting me close to him,
that he might whisper very softly ; " why did she give him
money, boy, in the moonlight ? "

" He was a beggar, perhaps."

Mr. Dick shook his head, as utterly renouncing the sugges-
tion ; and having replied a great many times, and with great



OF DAVID COPPEEFIELD. 273

confidence, " No beggar, no beggar, no beggar, sir ! " went on
to say, that from his window he had afterwards, and late at
night, seen nay aunt give this person money outside the garden
rails in the moonlight, who then slunk away — into the
ground again,- as he thought probable — and was seen no more :
while my aunt came hurriedly and secretly back into the house,
and had, even that morning, been quite different from her
usual self ; which preyed on Mr. Dick's mind.

I had not the least belief, in the outset of this story, that
the unknown was anything but a delusion of Mr. Dick's, and
one of the line of that ill-fated Prince who occasioned him so
much difficulty ; but after some reflection I began to entertain
the question whether an attempt, or threat of an attempt,
might have been twice made to take poor Mr. Dick himself
from under my aunt's protection, and whether my aunt, the
strength of whose kind feeling towards him I knew from
herself, might have been induced to pay a price for his peace
and quiet. As I was already much attached to Mr. Dick, and
very solicitous for his welfare, my fears favored this supposi-
tion; and for a long time his Wednesday hardly ever came
round, without my entertaining a misgiving that he would not
be on the coach-box as usual. There he always appeared,
however, gray-headed, laughing, and happy ; and he never had
anything more to tell of the man who could frighten my
aunt.

These Wednesdays were the happiest days of Mr. Dick's
life ; they were far from being the least happy of mine. He
soon became known to every boy in the school ; and though
he never took an active part in any game but kite-flying, was
as deeply interested in all our sports as any one among /us.
How often have I seen him, intent upon a match at marbles
or pegtop, looking on with a face of unutterable interest, and
hardly breathing at the critical times ! How often, at hare
and hounds, have I seen him mounted on a little knoll, cheer-
ing the whole field on to action, and waving his hat above his
gray head, oblivious of King Charles the Martyr's head, and
all belonging to it ! How many summer-hours have I known
to be but blissful minutes to him in the cricket-field ! How
many winter days have I seen him, standing blue-nosed, in the
vol. i — 18



274 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE*

snow and east wind, looking at the boys going down the long
slide, and clapping his worsted gloves in rapture !

He was an universal favorite, and his ingenuity in little
things was transcendant. He could cut oranges in such
devices as none of us had an idea of. He could' make a boat
out of anything, from a skewer upwards. He could turn
crampbones into chessmen ; fashion Koman chariots from old
court cards ; make spoked wheels out of cotton reels, and
birdcages of old wire. But he was greatest of all, perhaps,
in the articles of string and straw ; with which we were all
persuaded he could do anything that could be done by hands.

Mr. Dick's renown was not long confined to us. After a
few Wednesdays, Dr. Strong himself made some inquiries
of me about him, and I told him all my aunt had told me ;
which interested the Doctor so much that he requested, on the
occasion of his next visit, to be presented to him. This cere-
mony I performed ; and the Doctor begging Mr. Dick, when-
soever he should not find me at the coach-office, to come on
there, and rest himself until our morning's work was over, it
soon passed into a custom for Mr. Dick to come on as a matter
of course, and, if we were a little late, as often happened on
a Wednesday, to walk about the court-yard, waiting for me.
Here he made the acquaintance of the Doctor's beautiful
young wife (paler than formerly, all this time ; more rarely
seen by me or any one, I think ; and not so gay, but not .less
beautiful), and so became more and more familiar by degrees,
until, at last, he would come into the school and wait. He
always sat in a particular corner, on a particular stool, which
was called " Dick/' after him ; here he would sit, with his gray
head bent forward, attentively listening to whatever might
be going on, with a profound veneration for the learning lie
had never been able to acquire.

This veneration Mr. Dick extended to the Doctor, whom he
thought the most subtle and accomplished philosopher of any
age. It was long before Mr. Dick ever spoke to him otherwise
than bare-headed; and even when he and the Doctor had
struck up quite a friendship, and would walk together by the
hour, on that side of the courtyard which was known among
us as The Doctor's Walk, Mr. Dick would pull off his hat at





intervals to show his respect for wisdom and knowledge. How
it ever came about, that the Doctor began to read out scraps
of the famous Dictionary, in these walks, I never knew ; per-
haps he felt it all the same, at first, as reading to himself.
However, it passed into a custom too ; and Mr. Dick, listening
with a face shining with pride and pleasure, in his heart of
hearts, believed the Dictionary to be the most delightful book
in the world.

As I think of them going up and down before those school-
room windows — the Doctor reading with his complacent smile,
an occasional flourish of the manuscript, or grave motion of
his head ; and Mr. Dick listening, enchained by interest, with
his poor wits calmly wandering God knows where, upon the
wings of hard words — I think of it as one of the pleasantest
thing, in a quiet way, that I have ever seen. I feel as if they
might go walking to and fro for ever, and the world might
somehow be the better for it — as if a thousand things it makes
a noise about, were not one-half so good for it, or me.

Agnes was one of Mr. Dick's friends, very soon ; and in
often coming to the house, he made acquaintance with Uriah.
The friendship between himself and me increased continually,
and it was maintained on this odd footing: that, while Mr.
Dick came professedly to look after me as my guardian, he
always consulted me in any little matter of doubt that arose,
and invariably guided himself by my advice ; not only having
a high respect for my native sagacity, but considering that I
inherited a good deal from my aunt.

One Thursday morning, when I was about to walk with Mr.
"Dick from the hotel to the coach-offi.ce before going back to
school (for we had an hour's school before breakfast), I met
Uriah in the street, who reminded me of the promise I had
made to take tea with himself and his mother : adding, with
a writhe, " But I didn't expect you to keep it, Master Copper-
field, we're so very umble."

I really had not yet been able to make up my mind whether
I liked Uriah or detested him ; and I was very doubtful about
it still, as I stood looking him in the face in the street. But
I felt it quite an affront to be supposed proud, and said I only
wanted to be asked.



276 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" Oh, if that's all, Master Copperfield," said Uriah, " and it
really isn't our nmbleness that prevents you, will you come
this evening ? But if it is our umbleness, I hope you won't
mind owning to it, Master Copperfield ; for we are well aware
of our condition."

I said I would mention it to Mr. Wickfield, and if he ap-
proved, as I had no doubt he would, I would come with pleas-
ure. So, at six o'clock that evening, which was one of the
early office evenings, I announced myself as ready, to Uriah.

"Mother will be proud indeed," he said, as we walked
away together. " Or she would be proud, if it wasn't sinful,
Master Copperfield."

" Yet you didn't mind supposing I was proud this morning,"
I returned.

" Oh dear no, Master Copperfield !" returned Uriah. "Oh,
believe me, no ! Such a thought never came into my head ! 1
shouldn't have deemed it at all proud if you had thought us
too umble for you. Because we are so very umble."

" Have you been studying much law lately ? " I asked, to
change the subject.

" Oh, Master Copperfield," he said, with an air of self-denial,
" my reading is hardly to be called study. I have passed an
hour or two in the evening, sometimes, with Mr. Tidd."

" Bather hard, I suppose ? " said I.

"He is hard to me sometimes," returned Uriah. "But I
don't know what he might be, to a gifted person."

After beating a little tune on his chin as we walked on, with
the two forefingers of his skeleton right hand, he added :

" There are expressions, you see, Master Copperfield — Latin
words and terms — in Mr. Tidd, that are trying to a reader of
my umble attainments."

" Would you like to be taught Latin ? " I said, briskly.
" I will teach it you with pleasure, as I learn it."

" Oh, thank you, Master Copperfield," he answered, shaking
his head. " I am sure it's very kind of you to make the offer,
but I am much too umble to accept it."

"What nonsense, Uriah ! "

"Oh, indeed you must excuse me, Master Copperfield! I
am greatly obliged, and I should like it of all things, I assure






OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 277

you; but I am far too umble. There are people enough to
tread upon me in my lowly "state, without my doing outrage
to their feelings by possessing learning. Learning ain't for
me. A person like myself had better not aspire. If he is to
get on in life, he must get on umbly, Master Copperfield."

I never saw his mouth so wide, or the creases in his cheeks
so deep, as when he delivered himself of these sentiments :
shaking his head all the time, and writhing modestly.

" I think you are wrong, Uriah," I said* " I dare say there
are several things that I could teach you, if you would like to
learn them."

" Oh, I don't doubt that, Master Copperfield," he answered ;
" not in the least. But not being umble yourself, you don't
judge well, perhaps, for. them that are. I won't provoke my
betters with knowledge, thank you. I'm much too umble.
Here is my umble dwelling, Master Copperfield ! "

We entered a low, old-fashioned room, walked straight into
from the street, and found there, Mrs. Heep, who was the dead
image of Uriah, only short. She received me with the utmost
humility, and apologized to me for giving her son a kiss, ob-
serving that, lowly as they were, they had their natural affec-
tions, which they hoped would give no offence to any one. It
was a perfectly decent room, half parlor and half kitchen, but
not at all a snug room. The tea-things were set upon the
table, and the kettle was boiling on the hob. There was a
chest of drawers with an escritoire top, for Uriah to read or
write at of an evening ; there was Uriah's blue bag lying down
and vomiting papers ; there was a company of Uriah's books
commanded by Mr. Tidd ; there was a corner cupboard; and
there were the usual articles of furniture. I don't remember
that any individual object had a bare, pinched, spare look;
but I do remember that the whole place had.

It was perhaps a part of Mrs. Heep's humility, that she still
wore weeds. Notwithstanding the lapse of time that had
occurred since Mr. Heep's decease, she still wore weeds. I
think there was some compromise in the cap ; but otherwise
she was as weedy as in' the early days of her mourning.

"This is a day to be remembered, my Uriah, I am sure,"



278 THE PERSONAL BISTORT AND EXPERIENCE

said Mrs. Heep, making the tea, "when Master Copperfield
pays us a visit."

"I said you'd think so, mother," said Uriah.

"If I could have wished father to remain among us for any
reason," said Mrs. Heep, " it would have been, that he might
have known his company this afternoon."

I felt embarrassed by these compliments ; but I was sen-
sible, too, of being entertained as an honored guest, and I
thought Mrs. Heep an agreeable woman.

"My Uriah," said Mrs. Heep, "has looked forward to this,
sir, a long while. He had his fears that our umbleness stood
in the way, and I joined in them myself. Umble we are,
umble we have been, umble we shall ever be," said Mrs. Heep.

" I am sure you have no occasion to be so, ma'am," I said,
" unless you like."

"Thank you, sir," retorted Mrs. Heep. "We know oui
station and are thankful in it."

y I found that Mrs. Heep gradually got nearer to me, and
that Uriah gradually got opposite to me, and that they respect-
fully plied me with the choicest of the eatables on the table.
There was nothing particularly choice there, to be sure ; but
I took the will for the deed, and felt that they were very
attentive. Presently they began to talk about aunts, and then
I told them about mine ; and about fathers and mothers, and
then I told them about mine ; and then Mrs. Heep began to
talk about fathers-in-law, and then I began to tell her about
mine — but stopped, because my aunt had advised me to
observe a silence on that subject. A tender young cork, how-
ever, would have had no more chance against a pair of cork-
screws, or a tender young tooth against a pair of dentists, or a
little shuttlecock against two battledores, than I had against
Uriah and Mrs. Heep. They did just what they liked with
me ; and wormed things out of me that I had no desire to tell,
with a certainty I blush to think of : the more especially as,
in my juvenile frankness, I took some credit to myself for
being so confidential, and felt that I was quite the patron of
my two respectful entertainers.

* They were very fond of one another: that was certain. I
take it that had its effect upon me, as a touch of nature ; but



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 279

the skill with which the one followed up whatever the other
said, was a touch of art which I was still less proof against.
When there was nothing more to be got out of me about
myself (for on the Murdstone and Grinby life, and on my
journey, I was dumb), they began about Mr. Wickfield and
Agnes. Uriah threw the ball to Mrs. Heep, Mrs Heep caught
it and threw it back to Uriah, Uriah kept it up a little while,
then sent it back to Mrs. Heep, and so they went on tossing
it about until I had no idea who had got it, and was quite
bewildered. The ball itself was always changing too. Now
it was Mr. Wickfield, now Agnes, now the excellence of Mr.
Wickfield, now my admiration of Agnes ; now the extent of
Mr. Wickfield's business and resources, now our domestic life
after dinner ; row the wine that Mr. Wickfield took, the reason
why he took if, and the pity that it was he took so much 5 now
one thing, now another, then everything at once ; and all the
time, without appearing to speak very often, or to do anything
but sometimes encourage them a little, for fear they should
be overcome by their humility and the honor of my company,
I found myself perpetually letting out something or other
that I had no business to let out, and seeing the effect of it in
the twinkling of Uriah's dinted nostrils.

I had begun to be a little uncomfortable, and to wish myself
well out of the visit, when a figure coming down the street
passed the door — it stood open to air v the room, which was
warm, the weather being close for the time of year — came
back again, looked in, and walked in, exclaiming loudly, " Cop-
perfield ! Is it possible ! "

It was Mr. Micawber! It was Mr. Micawber, with his
eye-glass, and his walking stick, and his shirt-collar, and his gen-
teel air, and the condescending roll in his voice, all complete !

" My dear Copperfield," said Mr. Micawber, putting out his
hand, "this is indeed a meeting which is calculated to impress
the mind with a sense of the instability and uncertainty of
all human — in short, it is a most extraordinary meeting.
Walking along the street, reflecting upon the probability of
something turning up (of which I am at present rather san-
guine), I find a young but valued friend turn up, who is con-
nected with the most eventful period of my life ; I may say,



280 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

with the turning point of my existence. Copperfield, my dear
fellow, how do you do ? "

I cannot say — I really cannot say — that I was glad to see
Mr. Micawber there ; but I was glad to see him too, and shook
hands with him heartily, inquiring how Mrs. Micawber was.

" Thank you/' said Mr. Micawber, waving his hand as of
old, and settling his chin in his shirt-collar. " She is tolerably
convalescent. The twins no longer derive their sustenance
from Nature's founts — in short/' said Mr. Micawber, in one
of his bursts of confidence, "they are weaned — and Mrs.
Micawber is, at present, my travelling companion. She will
be rejoiced, Copper field, to renew her acquaintance with one
who has proved himself in all respects a worthy minister at
the sacred altar of friendship."

I said I should be delighted to see her.

" You are very good/' said Mr. Micawber.

Mr. Micawber then smiled, settled his chin again, and looked
about him.

" I have discovered my friend Copperfield," said Mr. Micaw-
ber, genteelly, and without addressing himself particularly to
any one, "not in solitude, but partaking of a social meal in
company with a widow lady, and one who is apparently her
offspring — 'in short," said Mr. Micawber, in another of his
bursts of confidence, * her son. I shall esteem it an honor to
be presented." *

I could do no less, under these circumstances, than make
Mr. Micawber known to Uriah Heep and his mother ; which
I accordingly did. As they abased themselves before him,
Mr. Micawber took a seat, and waved his hand in his most
courtly manner.

" Any friend of my friend Copperfield's," said Mr. Micawber,
" has a personal claim upon myself."

"We are too umble, sir," said Mrs. Heep, "my son and me,
to be the friends of Master Copperfield. He has been so good
as to take his tea with us, and we are thankful to him for his
company ; also to you, sir, for your notice."

"Ma'am," returned Mr. Micawber, with a bow, "you are
very obliging : and what are you doing, Copperfield ? Still in
the wine trade ? "



OF DAVID GOPPEBFIELD. 281

I was excessively anxious to get Mr. Micawber away ; and
replied, with my hat in my hand, and a very red face, I have
no doubt, that I^was a pupil at Doctor Strong's.

u A pupil ? " said Mr. Micawber, raising his eyebrows. " I
am extremely happy to hear it. Although a mind like my
friend Copperfield' s " — to Uriah and* Mrs. Heep — "does not
require that cultivation which, without his knowledge of men
and things, it would require, still it is a rich soil teeming with
latent vegetation — in short," said Mr. Micawber, smiling, in
another burst of confidence, " it is an intellect capable of get-
ting up the classics to any extent."

Uriah, with his long hands slowly twining over one another,
made a ghastly writhe from the waist upwards, to express his
concurrence in this estimation of me.

" Shall we go and see Mrs. Micawber, sir ? " I said, to get
Mr. Micawber away.

"If you will do her that favor, Copperfield," replied Mr.
Micawber, rising. " I have no scruple in saying, in the pres-
ence of our friends here, that I am a man who has, for some
years, contended against the pressure of pecuniary difficulties."
I knew he was certain to say something of this kind ; he
always would be so boastful about his difficulties. " Sometimes
I have risen superior to my difficulties. Sometimes my diffi-
culties have — in short, have floored me. There have been
times when I have administered a succession of facers to
them ; there have been times when they have been too many
for me, and I have given in, and said to Mrs. Micawber, in the
words of Cato, c Plato, thou reasonest well/ It's all up now.
I can show fight no more. But at no time of my life," said
Mr. Micawber, "have I enjoyed a higher degree of satisfac-
tion than in pouring my griefs (if I may describe difficulties,
chiefly arising out of warrants of attorney and promissory
notes at two and four months, by that word) into the bosom
of my friend Copperfield."

Mr. Micawber closed this handsome tribute by saying, " Mr.
Heep ! Good evening. Mrs. Heep ! Your servant," and then
walking out with me in his most fashionable manner, making
a good deal of noise on the pavement with his shoes, and hum-
ming a tune as we went.



282 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

It was a little inn where Mr. Micawber put up, and he occu-
pied a little room in it, partitioned off from the commercial
room, and strongly flavored with tobacco smoke. I think it
was over the kitchen, because a warm greasy smell appeared
to come up through the chinks in the floor, and there was a
flabby perspiration on the walls. I know it was near the bar,
on account of the smell of spirits and jingling of glasses.
Here, recumbent on a small sofa, underneath a picture of a
race-horse, with her head close to the fire, and her feet push-
ing the mustard off the dumb-waiter at the other end of the
room, was Mrs. Micawber, to whom Mr. Micawber entered
first, saying, " My dear, allow me to introduce to you a pupil
of Doctor Strong's."

I noticed, by the by, that although Mr. Micawber was just
as much confused as ever about my age and standing, he always
remembered, as a genteel thing, that I was a pupil of Doctor
Strong's.

Mrs. Micawber was amazed, but very glad to see me. I was
very glad to see her too, and after an affectionate greeting on
both sides, sat down on the small sofa near her.

"My dear," said Mr. Micawber, "if you will mention to
Copperfield what our present position is, which I have no
doubt he will like to know, I will go and look at the paper the
while, and see whether anything turns up among the adver-
tisements." *

"I thought you were at Plymouth, ma'am," I said to Mrs.
Micawber, as he went out.

"My dear Master Copperfield," she replied, "we went to
Plymouth." .

" To be on the spot," I hinted.

"Just so," said Mrs. Micawber. "To be on the spot. But,
the truth is, talent is not wanted in the Custom House. The
local influence of my family was quite unavailing to obtain
any employment in that department, for a man of Mr. Micaw-
ber's abilities. They would rather not have a man of Mr.
Micawber's abilities. He would only show the deficiency of
the; others. Apart from which," said Mrs. Micawber, " I will
not disguise from you, my dear Master Copperfield, that when
that branch of my family which is settled in Plymouth became





aware that Mr. Micawber was accompanied by myself, and by
little Wilkins and his sister, and by the twins, they did not
receive him with that ardor which he might have expected,
being so newly released from captivity. In fact," said Mrs.
Micawber, lowering her voice, — "this is between ourselves —
our reception was cool."

" Dear me ! " I said.

" Yes," said Mrs. Micawber. " It is truly painful to contem-
plate mankind in such an aspect, Master Copperfield, but our
reception was, decidedly, cool. There is no doubt about it.
In fact, that branch of my family which is settled in Plymouth
became quite personal to Mr. Micawber, before we had been
there a week."

I said, and thought, that they ought to be ashamed of them-
selves.

" Still, so it was," continued Mrs. Micawber. " Under such
circumstances, what could a man of Mr. Micawber's spirit do ?
But one obvious course was left. To borrow of that branch of
my family the money to return to London, and to return at
any sacrifice."

"Then youaill came back again, ma'am ? " I said.

" We all came back again," replied Mrs. Micawber. " Since
then, I have consulted other branches of my family on the
course which it is most expedient for Mr. Micawber to take —
for I maintain that he must take some course, Master Copper-
field," said Mrs. Micawber, argumentatively. "It is clear
that a family of six, not including a domestic, cannot live
upon air."

" Certainly, ma'am," said I.

" The opinion of those other branches of my family," pur-
sued Mrs. Micawber, " is, that Mr. Micawber should immedi-
ately turn his attention to coals."

" To what, ma'am ? "

"To coals," said Mrs. Micawber. "To the coal trade. Mr.
Micawber was induced to think, on inquiry, that there might
be an opening for a man of his talent in the Medway Coal
Trade. Then, as Mr. Micawber very properly said, the first
step to be taken clearly was, to come and see the Medway.
Which we came and saw. I say 'we,' Master Copperfield}



284 THE PEE SON AL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

for I never will/? said Mrs. Micawber with emotion, " I never
will desert Mr. Micawber."

I murmured my admiration and approbation.

" We came," repeated Mrs. Micawber, "and saw the Medway.
My opinion of the coal trade on that river, is, that it may re-
quire talent, but that it certainly requires capital. Talent,
Mr. Micawber has ; capital, Mr. Micawber has not. We saw,
I think, the greater part of the Medway ; and that is my
individual conclusion. Being so near here, Mr. Micawber was
of opinion that it would be rash not to come on, and see the
Cathedral. Firstly, on account of its being so well worth
seeing, and our never having seen it ; and secondly, on account
of the great probability of something turning up in a cathedral
town. We have been here," said Mrs. Micawber, " three days.
Nothing has, as yet, turned up ; and it may not surprise you,
my dear Master Copperfield, so much as it would a* stranger,
to know that we are at present waiting for a remittance from
London, to discharge our pecuniary obligations at this hotel.
Until the arrival of that remittance," said Mrs. Micawber,
with much feeling, "I am cut off from my home (I allude to
lodgings in Pentonville), from my boy and girl, and from my
twins."

I felt the utmost sympathy for Mr. and Mrs. Micawber in
this anxious extremity, and said as much to Mr. Micawber,
who now returned : adding that I only wished I had money
enough, to lend them the amount they needed. Mr. Micaw-
ber's answer expressed the disturbance of his mind. He said,
shaking hands with me, " Copperfield, you are a true friend ;
but when the worst comes to the worst, no man is without a
friend who is possessed of shaving materials." At this dread-
ful hint Mrs. Micawber threw her arms round Mr. Micawber's
neck, and entreated him to be calm. He wept ; but so far
recovered, almost immediately, as to ring the bell for the
waiter, and bespeak a hot kidney pudding and a plate of
shrimps for breakfast in the morning.

When I took my leave of them, they both pressed me so
much to come and dine before they went away, that I could
not refuse. But, as I knew I could not come next day, when
I should have a good deal to prepare in the evening, Mr.



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 285

Micawber arranged that he would call at Doctor Strong's in
the course of the morning (having a presentiment that the
remittance would arrive by that post), and propose the day
after, if it would suit me better. Accordingly I was called
out of school next forenoon, and found Mr. Micawber in the
parlor; who had called to say that the dinner would take
place as proposed. When I asked him if the remittance had
come, he pressed my hand and departed.

As I was looking out of window that same evening, it
surprised me, and made me rather uneasy, to see Mr. Micaw-
ber and Uriah Heep walk past, arm in arm : Uriah humbly
sensible of the honor that was done him, and Mr. Micawber
taking a bland delight in extending his patronage to Uriah.
But I was still more surprised, when I went to the little hotel
next day at the appointed dinner hour, which was four o'clock,
to find, from what Mr. Micawber said, that he had gone home
with Uriah, and had drunk brandy-and-water at Mrs. Heep's.

u And I'll tell you what, my dear Copperfield," said Mr.
Micawber, " your friend Heep is a young fellow who might be
attorney-general. If I had known that young man, at the
period when my difficulties came to a crisis, all I can say is^
that I believe my creditors would have been a great deal better
managed than they were. 5 '

I hardly understood how this could have been, seeing that
Mr. Micawber had paid them nothing at all as it was ; but I
did not like to ask* Neither did I like to say, that I hoped
he had not been too communicative to Uriah; or to inquire if
they had talked much about me. I was afraid of hurting Mr.
Micawber's feelings, or, at all events, Mrs. Micawber's, she
being very sensitive ; but I was uncomfortable about it, too,
and often thought about it afterwards.

We had a beautiful little dinner. Quite an elegant dish of
fish ; the kidney-end of a loin of veal, roasted ; fried sausage-
meat ; a partridge, and a pudding. There was wine, and there
was strong ale ; and after dinner Mrs. Micawber made us a
bowl of hot punch with her own hands.

Mr. Micawber was uncommonly convivial. I never saw him
such good company. He made his face shine with the punch,
so that it looked as if it had been varnished all over. He



286 THE PEE SON AL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

got cheerfully sentimental about the town, and proposed suc-
cess to it ; observing that Mrs. Micawber and himself had
been made extremely snug and comfortable there, and that
he never should forget the agreeable hours they had passed
in Canterbury. He proposed me afterwards ; and he, and Mrs.
Micawber, and I, took a review of our past acquaintance, in
the course of which, we sold the property all over again.
Then I proposed Mrs. Micawber; or, at least, said, modestly,
"If you'll allow me, Mrs. MicaAvber, I shall now have the
pleasure of drinking your health, ma'am." On which Mr.
Micawber delivered an eulogium on Mrs. Micawber's character,
and said she had ever been his guide, philosopher, and friend,
and that he would recommend me, when I came to a marrying
time of life, to marry such another woman, if such another
woman could be found.

As the punch disappeared, Mr. Micawber became still more
friendly and convivial. Mrs. Micawber's spirits becoming
elevated, too, we sang " Auld Lang Syne." When we came
to "Here's a hand, my^ trusty frere," we all joined hands
round the table; and when we declared we would "take a
right gude Willie Waught/' and hadn't the least idea what it
meant, we were really affected.

In a word, I never saw anybody so thoroughly jovial as
Mr. Micawber was, down to the very last moment of the
evening, when I took a hearty farewell of himself and his
amiable wife. Consequently, I was not. prepared, at seven
o'clock next morning, to receive the following communica-
tion, dated half -past nine in the evening; a quarter of an hour
after I had left him : —

" My dear Young Friend,

" The die is cast — all is over. Hiding the ravages of
care with a sickly mask of mirth, I have not informed you,
this evening, that there is no hope of the remittance ! Under
these circumstances, alike humiliating to endure, humiliating
to contemplate, and humiliating to relate, I have discharged
the pecuniary liability contracted at .this establishment, by
giving a note of hand, made payable fourteen days after date,
at my residence, Pentonville, London. When it becomes due,





it will not be taken up. The result is destruction. The bolt
is impending, and the tree must fall.

"Let the wretched man who now addresses you, my dear
Copperfield, be a beacon to you through life. He writes with
that intention, and in that hope. If he could think himself
of so much use, one gleam of day might, by possibility, pene-
trate into the cheerless dungeon of his remaining existence —
though his longevity is, at present (to say the least of it),
extremely problematical.

" This is the last communication, my dear Copperfield, you
will ever receive.

"From

"The

"Beggared Outcast,

"WlLKISTS MlCAWBER."

I was so shocked by the contents of this heart-rending letter,
that I ran off directly towards the little hotel with the inten-
tion of taking it on my way to Dr. Strong's, and trying to
soothe Mr. Micawber with a word of comfort. But, half-way
there, I met the London coach with Mr. and Mrs. Micawber
up behind ; Mr. Micawber, the very picture of tranquil enjoy-
ment, smiling at Mrs. Mieawber's conversation, eating walnuts
out of a paper bag, with a bottle sticking out of his breast
pocket. As they did not see me, I thought it best, all things
considered, not to see them. So, with a great weight taken
off my mind, I turned into a by-street that was the nearest
way to school, and felt, upon the whole, relieved that they
were gone : though I still liked them very much, nevertheless.



288 THE PERSONAL HISTOBY AND EXPERIENCE



CHAPTEE XVIII.

A RETROSPECT.

My school-days ! The silent gliding on of my existence —
the unseen, unf elt progress of my life — from childhood up to
youth ! Let me think, as I look back upon that flowing water,
now a dry channel overgrown with leaves, whether there are
any marks along its course, by which I can remember how it
ran.

A moment, and I occupy my place in the Cathedral, where
we all went together, every Sunday morning, assembling first
at school for that purpose. The earthy smell, the sunless air,
the sensation of the world being shut out, the resounding of
the organ through the black and white arched galleries and
aisles, are wings that take me back, and hold me hovering
above those days, in a half-sleeping and half-waking dream.

I am not the last boy in the school. I have risen, in a few
months, over several heads. But the first boy seems to me a
mighty creature, dwelling afar off, whose giddy height is un-
attainable. Agnes says " No," but I say " Yes," and tell her
that she little thinks what stores of knowledge have been
mastered by the wonderful Being, at whose place she thinks
I, even I, weak aspirant, may arrive in time. He is not my
private friend and public patron, as Steerforth was, but I hold
him in a reverential respect. I chiefly wonder what he'll be,
when he leaves Doctor Strong's, and what mankind will do to
maintain any place against him.

But who is this that breaks upon me ? This is Miss Shepherd,
whom I love.

Miss Shepherd is a boarder at the ]\fisses Nettingalls' estab-
lishment. I adore Miss Shepherd. She is a little girl, in a
spencer, with a round face and curly flaxen hair. The Misses
Nettingalls 7 young ladies come to the Cathedral too. I cannot
look upon my book, for I must look upon Miss Shepherd.



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 289

"When the choristers chant, I hear Miss Shepherd. In the
service I mentally insert Miss Shepherd's name — I put her in
among the Koyal Family. At home, in my own room, I am
sometimes moved to cry out, "Oh, Miss Shepherd!" in a
transport of love.

For some time, I am doubtful of Miss Shepherd's feelings,
but, at length, Fate being propitious, we meet at the dancing-
school. I have Miss Shepherd for my partner. I touch Miss
Shepherd's glove, and feel a thrill go up the right arm of my
jacket, and come out at my hair. I say nothing tender to
Miss Shepherd, but we understand each other. Miss Shep-
herd and myself live but to be united.

Why do I secretly give Miss Shepherd twelve Brazil nuts
for a present, I wonder ? They are not expressive of affec-
tion, they are difficult to pack into a parcel of any regular
shape, they are hard to crack, even in room doors, and they
are oily when cracked ; yet I feel that they are appropriate
to Miss Shepherd. Soft, seedy biscuits, also, I bestow upon
Miss Shepherd ; and oranges innumerable. Once, I kiss Miss
Shepherd in the cloak room. Ecstasy ! What are my agony
and indignation next day, when I hear a flying rumor that the
Misses Nettingall have stood Miss Shepherd in the stocks for
turning in her toes !

Miss Shepherd being the one pervading theme and vision of
my life, how do I ever come to break with her ? I can't con-
ceive. And yet a coolness grows between Miss Shepherd and
myself. Whispers reach me of Miss Shepherd having said
she wished I wouldn't stare so, and having avowed a prefer-
ence for Master Jones — for Jones ! a boy of no merit what-
ever ! The gulf between me and Miss Shepherd widens. At
last, one day, I meet the Misses Nettingalls' establishment out
walking. Miss Shepherd makes a face as she goes by, and
laughs to her companion. All is over. The devotion of a life
— it seems a life, it is all the same — is at an end; Miss Shep-
herd comes out of the morning service, and the Eoyal Family
know her no more.

I am higher in the school, and no one breaks my peace. I
am not at all polite, now, to the Misses Nettingalls' young
ladies, and shouldn't dote on any of them, if they were twice

VOL. I — 19



290 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

as many and twenty times as beautiful. I think the dancing-
school a tiresome affair, and wonder why the girls can't dance
by themselves, and leave us alone. I am growing great in
Latin verses, and neglect the laces of my boots. Doctor
Strong refers to me in public as a promising young scholar.
Mr. Dick is wild with joy, and my aunt remits me a guinea
by the next post.

The shade of a young butcher rises, like the apparition of
an armed head in Macbeth. Who is this young butcher ? He
is the terror of the youth of Canterbury. There is a vague
belief abroad, that the beef suet with which he anoints his
hair gives him unnatural strength, and that he is a match for
a man. He is a broad-faced, bull-necked young butcher, with
rough red cheeks, an ill-conditioned mind, and an injurious
tongue. His main use of this tongue, is, to disparage Doctor
Strong's young gentlemen. He says publicly, that if they
want anything he'll give it 'em. He names individuals among
them (myself included), whom he could undertake to settle
with one hand, and the other tied behind him. He waylays
the smaller boys to punch their unprotected heads, and calls
challenges after me in the open streets. For these sufficient
reasons I resolve to fight the butcher.

It is a summer evening, down in a green hollow, at the
corner of a wall. I meet the butcher by appointment. I am
attended by a select body of our boys ; the butcher, by two
other butchers, a young publican, and a sweep. The prelimi-
naries are adjusted, and the butcher and myself stand face to
face. In a moment the butcher lights ten thousand candles
out of my left eyebrow. In another moment, I don't know
where the wall is, or where I am, or where anybody is. I
hardly know which is myself and which the butcher, we are
always in such a tangle and tustle, knocking about upon the
trodden grass. Sometimes I see the butcher, bloody but confi-
dent; sometimes I see nothing, and sit gasping on my second's
knee ; sometimes I go in at the butcher madly, and cut my
knuckles open against his face, without appearing to discom-
pose him at all. At last I awake, very queer about the head,
as from a giddy sleep, and see the butcher walking off, con-
gratulated by the two other butchers and the sweep and pub-





lican, and putting on his coat as he goes; from which I augur.
justly, that the victory is his.

I am taken home in a sad plight, and I have beef-steaks
put to my eyes, and am rubbed with vinegar and brandy, and
find a great white puffy place bursting out on my upper lip,
which swells immoderately. Tor three or four days I remain
at home, a very ill-looking subject, with a green shade over
my eyes ; and I should be very dull, but that Agnes is a
sister to me, and condoles with me, and reads to me, and
makes, the time light and happy. Agnes has my confidence
completely, always ; I tell her all about the butcher, and the
wrongs he has heaped upon me ; and she thinks I couldn't
have done otherwise than fight the butcher, while she shrinks
and trembles at my having fought him.

Time has stolen on unobserved, for Adams is not the head-
boy in the days that are come now, nor has he been this many
and many a day. Adams has left the school so long, that
when he comes back, on a visit to Doctor Strong, there are
not many there, besides myself, who know him. Adams is
going to be called to the bar almost directly, and is to be an
advocate, and to wear a wig. I am surprised to find him a
meeker man than I had thought, and less imposing in appear-
ance. He has not staggered the world yet,* either ; for it goes
on (as well as I can make out) pretty much the same as if he
had never joined it.

A blank, through which the warriors of poetry and history
march on in stately hosts that seem to have no end — and
what comes next ! 7" am the head boy, now ; and look down
on the line of boys below me, with a condescending interest in
such of them as bring to my mind the boy I was myself, when
I first came there. That little fellow seems to be no part of
me ; I remember him as something left behind upon the road
of life — as something I have passed, rather than have actually
been — and almost think of him as of some one else.

And the little girl I saw on that first day at Mr. Wickfield's,
where is she ? Gone also. In her stead, the perfect likeness
of the picture, a child likeness no more, moves about the
house ; and Agnes — my sweet sister, as I call her in my
thoughts, my counsellor and friend, the better angel of the



292 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

lives of all who come within her calm, good, self-denying
influence — is quite a woman.

"What other changes have come upon me, besides the
changes in my growth and looks, and in the knowledge I have
garnered all this while ? I wear a gold watch and chain, a
ring upon my little finger, and a long-tailed coat ; and I use a
great deal of bear's grease — which, taken in conjunction with
the ring, looks bad. Am I in love again ? I am. I worship the
eldest Miss Larkins.

The eldest Miss Larkins is not a little girl. She is a tall,
dark, black-eyed, fine figure of a woman. The eldest Miss
Larkins is not a chicken j for the youngest Miss Larkins is
not that, and the eldest must be three or four years older.
Perhaps the eldest Miss Larkins may be about thirty. My
passion for her is beyond all bounds.

The eldest Miss Larkins knows officers. It is an awful
thing to bear. I see them speaking to her in the street. I
see them cross the way to meet her, when her bonnet (she has
a bright taste in bonnets) is seen coming down the pavement,
accompanied by her sister's bonnet. She laughs and talks,
and seems to like it. I spend a good deal of my own spare
time in walking up and down to meet her. If I can bow to
her once in the day (I know her to bow to, knowing Mr. Lar-
kins), I am happier. I deserve a bow now and then. The
raging agonies I suffer on the night of the Race Ball, where I
know the eldest Miss Larkins will be dancing with the mil-
itary, ought to have some compensation, if there be even-
handed justice in the world.

My passion takes away my appetite, and makes me wear
my newest silk-neckerchief continually. I have no relief but
in putting on my best clothes, and having my boots cleaned
over and over again. I seem, then, to be worthier of the
eldest Miss Larkins. Everything that belongs to her, or is
connected with her, is precious to me. Mr. Larkins (a gruff
old gentleman with a double chin, and one of his eyes immov-
able in his head) is fraught with interest to me. When I
can't meet his daughter, I go where I am likely to meet him.
To say, "How do you do, Mr. Larkins ? Are the young ladies
and all the family quite well ? " seems so pointed, that I blush.





I think continually about my age. Say I am seventeen,
and say that seventeen is young for the eldest Miss Larkins,
what of that ? Besides, I shall be one-and-twenty in no time
almost. I regularly take walks outside Mr. Larkins's house
in the evening, though it cuts me to the heart to see the offi-
cers go in, or to hear them up in the drawing-room, where the
eldest Miss Larkins plays the harp. I even walk, on two or
three occasions, in a sickly, spoony manner, round and round
the house after the family are gone to bed, wondering which
is the eldest Miss Larkins's chamber (and pitching, I dare
say now, on Mr. Larkins's instead) ; wishing that a fire would
burst out ; that the assembled crowd would stand appalled ;
that I, dashing through them with a ladder, might rear it
against her window, save her in my arms, go back for some-
thing she had left behind, and perish in the flames. For I am
generally disinterested in my love, and think I could be con-
tent to make a figure before Miss Larkins, and expire. — Gen-
erally, but not always. Sometimes brighter visions rise before
me. When I dress (the occupation of two hours), for a great
ball given at the Larkins's (the anticipation of three weeks),
I indulge my fancy with pleasing images. I picture myself
taking courage to make a declaration to Miss Larkins. I pic-
ture Miss Larkins sinking her head upon my shoulder, and
saying, " Oh, Mr. Copperfield, can I believe my ears ! " I
picture Mr. Larkins waiting on me next morning, and say-
ing, "My dear Copperfield, my daughter has told me all.
Youth is no objection. Here are twenty thousand pounds.
Be happy ! " I picture my aunt relenting, and blessing us ;
and Mr. Dick and Doctor Strong being present at the marriage
ceremony. I am a sensible fellow, I believe — I believe, on
looking back, I mean — and modest I am sure ; but all this
goes on notwithstanding.

I repair to the enchanted house, where there are lights,
chattering, music, flowers, officers (I am sorry to see), and the
eldest Miss Larkins, a blaze of beauty. She is dressed in blue,
with blue flowers in her hair — forget-me-nots — as if she had
any need to wear forget-me-nots ! It is the first really grown-
up party that I have ever been incited to, and I am a little
uncomfortable ; for I appear not to belong to anybody, and



294 THE PERSONAL HISTOEY AND EXPERIENCE

nobody appears to have anything to say to me, except Mr.
Larkins, who asks me how my school-fellows are, which he
needn't do, as I have not come there to be insulted.

But after I have stood in the doorway for some time, and
feasted my eyes upon the goddess of my heart, she approaches
me — she, the eldest Miss Larkins ! — and asks me pleasantly,
if I dance.

I stammer, with a bow, " With you, Miss Larkins."

u With no one else ? " inquires Miss Larkins.

" I should have no pleasure in dancing with any one else."

Miss Larkins laughs and blushes (or I think she blushes),
and says, "Next time but one, I shall be very glad."

The time arrives. "It is a waltz, I think," Miss Larkins
doubtfully observes, when I present myself. " Do you waltz ?
If not, Captain Bailey — "

But I do waltz (pretty well, too, as it happens), and I take
Miss Larkins out. I take her sternly from the side of Captain
Bailey. He is wretched, I have no doubt ; but he is nothing
to me. I have been wretched, too. I waltz with the eldest
Miss Larkins! I don't know where, among whom, or how long.
I only know that I swim about in space, with a blue angel, in
a state of blissful delirium, until I find myself alone with her
in a little room, resting on a sofa. She admires a flower (pink
camelia japonica, price half-a-crown), in my button-hole. I
give it her, and say :

"I ask an inestimable price for it, Miss Larkins."

"Indeed ! What is that ?" returns Miss Larkins.

" A flower of yours, that I may treasure it as a miser does
gold."

"You're a bold boy," says Miss Larkins. "There."

She gives it me, not displeased ; and I put it to my lips, and
then into my breast. Miss Larkins, laughing, draws her hand
through my arm, and says, " Now take me back to Captain
Bailey."

I am lost in the recollection of this delicious interview, and
the waltz, when she comes to me again, with a plain elderly
gentleman, who has been playing whist all night, upon her
arm, and says :



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 295

" Oh ! here is my bold friend ! Mr. Chestle wants to know
you, Mr. Copperfield."

I feel at once that he is a friend of the family, and am much
gratified.

" I admire your taste, sir/' says Mr. Chestle. " It does you
credit. I suppose you don't take much interest in hops ; but
I am a pretty large grower myself ; and if you ever like to
come over to our neighborhood — neighborhood of Ashf ord —
and take a run about our place, we shall be glad for you to
stop as long as you like."

I thank Mr. Chestle warmly, and shake hands. I think I
am in a happy dream. I waltz with the eldest Miss Larkins
once again — she says I waltz so well ! I go home in a state
of unspeakable bliss, and waltz in imagination, all night long,
with my arm round the blue waist of my dear divinity. For
some* days afterwards, I am lost in rapturous reflections ; but
I neither see her in the street, nor when I call. I am imper-
fectly consoled for this disappointment by the sacred pledge,
the perished flower.

" Trotwood," says Agnes, one day after dinner. " Who do
you think is going to be married to-morrow ? Some one you
admire."

"Not you, I suppose, Agnes ? "

"Not me I" raising her cheerful face from the music she is
copying. "Do you hear him, papa ? — The eldest Miss Larkins."

"To — to Captain Bailey?" I have just enough power to
ask.

"No ; to no Captain. To Mr. Chestle, a hop-grower."

I am terribly dejected for about a week or two. I take off
my ring, I wear my worst clothes, I use no bear's grease, and
I frequently lament over the late Miss Larkins's faded flower.
Being, by that time, rather tired of this kind of life, and hav-
ing received new provocation from the butcher, I throw the
flower away, go out with the butcher, and gloriously defeat
him.

This, and the resumption of my ring, as well as of the bear's
grease in moderation, are the last marks I can discern, now, in
my progress to seventeen.



296 THE PERSONAL HISTOBY AND EXPERIENCE



CHAPTER XIX.

I LOOK ABOUT ME, AXD MAKE A DISCOVERY.

I am doubtful whether I was at heart glad or sorry, when
my school-days drew to an end, and the time came for my
leaving Doctor Strong's. I had been very happy there, I had
a great attachment for the Doctor, and I was eminent and dis-
tinguished in that little world. For these reasons I was sorry
to go ; but for other reasons, unsubstantial enough, I was glad.
Misty ideas of being a young man at my own disposal, of the
importance attaching to a young man at his own disposal, of
the wonderful things to be seen and done by that magnificent
animal, and the wonderful effects he could not fail to make
upon society, lured me away. So powerful were these vision-
ary considerations in my boyish mind, that I seem, according
to my present way of thinking, to have left school without
natural regret. The separation has not made the impression
on me, that other separations have. I try in vain to recall
how I felt about it, and what its circumstances were ; but it
is not momentous in my recollection. I suppose the opening
prospect confused -me. I know that my juvenile experiences
went for little or nothing then ; and that life was more like
a great fairy story, which I was just about to begin to read,
than anything else.

My aunt and I had held many grave deliberations on the
calling to which I should be devoted. For a year or more I
had endeavored to find a satisfactory answer to her often-re-
peated question, " What I would like to be ? " But I had no
particular liking, that I could discover, for anything. If I
could have been inspired with a knowledge of the science of
navigation, taken the command of a fast-sailing expedition, and
gone round the world on a triumphant voyage of discovery, I
think I might have considered myself completely suited. But
in the absence of any such miraculous provision, my desire





was to apply myself to some pursuit that would not lie too
heavily upon her purse ; and to do my duty in it, whatever it
might be.

Mr. Dick had regularly assisted at our councils, with a
meditative and sage demeanor. He never made a suggestion
but once ; and on that occasion (I don't know what put it in
his head), he suddenly proposed that I should be " a Brazier."
My aunt received this proposal so very ungraciously, that he
never ventured on a second; but ever afterwards confined
himself to looking watchfully at her for her suggestions, and
rattling his money.

" Trot, I tell you what, my dear," said my aunt, one morning
in the Christmas season when I left school ; " as this knotty
point is still unsettled, and as we must not make a mistake in
our decision if we can help it, I ^chink we had better take a
little breathing-time. In the meanwhile, you must try to look
at it from a new point of view, and not as a schoolboy."

" I will, aunt."

" It has occurred to me," pursued my aunt, " that a little
change, and a glimpse of life out of doors, may be useful, in
helping you to know your own mind, and form a cooler judg-
ment. Suppose you were to take a little journey now.
Suppose you were to go down into the old part of the country
again, for instance, and see that — that out-of-the-way woman
with the savagest of names," said my aunt, rubbing her nose,
for she could never thoroughly forgive Peggotty for being so
called.

"Of all things in the world, aunt, I should like it best."

"Well," said my aunt, "that's lucky, for I should like it
too. But it's natural and rational that you should like it.
And I am very well persuaded that whatever you do, Trot,
will always be natural and rational."

" I hope so, aunt."

"Your sister, Betsey Trotwood," said my aunt, "would have
been as natural and rational a girl as ever breathed. You'll
be worthy of her, won't you ? "

"I hope I shall be worthy of you, aunt. That will be
enough for me."

" It's a mercy that poor dear baby of a mother of yours



298 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

didn't live/' said my aunt, looking at me approvingly, "or
she'd have been so vain of her boy by this time, that her soft
little head would have been completely turned, if there was
anything of it left to turn." (My aunt always excused any
weakness of her own in my behalf, by transferring it in this
way to my poor mother.) "Bless me, Trotwood, how you do
remind me of her ! "

" Pleasantly, I hope, aunt ? " said I.

"He's as like her, Dick," said my aunt, emphatically, "he's
as like her, as she was that afternoon, before she began to fret
— bless my heart, he's as like her, as he can look at me out of
his two eyes ! "

" Is he indeed ? " said Mr. Dick.

" And he's like David, too," said my aunt, decisively.

"He is very like David ! " said Mr. Dick.

"But what I want you to be, Trot," resumed my aunt, " — I
don't mean physically, but morally ; you are very well physi-
cally — is, a firm fellow. A fine firm fellow, with a will of
your own. With resolution," said my aunt, shaking her cap
at me, and clenching her hand. " With determination. With
character, Trot — with strength of character that is not to be
influenced, except on good reason, by anybody, or by anything.
That's what I want you to be. That's what your father and
mother might both have been, Heaven knows, and been the
better for it."

I intimated that I hoped I should be what she described.

" That you may begin, in a small way, to have a reliance
upon yourself, and to act for yourself," said my aunt, " I shall
send you upon your trip, alone. I did think, once, of Mr.
Dick's going with you ; but, on second thoughts, I shall keep
him to take care of me."

Mr. Dick, for a moment, looked a little disappointed ; until
the honor and dignity of having to take care of the most
wonderful woman in the world, restored the sunshine to his
face.

" Besides," said my aunt, " there's the Memorial — "

" Oh, certainly," said Mr. Dick, in a hurry, " I intend, Trot-
wood, to get that done immediate^ — it really must be done
immediately ! And then it will go in you know — and then,"



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 299

--said Mr. Dick, after checking himself, and pausing a long
time, " there'll be a pretty kettle of fish ! "

In pursuance of my aunt's kind scheme, I was shortly after-
wards fitted out with a handsome purse of money, and a
portmanteau, and tenderly dismissed upon my expedition. At
parting, my aunt gave me some good advice, and a good many
kisses ; and said that as her object was that I should look
about me, and should think a little, she would recommend ine
to stay a few days in London, if I liked it, either on my way
down into Suffolk, or in coming back. In a word, I was at
liberty to do what I would, for three weeks or a month ; and
no other conditions were imposed upon my freedom than the
before-mentioned thinking and looking about me, and a pledge
to write three times a week and faithfully report myself.

I went to Canterbury first, that I might take leave of Agnes
and Mr. Wickfield (my old room in whose house I had not
yet relinquished), and also of the good Doctor. Agnes was
very glad to see me, and told me that the house had not been
like itself since I had left it.

" I am sure I am not like myself when I am away," said I.
" I seem to want my right hand when I miss you. Though
that's not saying much ; for there's no head in my right hand,
and no heart. Every one who knows you, consults with you,
and is guided by you, Agnes."

"Every one who knows me, spoils me, I believe," she
answered, smiling.

"No. It's because you are like no one else. You are so
good and so sweet-tempered. You have such a gentle nature,
and you are always right."

" You talk," said Agnes, breaking into a pleasant laugh, as
she sat at work, " as if I were the late Miss Larkins."

" Come ! It's not fair to abuse my confidence-," I answered,
reddening a the recollection of my blue enslaver. "But I
shall confide in you, just the same, Agnes. I can never grow
out of that. Whenever I fall into trouble, or fall in love, I
shall always tell you, if you'll let me — even when I come to
fall in love in earnest."

"Why, you have always been in earnest!" said Agnes,
laughing again.



300 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" Oh ! that was as a child, or a school -boy," said I, laughing
in my turn, not without being a little shame-faced. " Times
are altering now, and I suppose I shall be in a terrible state of
earnestness one day or other. My wonder is, that you are not
in earnest yourself, by this time, Agnes."

Agnes laughed again, and shook her head.

" Oh, I know you are not ! " said I, " because if you had
been, you would have told me. Or at least " — for I saw a
faint blush in her face, " You would have let me find it out
for myself. But there is no one that I know of, who deserves
to love youj Agnes. Some one of a nobler character, and more
worthy altogether than any one I have ever seen here, must
rise up, before I give my consent. In the time to come, I
shall have a wary eye on all admirers ; and shall exact a great
deal from the successful one, I assure you."

We had gone on, so far, in a mixture of confidential jest and
earnest, that had long grown naturally out of our familiar
relations, begun as mere children. But Agnes, now suddenly
lifting up her eyes to mine, and speaking in a different man-
ner, said :

"Trotwood, there is something that I want to ask you, and
that I may not have another opportunity of asking for a long
time, perhaps — something I would ask, I think, of no one
else. Have you observed any gradual alteration in papa ? "

I had observed it, and had often wondered whether she had
too. I must have shown as much, now, in my face ; for her
eyes were in a moment cast down, and I saw tears in them.

" Tell me what it is," she said, in a low voice.

"I think — shall I be quite plain, Agnes, liking him so
much?"

"Yes," she said.

" I think he does himself no good by the habit that has
increased upon him since I first came here. He is often very
nervous — or I fancy so."

" It is not fancy," said Agnes, shaking her head.

"His hand trembles, his speech is not plain, and his eyes
look wild. I have remarked that at those times, and when he
is least like himself, he is most certain to be wanted on some
business."





" By Uriah," said Agnes.

" Yes ; and the sense of being unfit for it, or of not having
understood it, or of having shown his condition in spite of
himself, seems to make him so uneasy, that next day he is
worse, and next day worse, and so he becomes jaded and hag-
gard. Do not be alarmed by what I say, Agnes, but in this
state I saw him, only the other evening, lay down his head
upon his desk, and shed tears like a child."

Her hand passed softly before my lips while I was yet
speaking, and in a moment she had met her father at the door
of the room, and was hanging on his shoulder. The expres-
sion of her face, as they both looked towards me, I felt to be
very touching. There was such deep fondness for him, and
gratitude to him for all his love and care, in her beautiful
look ; and there was such a fervent appeal to me to deal ten-
derty by him, even in my inmost thoughts, and to let no harsh
construction find any place against him ; she was, at once, so
proud of him and devoted to him, yet so compassionate and
sorry, and so reliant upon me to be so, too ; that nothing she
could have said would have expressed more to me, or moved
me more.

We were to drink tea at the Doctor's. We went there at
the usual hour ; and round the study-fireside found the Doc-
tor, and his young wife, and her mother. The Doctor, who
made as much of my going away as if I were going to China,
received me as an honored guest ; and called for a log of wood
to be thrown on the fire, that he might see the face of his old
pupil reddening in the blaze.

" I shall not see many more new faces in Trotwood's stead,
Wickfield," said the Doctor, warming his hands; "I am
getting lazy, and want ease. I shall relinquish all my young
people in another six months, and lead a quieter life."

" You have said so, any time these ten years, Doctor," Mr.
Wickfield answered.

"But now I mean to do it," returned the Doctor. "My
first master will succeed me — I am in earnest at last — so
you'll soon have to arrange our contracts, and to bind us
firmly to them, like a couple of knaves."

u And to take care," said Mr. Wickfield, u that you're not



302 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

imposed on, eh ? — as you certainly would be, in any contract
you should make for yourself. Well ! I am ready. There
are worse tasks than that, in my calling."

" I shall have nothing to think of, then," said the Doctor,
with a smile, " but my Dictionary ; and this other contract-
bargain — Annie."

As Mr. Wickfield glanced towards her, sitting at the tea-
table by Agnes, she seemed to me to avoid his look with such
unwonted hesitation and timidity, that his attention became
fixed upon her, as if something were suggested to his thoughts.

" There is a post come in from India, I observe," he said,
after a short silence.

"By the by! and letters from Mr. Jack Maldon!" said the
Doctor.

"Indeed?"

"Poor dear Jack!" said Mrs. Markleham, shaking her
head. " That trying climate ! — like living, they tell me, on a
sand-heap, underneath a burning-glass ! He looked strong,
but he wasn't. My dear Doctor, it was his spirit, not his
constitution, that he ventured on so boldly. Annie, my dear,
I am sure you must perfectly recollect that your cousin never
was strong — not what can be called robust, you know," said
Mrs. Markleham, with emphasis, and looking round upon us
generally, " — from the time when my daughter and himself
were children, together, and walking about, arm-in-arm, the
live-long day."

Annie, thus addressed, made no reply.

"Do I gather from what. you say, ma'am, that Mr. Maldon
is ill ? " asked Mr. Wickfield.

" 111 ! " replied the Old Soldier. " My dear sir, he's all sorts
of things."

" Except well ? " said Mr. Wickfield.

"Except well, indeed!" said the Old Soldier. "He has
had dreadful strokes of the sun, no doubt, and jungle fevers
and agues, and every kind of thing you can mention. As to
his liver," said the Old Soldier, resignedly, " that, of course,
he gave up altogether, when he first went out ! "

" Does he say all this ? " asked Mr. Wickfield.

" Say ? My dear sir," returned Mrs. Markleham, shaking





her head and her fan, u you little know my poor Jack Maldon
when you ask that question. Say? Not he. You might
drag him at the heels of four wild horses first."

" Mamma ! " said Mrs. Strong.

"Annie, my dear/' returned her mother, "once for all, I
must really beg that you will not interfere with me, unless it
is to confirm what I say. You know as well as I do, that
your cousin Maldon would be dragged at the heels of any
number of wild horses — why should I confine myself t' > four !
I won't confine myself to four — eight, sixteen, two-and-thirty,
rather than say anything calculated to overturn the Doctor's
plans."

" Wickfield' s plans/' said the Doctor, stroking his face, and
looking penitently at his adviser. "That is to say, our joint
plans for him. I said myself, abroad or at home."

"And I said/' added Mr. Wickfield, gravely, "abroad. I
was the means of sending him abroad. It's my responsi-
oility."

"Oh! Eesponsibility ! " said the Old Soldier. "Every-
thing was done for the best, my dear Mr. Wickfield ; every-
thing was done for the kindest and best, we know. But if
the dear fellow can't live there, he can't live there. And if he
can't live there, iie'll die there, sooner than he'll overturn the
Doctor's plans. I know him," said the Old Soldier, fanning
herself, in a sort of calm prophetic agony, "and I know he'll
die there, sooner than he'll overturn the Doctor's plans."

"Well, well, ma'am/' said the Doctor, cheerfully, "I am
not bigoted to my plans, and I can overturn them myself. I
can substitute some other plans. If Mr. Jack Maldon comes
home on account of ill health, he must not be allowed to go
back, and we must endeavor to make some more suitable and
fortunate provision for him in this country."

Mrs. Markleham was so overcome by this generous speech
— which, I need not say, she had not at all expected or led up
to — that she could only tell the Doctor it^was like himself,
and go several times through that operation of kissing the
sticks of her fan, and then tapping his hand with it. After
which she gently chid her daughter Annie, for not being more
demonstrative when such kindnesses were showered, for her



304 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

sake, on her old playfellow : and entertained us with some
particulars concerning other deserving members of her family,
whom it was desirable to set on their deserving legs.

All this time, her daughter Annie never once spoke, or lifted
up her eyes. All this time, Mr. Wickfield had his glance upon
her as she sat by his own daughter's side. It appeared to me
that he never thought of being observed by any one ; but was
so intent upon her, and upon his own thoughts in connection
with her, as to be quite absorbed. He now asked what Mr.
Jack Maldon had actually written in reference to himself, and
to whom he had written it ?

"Why, here," said Mrs. Markleham, taking a letter from
the chimney-piece above the Doctor's head, "the dear fellow
says to the Doctor himself — where is it? Oh! — <I am sorry
to inform you that my health is suffering severely, and that I
fear I may be reduced to the necessity of returning home for
a time, as the only hope of restoration/ That's pretty plain,
poor fellow ! His only hope of restoration ! But Annie's
letter is plainer still. Annie, show me that letter again."

"Not now, mamma," she pleaded, in a low tone.

"My dear, you absolutely are, on some subjects, one of the
most ridiculous persons in the world," returned her mother,
" and perhaps the most unnatural to the claims of your own
family. We never should have heard of the letter at all, I
believe, unless I had asked for it myself. Do you call thai;
confidence, my love, towards Doctor Strong ? I am surprised.
You ought to know better."

The letter was reluctantly produced ; and as I handed it to
the old lady, I saw how the unwilling hand from which I took
it, trembled.

" Now let us see," said Mrs. Markleham, putting her glass
to her eye, "where the passage is. 'The remembrance of old
times, my dearest Annie' — and so forth — it's not there.
'The amiable old Proctor' — who's he ? Dear me, Annie, how
illegibly your cousin Maldon writes, and how stupid I am!
' Doctor/ of course. Ah ! amiable indeed ! " Here she left off,
to kiss her fan again, and shake it at the Doctor, who was
looking at us in a state of placid satisfaction. " Now I have
found it. < You may not be surprised to hear, Annie ' — no,



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 305

to be sure, knowing that he never was really strong; what did
I say just now? — 'that I have undergone so much in this
distant place, as to have decided to leave it at all hazards ; on
sick leave, if I can; on total resignation, if that is not to be
obtained. What I have endured, and do endure here, is in-
supportable.' And but for the promptitude of that best of
creatures," said Mrs. Markleham, telegraphing the Doctor as
before, and refolding the letter, "it would be insupportable to
me to think of."

Mr. Wickfield said not one word, though the old lady looked
to him as if for his commentary on this intelligence ; but sat
severely silent, with his eyes fixed on the ground. Long after
the subject was dismissed, and other topics occupied us, he
remained so ; seldom raising his eyes, unless to rest them for
a moment, with a thoughtful frown, upon the Doctor, or his
Avife, or both.

The Doctor was very fond of music. Agnes sang with great
sweetness and expression, and so did Mrs. Strong. They sang
together, and played duets together, and we had quite a little
concert. But I remarked two things : first, that though Annie
soon recovered her composure, and was quite herself, there
was a blank between her and Mr. Wickfield which separated
them Avholly from each other; secondly, that Mr. Wickfield
seemed to dislike the intimacy between her and Agnes, and to
watch it with uneasiness. And now, I must confess, the
recollection of what I had seen on that night when Mr. Mal-
don went away, first began to return upon me with a meaning
it had never had, and to trouble me. The innocent beauty of
her face was not as innocent to me as it had been; I mis-
trusted the natural grace and charm of her manner ; and when
I looked at Agnes by her side, and thought .how good and true
Agnes was, suspicions arose within me that it was an ill-
assorted friendship.

She was so happy in it herself, however, and the other was
so happy too, that they made the evening fly away as if it
were but an hour. It closed in an incident which I well
remember. They were taking leave of each other, and Agnes
was going to embrace her and kiss her, when Mr. Wickfield
stepped between them, as if by accident, and drew Agnes
vol, i — 20



306 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

quickly away. Then I saw, as though all the intervening
time had been cancelled, and I were still standing in the door-
way on the night of the departure, the expression of that
night in the face of Mrs. Strong, as it confronted his.

I cannot say what an impression this made upon me, or
how impossible I found it, when I thought of her afterwards,
to separate her from this look, and remember her face in its
innocent loveliness again/ It haunted me when I got home.
I seemed to have left the Doctor's roof with a dark cloud
lowering on it. The reverence that I had for his gray head,
was mingled with commiseration for his faith in those who
were treacherous to him, and with resentment against those
who injured him. The impending shadow of a great affliction,
and a great disgrace that had no distinct form in it yet, fell
like a stain upon the quie.t place where I had worked and
played as a boy, and did it a cruel wrong. I had no pleasure
in thinking, any more, of the grave old broad-leaved aloe-
trees which remained shut up in themselves a hundred years
together, and of the trim, smooth grass-plot, and the stone
urns, and the Doctor's walk, and the congenial sound of the
Cathedral bell hovering above them all. It *was as if the
tranquil sanctuary of my boyhood had been sacked before my
face, and its peace and honor given to the winds.

But morning brought with it my parting from the old house,
which Agnes had filled with her influence ; and that occupied
my mind sufficiently. I should be there again soon, no doubt;
I might sleep again — perhaps often — in my old room ; but
the days of my inhabiting there were gone, and the old time
was past. I was heavier at heart when I packed up such of
my books and clothes as still remained there to be sent to
Dover, than I cared to show to Uriah Heep: who was so
officious to help me, that I uncharitably thought him mighty
glad that I was going.

I got away from Agnes and her father, somehow, with an
indifferent show of being very manly, and took my seat upon
the box of the London coach. I was so softened and forgiving,
going through the town, that I had half a mind to nod to my
old enemy the butcher, and throw him five shillings to drink.
But he looked such a very obdurate butcher as he stood scrap-



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD.



307



mg the great block in the shop, and moreover, his appearance
was so little improved by the loss of a front tooth which I
had knocked out, that I thought it best to make no advances.

The main object on my mind, I remember, when we got fairly
on the road, was to appear as old as possible to the coachman,
and to speak extremely gruff. The latter point I achieved at
great personal inconvenience : but I stuck to it, because I felt
t t was a grown-up sort of thing.

"You are going through, sir ?" said the coachman.

"Yes, William," I said, condescendingly (I knew him) ; "I
tm going to London. I shall go down into Suffolk after-
wards."

"Shooting, sir ? " said the coachman.

He knew as well as I did that it was just as likely, at that
time of year, I was going down there whaling ; but I felt com-
plimented, too. .

" I don't know," I said, pretending to be undecided, whether

I shall take a shot or not."

"Birds is got wery shy, I'm told," said William.

" So I understand," said I.

"Is Suffolk your county, sir ? " asked William.

"Yes," I said, with some importance. "Suffolk's my

county." . " „

"I'm told the dumplings is uncommon fine down tnere,

said William.

I was not aware of it myself, but I felt it necessary to
uphold the institutions of my county, and to evince a famil-
iarity with them; so I shook my head, as much as to say,
" I believe you ! "

" And the Punches," said William. " There's cattle ! A
Suffolk Punch, when he's a good un, is worth his weight in
gold. Did you ever breed any Suffolk Punches yourself, sir ? >■
' « ■$ _ no," I said, " not exactly."

"Here's a gen'lm'n behind me, I'll pound it," said William,
" as has bred 'em by wholesale."

The gentleman spoken of was a gentleman with a very
unpromising squint, and a prominent chin, who had a tall
white hat on with a narrow flat brim, and whose close-fitting
drab trousers seemed to button all the way up outside his legs



308 THE PEBSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

from his boots to his hips. His chin was cocked over the
coachman's shoulder, so near to me, that his breath quite
tickled the back of my head ; and as I looked round at him,
he leered at the leaders with the eye with which he didn't
squint, in a very knowing manner.

" Ain't you ? " asked William.

" Ain't I what ? " said the gentleman behind.

" Bred them Suffolk Punches by wholesale ? "

"I should think so," said the gentleman. " There ain't
no sort of orse that I ain't bred, and no sort of dorg. Orses
and dorgs is some men's fancy. They're wittles and drink to
me — lodging, wife, and children — reading, writing, and 'rith-
metic — snuff, tobacker, and sleep."

" That ain't a sort of man to see sitting behind a coach-box,
is it though ? " said William, in my ear, as he handled the
reins.

I construed this remark into an indication of a wish that he
should have my place, so I blushingly offered to resign it.

"Well, if you don't mind, sir," said William, "I think it
would be more correct."

I have always considered this as the first fall I had in life.
When I booked my place at the coach-office, I had had " Box
Seat " written against the entry, and had given the book-keeper
half-a-crown. I was got up in a special great coat and shawl,
expressly to do honor to that distinguished eminence ; had
glorified myself upon it a good deal ; and had felt that I was*
a credit to the coach. And here, in the very first stage, I was
supplanted by a shabby man with a squint, who had no other
merit than smelling like a livery-stables, and being able to
walk across me, more like a fly than a human being, while
the horses were at a canter !

A distrust of myself, which has often beset me in life on •
small occasions, when it would have been better away, was
assuredly not stopped in its growth by this little incident out-
side the Canterbury coach. It was in vain to take refuge in
gruffness of speech. I spoke from the pit of my stomach for
the rest of the journey, but I felt completely extinguished, and
dreadfully young.

It was curious and interesting, nevertheless, to be sitting up





there, behind four horses: well educated, well dressed, and
with plenty of money in my pocket : and to look out for the
places where I had slept on my weary journey. I had abun-
dant occupation for my thoughts, in every conspicuous land-
mark on the road. "When I looked down at the tampers whom
we passed, and saw that well-remembered style of face turned
up, I felt as if the tinker's blackened hand were in the bosom
of my shirt again. When Ave clattered through the narrow
street of Chatham, and I caught a glimpse, in passing, of the
lane where- the old monster lived who had bought my jacket, I
stretched my neck eagerly to look for the place where I had
sat, in the sun and in the shade, waiting for my money.
When we came, at last, within a stage of London, and passed
the veritable Salem House where Mr. Creakle had laid about
him with a heavy hand, I would have given all I had, for law-
ful permission to get down and thrash him, and let all the boys
out like so many caged sparrows.

We went to the Golden Cross at Charing Cross, then a
mouldy sort of establishment in a close neighborhood. A
waiter showed me into the coffee-room; and a chambermaid
introduced me to my small bedchamber, which smelt like a
hackney-coach, and was shut up like a family vault. I was
still painfully concious of my youth, for nobody stood in any
awe of me at all : the chambermaid being utterly indifferent
to my opinions on any subject, and the waiter being familiar
with me, and offering advice to my inexperience.

"Well now," said the waiter, in a tone of confidence, "what
would you like for dinner ? Young gentlemen likes poultry in
general, have a fowl ! "

I told him, as majestically as I could, that I wasn't in the
hum or -for a fowl.

"Ain't you!" said the waiter. "Young gentlemen is gen-
erally tired of beef and mutton, have a weal cutlet ! "

I assented to this proposal, in default of being able to suggest
anything else,

" Do you care for taters ? " said the water, with an insinu-
ating smile, and his head on one side. "Young gentlemen
generally has been overdosed with taters."

I commanded him, in my deepest voice, to order a veal cut-



310 THE PUR SON AL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

let and potatoes, and all things fitting ; and to inquire at the
bar if there were any letters for Trotwood Copperiield, Esquire
— which I knew there were not, and couldn't be, but thought
it manly to appear to expect.

He soon came back to say that there were none (at which
I was much surprised) , and began to lay the cloth for my
dinner in a box by the fire. While he was so engaged, he
asked me what I would take with it; and on my replying
" Half a pint of sherry," thought it a favorable opportunity,
I am afraid, to extract that measure of wine from the stale
leavings at the bottoms of several small decanters. I am of
this opinion, because, while I was reading the newspaper, I
observed him behind a low wooden partition, which was his
private apartment, very busy pouring out of a number of those
vessels into one, like a chemist and druggist making up a pre-
scription. When the wine came, too, I thought it flat ; and
it certainly had more English crumbs in it, than were to be
expected in a foreign wine in anything like a pure state ; but
I was bashful enough to drink it, and say nothing.

Being then in a pleasant frame of mind (from which I infer
that poisoning is not always disagreeable in some stages of
the process), I resolved to go to the play. It was Covent
Garden Theatre that I chose ; and there, from the back of a
centre box, I saw Julius Caesar and the new Pantomime. To
have all those noble Romans alive before me, and walking in
and out for my entertainment, instead of being the stern task-*
masters they had been at school, was a most novel and delight-
ful effect. But the mingled reality and mystery of the whole
show, the influence upon me of the poetry, the lights, the
music, the company, the smooth stupendous changes of glitter-
ing and brilliant scenery, were so dazzling, and opened up such
illimitable regions of delight, that when I came out into the
rainy street, at twelve o'clock at night, I felt as if I had come
from the clouds, where I had been leading a romantic life for
ages, to a bawling, splashing, link-lighted, umbrella-strug-
gling, hackney-coach-jostling, patten-clinking, muddy, miserable
world.

I had emerged by another door, and stood in the street for
a little while, as if I really were a stranger upon earth : but



OF DAVID COPTEBFIELB. 311

the unceremonious pushing and hustling that I received, soon
recalled me to myself, and put me in the road back to. the
hotel ; whither I went, revolving the glorious vision all the
way ; and where, after some porter and oysters, I sat revolving
it still, at past one o'clock, with my eyes on the coffee-room

fire.

I was so filled with the play, and with the past — for it was,
in a manner, like a shining transparency, through which I
saw my earlier life moving along — that I don't know when
the figure of a handsome well-formed young man, dressed
with a tasteful easy negligence which I have reason to remem-
ber very well, became a real presence to me. But I recollect
being conscious of his company without having noticed his
coming in — and my still sitting, musing, over the coffee-room

fire.

At last I rose to go to bed, much to the relief of the sleepy
waiter, who had got the fidgets in his legs, and was twisting
them, and hitting them, and putting them through all kinds
of contortions in his small pantry. In going towards the
door, I passed the person who had come in, and saw him
plainly. I turned directly,, came back, and looked again. He
did not know me, but I knew him in a moment.

At another time I might have wanted the confidence or the
decision to speak to him, and might have put it off until next
day, and might have lost him. But, in the then condition of
my mind, where the play was still running high, his former
protection of me appeared so deserving of my gratitude, and
my old love for him overflowed my breast so freshly and spon-
taneously, that I went up to him at once, with a fast-beating
heart, and said :

" Steerforth ! Won't you speak to me ? "

He looked at me — just as he used to look, sometimes — but
I saw no recognition in his face.

"You don't remember me, I am afraid," said I.

"My God!" he suddenly exclaimed. "It's little Copper-
field ! "

I grasped him by both hands, and could not let them go.
But for very shame, and the fear that it might displease him,
I could have held him round the neck and cried.



312 THE PERSONAL HISTOBY AND EXPERIENCE

" I never, never, never, was so glad ! My dear Steerf orth,, 1
am so overjoyed to see you ! "

" And I am rejoiced to see you, too ! " he said, shaking my
hands heartily. "Why, Copperfield, old boy, don't be over-
powered ! " And yet he was glad, too, I thought, to see how
the delight I had in meeting him affected me.

I brushed away the tears that my utmost resolution had not
been able to keep back, and I made a clumsy laugh of it, and
we sat down together, side by side.

" Why, how do you come to be here ? " said Steerf orth,
clapping me on the shoulder.

" I came here by the Canterbury coach, to-day. I have been
adopted by an aunt down in that part of the country, and have
just finished my education there. How do you come to be
here, Steerf orth ? "

" Well, I am what they call an Oxford man," he returned ;
" that is to say, I get bored to death down there, periodically
— and I am on my way now to my mother's. You're a devil-
ish amiable-looking fellow, Copperfield. Just what you used
to be, now I look at you ! Not altered in the least ! "

" I knew you immediately," I said ; " but you are more easily-
remembered."

He laughed as he ran his hand through the clustering curls
of his hair, and said gaily :

" Yes, T am on an expedition of duty. My" mother lives a
little way out of town ; and the roads being in a beastly con-
dition, and our house tedious enough, I remained here to-night
instead of going on. I have not been in town half-a-dozen
hours, and those I have been dozing and grumbling away at
the play."

"I have been at the play, too," said I. "At Covent Gar-
den. What a delightful and magnificent entertainment, Steer-
forth ! "

Steerforth laughed heartily.

— "My dear young Davy," he said, clapping me on the
shoulder again, "you are a very Daisy. The daisy of the
field, at sunrise, is not fresher than you are ! I have been at
Covent Garden, too, and there never was a more miserable
business. — Holloa, you sir ? "



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 313

This was addressed to the waiter, -who had been very atten-
tive to our recognition, at a distance, and now came forward

deferentially. „ .,

"Where have you put my friend, Mr. Copperfield? said

Steerforth.

" Beg your pardon, sir ? " '

« Where does he sleep ? What's his number ? You know
what I mean," said Steerforth. ■

« Well, sir," said the waiter, with an apologetic air. Mr.
Copperfield is at present in forty-four, sir."

"And what the devil do you mean," retorted Steerforth,
' «bv putting Mr. Copperfield into a little loft over a stable ?

"Why you see we wasn't aware, sir," returned the waiter,
still apologetically, "as Mr. Copperfield was anyways- partic-
ular. We can give Mr. Copperfield seventy-two, sir, it it
would be preferred. Next you, sir."

« Of course it would be preferred," said Steerforth. And

do it at once." ,

The waiter immediately withdrew to make the exchange.
Steerforth, very much amused at my having been put into
forty-four, laughed again, and clapped me on the shoulder
again, and invited me to breakfast with him next morning at
ten o'clock — an invitation I was only too proud and happy to
accept. It being now pretty late, we took our candles and
went up stairs, where we parted with friendly heartiness at his
door, and where I found my new room a great improvement on
my old one, it not being at all musty, and having an immense
four-post bedstead in it, which was quite a little landed estate.
Here, among pillows enough for six, I soon fell asleep ma
blissful condition, and dreamed of ancient Eome, Steerforth,
and friendship, until the early morning coaches, rumbling out
of the archway underneath, made me dream of thunder and
the gods.



314 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE



CHAPTEE XX.



steerforth's home.



When the chambermaid tapped at my door at eight o'clock,
and informed me that my shaving-water was outside, I felt
severely the having no occasion for it, and blushed in my bed.
The suspicion that she laughed too, when she said it, preyed
upon my mind all the time I was dressing, and gave me, I
was conscious, a sneaking and guilty air when I passed her on
the staircase, as I was going down to breakfast. I was so
sensitively aware, indeed, of being younger than I could have
wished, that for some time I could not make up my mind to
pass her at all, under the ignoble circumstances of the case ;
but, hearing her there with a broom, stood peeping out of
window at King Charles on horseback, surrounded by a maze
of hackney-coaches and looking anything but regal in a driz-
zling rain and a dark-brown fog, until I was admonished by
the waiter that the gentleman was waiting for me.

It was not in the coffee-room that I found Steerf orth expect-
ing me. but in a snug private apartment, red-curtained and
Turkey-carpeted, where the fire burnt bright, and a fine hot
breakfast was set forth on a table covered with a clean cloth,
and a cheerful miniature of the room, the fire, the breakfast,
Steerforth, and all, was shining in the little round mirror over
the sideboard. I was rather bashful at first, Steerforth being
so self-possessed, and elegant, and superior to me in all respects
(age included) ; but his easy patronage soon put that to rights,
and made me quite at home. I could not enough admire the
change he had wrought in the Golden Cross, or compare the
dull forforn state I had held yesterday, with this morning's
comfort and this morning's entertainment. As to the waiter's
familiarity, it was quenched as if it had never been. He
attended on us, as I may say, in sackcloth and ashes.

" Now, Copperfield," said Steerforth, when we were alone,



OF DAVID GOPPEBFIELD 315

« I should like to hear what you are doing, and where you are
going, and all about you. I feel as if you were my property.

Glowing with pleasure to find that he had still this interest
in me, I told him how my aunt had proposed the little expedi-
tion that I had before me, and whither it tended.

"As you are in no hurry, then," said Steerforth, "come
home with me to Highgate, and stay a day or two. You will
be pleased with my mother -she is a little vain and prosy
about me, but that you can forgive her -and she will be
pleased with you."

"I should like to be as sure of that, as you are kind enough
to say you are," I answered, smiling.

"Oh!" said Steerforth, "every one who likes me, has a
claim on her that is sure to be acknowledged."
" Then I think I shall be a favorite," said I.
"Good' " said Steerforth. " Come and prove it. We will
go and see the lions for an hour or two — it's something to
have a fresh fellow like you to show them to, Copperfield —
and then we'll journey out to Highgate by the coach."

I could hardly believe but that I was in a dream, and that
I should wake presently in number forty-four, to the solitary
box in the coffee-room and the familiar waiter again. After
I had written to my aunt and told her of my fortunate meeting
with my admired old school-fellow, and my acceptance of his
invitation, we went out in a hackney-chariot, and saw a Pano-
rama and some other sights, and took a walk through the
Museum, where I could not help observing how much Steer-
forth knew, on an infinite variety of subjects, and of how little
account he seemed to make his knowledge.

" You'll take a high degree at college, Steerforth, said 1,
"if you have not done so already; and they will have good
reason to be proud of you."

"I take a degree!" cried Steerforth. "Kot I! my dear
Daisy —will you mind my calling you Daisy ? "

"Not at all!" said I. : ,

"That's a good fellow! My dear Daisy," said Steerforth,
laughing "I have not the least desire or intention to distin-
guish myself in that way. I have done quite sufficient for my



316 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

purpose. I find that I am heavy company enough for myself
as I am."

" But the fame — * I was beginning.

" You romantic Daisy ! " said Steerf orth, laughing still more
heartily; "why should I trouble myself, that a parcel of
heavy-headed fellows may gape and hold up their hands ?
Let them do it at some other man. There's fame for him,
and he's welcome to it."

I was abashed at having made so great a mistake, and was
glad to change the subject. Fortunately it was not difficult
to do, for Steerf orth could always pass from one subject to
another with a carelessness and lightness that were his own.

Lunch succeeded to our sight-seeing, and the short winter
day wore away so fast, that it was dusk when the stage-coach
stopped with us at an old brick house at Highgate on the
summit of the hill. An elderly lady, .though not very far
advanced in years, with a proud carriage and a handsome
face, was in the doorway as we alighted ; and greeting
Steerf orth as " My dearest James," folded him in her arms.
To this lady he presented me as his mother, and she gave me
a stately welcome.

It was a genteel old-fashioned house, very quiet and orderly.
From the windows of my room I saw all London lying in the
distance like a great vapor, with here and there some lights
twinkling through it. I had only time, in dressing, to glance
at the solid furniture, the framed pieces of work (done, I
supposed, by Steerforth's mother when she was a girl), and
some pictures in crayons of ladies with powdered hair and
bodices, coming and going on the walls, as the newly kindled
fire crackled and sputtered, when I was called to dinner.

There was a second lady in the dining-room, of a slight
short figure, dark, and not agreeable to look at, but with some
appearance of good looks too, who attracted my attention :
perhaps because I had not expected to see her : perhaps
because I found myself sitting opposite to her: perhaps
because of something really remarkable in her. She had
black hair and eager black eyes, and was thin, and had a scar
upon her lip. It was an old scar — I should rather call it
seam, for it was not discolored, and had healed years ago —





which had once cut through her mouth, downward towards
the chin, but was now barely visible across the table, except
above and on her upper lip, the shape of which it had altered.
I concluded in niy own mind that she was about thirty years
of age, and that she wished to be married. She was a little
dilapidated — like a house — with having been so long to let ;
yet had, as I have said, an appearance of good looks. Her
thinness seemed to be the effect of some wasting fire within
her, which found a vent in her gaunt eyes.

She was introduced as Miss Dartle, and both Steerforth and
his mother called her Eosa. I found that she lived there,
and had been for a long time Mrs. Steerforth's companion.
It appeared to me that she never said anything she wanted to
say, outright; but hinted it, and made a great deal more
of it by this practice. For example, when Mrs. Steerforth
observed, more in jest than earnest, that she feared her son
led but a wild life at college, Miss Dartle put in thus :

"Oh, really? You know how ignorant I am, and that I
only ask for information, but isn't it always so ? I thought
that kind of life was on all hands understood to be — eh ? "

"It is education for a very grave profession, if you mean
that, Eosa," Mrs. Steerforth answered, with some coldness.

"Oh! Yes! That's very true," returned Miss Dartle.
"But isn't it, though?— I want to be put right if I am wrong
— isn't it really?"

" Eeally what ? " said Mrs. Steerforth.

" Oh ! You mean it's not I " returned Miss Dartle. " Well,
I'm very glad to hear it ! Now, I know what to do ! That's
the advantage of asking. I shall never allow people to talk
before me about wastfulness and profligacy, and so forth, in
connection with that life, any more."

" And you will be right," said Mrs. Steerforth. " My sorfs
tutor is a conscientious gentleman ; and if I had not implicit
reliance on my son, I should have reliance on him."

"Should you?" said Miss Dartle. "Dear me! Con-
scientious, is he ? Eeally conscientious, now ? "

" Yes, I am convinced of it," said Mrs. Steerforth.

"How very nice!" exclaimed Miss Dartle. "What a
comfort ! Eeally conscientious ? Then he's not — but of



318 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

course he can't be/ if lie's really conscientious. Well, I shall
be quite happy in my opinion of him, from this time. You
can't think how it elevates him in my opinion, to know for
certain that he's really conscientious ! ?'

Her own views of every question, and her correction of
everything that was said to which she was opposed, Miss
Dartle insinuated in the same way : sometimes, I could not
conceal from myself, with great power, though in contradiction
even of Steerforth. An instance happened before dinner was
done. Mrs. Steerforth speaking to me about my intention of
going down into Suffolk, I said at hazard how glad I should
be, if Steerforth would only go there with me ; and explaining
to him that I was going to see my old nurse, and Mr. Peg-
gotty's family, I reminded him of the boatman whom he had
seen at school.

"Oh! That bluff fellow!" said Steerforth. "He had a
son with him, hadn't he ? "

" No. That was his nephew," I replied ; " whom he
adopted, though, as a son. He has a very pretty little niece
too, whom he adopted as a daughter. In short, his house (or
rather his boat, for he lives in one, on dry land) is full of
people who are objects of his generosity and kindness. You.
would be delighted to see that household."

" Should I ? " said Steerforth. " Well, I think I should.
I must see what can be done. It would be worth a journey —
not to mention the pleasure of a journey with you, Daisy, —
to see that sort of people together, and to make one of 'em."

My heart leaped with a new hope of pleasure. But it was
in reference to the tone in which he had spoken of " that sort
of people," that Miss Dartle, whose sparkling eyes had been
watchful of us, now broke in again.

" Oh, but, really ? Do tell me. Are they, though ? " she
said.

" Are they what ? And are who what ? " said Steerforth.

" That sort of people. — Are they really animals and clods,
and beings of another order ? I want to know, so much."

" Why, there's a pretty wide separation between them and
us," said Steerforth, with indifference. " They are not to be
expected to be as sensitive as we are. Their delicacy is not



OF DAVID COPPEBFIBLD. 319

to be shocked, or hurt very easily. They are wonderfully
virtuous, I dare say — some people contend for that, at least,
and I am sure I don't want to contradict them — but they
have not very fine natures, and they may be thankful that,
like their coarse rough skins, they are not easily wounded."

" Really ! " said Miss Dartle. " Well, I don't know, now,
Avhen I have been better pleased than to hear that. It's so
consoling ! It's such a delight to know that when they suffer
they don't feel ! Sometimes I have been quite uneasy for
that sort of people ; but now I shall just dismiss the idea of
them altogether. Live and learn. I had my doubts, I con-
fess, but now they're cleared up. I didn't know, and now
I do know, and that shows the advantage of asking— don't

it?"

I believed that Steerforth had said what he had, in jest, or
to draw Miss Dartle out ; and I expected him to say as much
when she was gone, and we two were sitting before the fire.
But he merely asked me what I thought of her.

" She is very clever, is she not ? " I asked.

"Clever! She brings everything to a grindstone/' said
Steerforth, " and sharpens it, as she has sharpened her own
face and figure these years past. She has worn herself away
by constant sharpening. She is all edge."

" What a remarkable scar that is upon her lip ! " I said.

Steerforth's face fell, and he paused a moment.

" Why, the fact is," he returned, " — I did that."

" By an unfortunate accident ! "

" No. I was a young boy, and she exasperated me, and I
threw a hammer at her. A promising young angel I must

have been ! "

I was deeply sorry to have touched on such a painful theme,

but that was useless now.

"She has borne the mark ever since, as you see," said
Steerforth ; " and she'll bear it to her grave, if she ever rests
in one —though I can hardly believe she will ever rest any-
where. She was the motherless child of a sort of cousin of
my father's. He died one day. My mother, who was then
a widow, brought her here to be company to her. She has a
couple of thousand pounds of her own, and saves the interest



320 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

of it every yea*, to add to the principal. There's the history
of Miss Eosa Dartle for you."

" And I have no doubt she loves you like a brother ? "
said I.

" Humph ! " retorted Steerf orth, looking at the fire. " Some
brothers are not loved over much; and some love — but help
yourself, Copperfield ? We'll drink the daisies of the field, in
compliment to you ; and the lilies of the valley, that toil not,
neither do they spin, in compliment to me — the more shame
for me ! " A moody smile that had overspread his features
cleared off as he said this merrily, and he was his own frank,
winning self again.

I could not help glancing at the scar with a painful interest
when we went in to tea. It was not long before I observed
that it was the most susceptible part of her face, and that,
when she turned pale, that mark altered first, and became a
dull lead-colored streak, lengthening out to its full extent, like
a mark in invisible ink brought to the fire. There was a little
altercation between her and Steerforth about a cast of the dice
at backgammon — when I thought her, for one moment, in a^
storm of rage ; and then I saw it start forth like the old writ-
ing on the wall.

It was no matter of wonder to me to find Mrs. Steerforth
devoted to her son. She seemed to be able to speak or think
about nothing else. She showed me his picture as an infant,
m in a locket, with some of his baby-hair in it ; she showed me
his picture as he had been when I first knew him ; and she
wore at her breast his picture as he was now. All the letters
he had ever written to her, she kept in a cabinet near her own
chair, by the fire ; and she would have read me some of them,
and I should have been very glad to hear them too, if he had
not interposed, and coaxed her out of the design.

" It was at Mr. Creakle's, my son tells me, that you first
became acquainted," said Mrs. Steerforth, as she and I were
talking at one table, while they played backgammon at
another. " Indeed, I recollect his speaking at that time, of a
pupil younger than himself who had taken his fancy there ;
but your name, as you may suppose, has not lived in my
memory."



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 321

"He was very generous and noble to me in those days, I
assure you, ma'am/' said I, " and I stood in need of such a
friend. I should have been quite crushed without him."

« He is always generous and noble/' said Mrs. Steerforth,

proudly.

I subscribed to this with all my heart, God knows. She
knew I did ; for the stateliness of her manner already abated
towards me, except when she spoke in praise of him, and
then her air was always lofty.

" It was not a fit school generally for my son/' said she ;
" far from it ; but there were particular circumstances to be
considered at the time, of more importance even than that
selection. My son's high spirit made it desirable that he
should be placed with some man who felt its superiority, and
would be content to bow himself before it; and we found
such a man there."

I knew that, knowing the fellow. And yet I did not despise
him the more for it, but thought it a redeeming quality in
him — if he could be allowed any grace for not resisting one
so irresistible as Steerforth.

"My son's great capacity was tempted on, there, by a feel-
ing of voluntary emulation and conscious pride," the fond
lady went on to say. "He would have risen against all
constraint ; but he found himself the monarch of the place,
and he haughtily determined to be worthy of his station. It
was like himself."

I echoed, with all my heart and soul, that it was like him-

self.

" So my son took, of his own will, and on no compulsion, to
the course in which he can always, when it is his pleasure, out-
strip every competitor/' she pursued. "My son informs me,
Mr. Copperfield, that you were quite devoted to him, and that
when you met yesterday you made yourself known to him
with tears of joy. I should be an affected woman if I made
any pretence of being surprised by my son's inspiring such
emotions ; but I cannot be indifferent to any one who is so
sensible of his merit, and I am very glad to see you here, and
can assure you that he feels an unusual friendship for you,
and that you may rely on his protection."

VOL. I — 21



322 THE PEBSONAL HISTOBY AND EXPEBIENGE

Miss Dartle played backgammon as eagerly as she did
everything else. If I had seen her, first, at the board, I
should have fancied that her figure had got thin, and her eyes
had got large, over that pursuit, and no other. But I am very
much mistaken if she missed a word of this, or lost a look of
mine as I received it with the utmost pleasure, and, honored
by Mrs. Steerforth' s confidence; felt older than I had done'
since I left Canterbury.

When the evening was pretty far spent, and a tray of
glasses and decanters came in, Steerforth promised, over the
fire, that he would seriously think of going down into the
country with me. There was no hurry, he said; a week hence
would do ; and his mother hospitably said the same. While
we were talking, he more than once called me Daisy ; which
brought Miss Dartle out again.

"But really, Mr. Copperfield," she asked, "is it a nick-
name? And why does he give it you? Is it — eh? —
because he thinks you young and innocent ? I am so stupid
in these things."

I colored in replying that I believed it was.

" Oh- ! " said Miss Dartle. " Now I am glad to know that !
I ask for information, and I am glad to know it. He thinks
you young and innocent; and so you are his friend. Well,
that's quite delightful ! "

She went to bed soon after this, and Mrs. Steerforth retired
too. Steerforth and I, after lingering for half an hour over
the fire, talking about Traddles and all the rest of them at old
Salem House, went up stairs together. Steerforth's room was
next to mine, and I went in to look at it. It was a picture of
comfort, full of easy chairs, cushions, and footstools, worked
by his mother's hand, and with no sort of thing omitted that
could help to render it complete. Finally, her handsome feat-
ures looked down on her darling from a portrait on the wall,
as if it were even something to her that her likeness should
watch him while he slept.

I found the fire burning clear enough in my rOom by this
time, and the curtains drawn before the windows and round
the bed, giving it a very snug appearance. I sat down in a
great chair upon the hearth to meditate on my happiness ; and





had enjoyed the contemplation of it for some time, when I
found a likeness of Miss Dartle looking eagerly at me from
above the chimney-piece.

It was a startling likeness, and necessarily had a startling
look. The painter hadn't made the scar, but J made it ; and
there it was, coming and going : now confined to the upper
lip as I had seen it at dinner, and now showing the whole
extent of the wound inflicted by the hammer, as I had seen it
when she was passionate.

I wondered peevishly why they couldn't put her anywhere
else instead of quartering her on me. To get rid of her, I
undressed quickly, extinguished my light, and went to bed.
But, as I fell asleep, I could not forget that she was still there
looking, "Is it really, though ? I want to know;" and when
I awoke in the night, I found that I was uneasily asking all
sorts of people in my dreams whether it really was or not —
without knowing what I meant.



324 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE



CHAPTEE XXI.



LITTLE EM ? LY.



There was a servant in that house, a man who, I understood,
was usually with Steerforth, and had come into his service at
the University, who was in appearance a pattern of respecta-
bility. I believe there never existed in his station a more
respectable-looking man. He was taciturn, soft-footed, very
quiet in his manner, deferential, observant, always at hand
when wanted, and never near when not wanted ; but his great
claim to consideration was his respectability. He had not a
pliant face, he had rather a stiff neck, rather a tight smooth
head with short hair clinging to it at the sides, a soft way of
speaking with a peculiar habit of whispering the letter S so
distinctly, that he seemed to use it oftener than any other
man ; but every peculiarity that he had he made respectable.
If his nose had been upside-down, he would have made that
respectable. He surrounded himself with an atmosphere of
respectability, and walked secure in it. It would have been
next to impossible to suspect him of anything wrong, he was
so thoroughly respectable. Nobody could have thought of
putting him in a livery, he was so highly respectable. To have
imposed any derogatory Avork upon him, would have been to
inflict a wanton insult on the feelings of a most respectable
man. And of this, I noticed the women-servants in the house-
hold were so intuitively conscious, that they always did such
Avork themselves, and generally while he read the paper by
the pantry fire.

Such a self-contained man I never saw. But in that quality,
as in every other he possessed, he only seemed to be the more
respectable. Even the fact that no one knew his Christian
name, seemed to form a part of his respectability. Nothing
could be objected against his surname Littimer, by Avhich he



OF DAVID COPPEEFIELD. 325

was known. Peter might have been hanged, or Tom trans-
ported ; but Littimer was perfectly respectable.

It was occasioned; I suppose, by the reverend nature of
respectability in the abstract, but I felt particularly young in
this man's presence. How old he was himself I could not
g Uess — an d that again went to his credit on the same score ;
for in the calmness of respectability he might have numbered
fifty years as Avell as thirty.

Littimer was in my room in the morning before I was up,
to bring me that reproachful shaving-water, and to put out my
clothes. When I undrew the curtains and looked out of bed,
I saw him, in an equable temperature of respectability, unaf-
fected by the east wind of January, and not even breathing
frostily, standing my boots right and left in the first dancing
position, and blowing specks of dust off my coat as he laid it
down like a baby.

I gave him good morning, and asked him what o' clock it
was. He took out of his pocket the most respectable hunting-
watch I ever saw, and preventing the spring with his thumb
from opening far, looked in at the face as if he were consult-
ing an oracular oyster, shut it up again, and said, if I pleased,
it was half-past eight.

" Mr. Steerf orth will be glad to hear how you have rested,
sir."

"Thank you," said I, "very well indeed. Is Mr. Steerf orth
quite well ? " .

" Thank you, sir, Mr. Steerf orth is tolerably well." An-
other of his characteristics, — no use of superlatives. A cool,
calm medium always.

" Is there anything more I can have the honor of doing for
you, sir ? The warning-bell will ring at nine ; the family take
breakfast at half-past nine."

"Nothing, I thank you."

" I thank you, sir, if you please ; " and with that, and with
a little inclination of his head when he passed the bedside, as
an apology for correcting me, he went out, shutting the door
as delicately as if I had just fallen into a sweet sleep on which
my life depended.

Every morning we held exactly this conversation: never



326 THE PER SON AL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

any more, and never any less : and yet, invariably, however
far I might have been lifted out of myself over-night, and
advanced towards maturer years, by Steerforth's companion-
ship, or Mrs. Steerforth's confidence, or Miss Dartle's conver-
sation, in the presence of this most respectable man I became
as our smaller poets sing, " a boy again."

He got horses for us ; and Steerforth, who knew everything,
gave me lessons in riding. He provided foils for us, and
Steerforth gave me lessons in fencing — gloves, and I began,
of the same master, to improve in boxing. It gave me no
manner of concern that Steerforth should find me a novice in
these sciences, but I never could bear to show my want of
skill before the respectable Littimer. I had no reason to be-
lieve that Littimer understood such arts himself ; he never led
me to suppose anything of the kind, by so much as the vibra-
tion of one of his respectable eyelashes ; yet w r henever he was
by, while we w r ere practising, I felt myself the greenest and
most inexperienced of mortals.

I am particular about this man, because he made a paticular
effect on me at that time, and because of what took place
thereafter.

The week passed away in a most delightful manner. It
passed rapidly, as may be supposed, to one entranced as I
was ; and yet it gave me so many occasions for knowing Steer-
forth better, and admiring him more in a thousand respects,
that at its close I seemed to have been with him for a much
longer time. A dashing way he had of treating me like a
plaything, was more agreeable to me than any behavior he
could have adopted. It reminded me of our old acquaintance ;
it seemed the natural sequel of it ; it showed me that he was
unchanged ; it relieved me of any uneasiness I might have felt,
in comparing my merits with his, and measuring my claims
upon his friendship by any equal standard ; above all, it was
a familiar, unrestrained, affectionate demeanor that he used
towards no one else. As he had treated me at school differ-
ently from all the rest, I joyfully believed that he treated me
in life unlike any other friend he had. I believed that I was
nearer to his heart than any other friend, and my own heart
warmed with attachment to him.



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 327

He made up his mind to go with me into the country, and
the day arrived for our departure. He had been doubtful at
first whether to take Littimer or not, but decided to leave him
at home. The respectable creature, satisfied with his lot
whatever it was, arranged our portmanteaus on the little car-
riage that was to take us into London, as if they were in-
tended to defy the shocks of ages j and received my modestly
proffered donation with perfect tranquillity.

We bade adieu to Mrs. Steerforth and Miss Dartle, with
many thanks on my part, and much kindness on the devoted
mother's. The last thing I saw was Littiiner's unruffled eye ;
fraught, as I fancied, with the silent conviction, that I was
very young indeed.

What I felt, in returning so auspiciously to the old familiar
places, I shall not endeavor to describe. We went down by
the Mail. I was so concerned, I recollect, even for the honor
of Yarmouth, that when Steerforth said, as we drove through
its dark streets to the inn, that, as well as he could make out,
it was a good, queer, out-of-the-way kind of hole, I was highly
pleased. We went to bed on our arrival (I observed a pair of
dirty shoes and gaiters in connection with my old friend the
Dolphin as we passed that door), and breakfasted late in the
morning. Steerforth, who was in great spirits, had been stroll-
ing about the beach before I was up, and had made acquaint-
ance, he said, with half the boatmen in the place. Moreover,
he had seen, in the distance, what he was sure must be the
identical house of Mr. Peggotty, with smoke coming out of the
chimney ; and had had a great mind, he told me, to walk in
and swear he was myself grown out of knowledge.

" When do you propose to introduce me there, Daisy ? " he
said. " I am at your disposal. Make your own arrangements."

"Why, I was thinking that this evening would be a good
time, Steerforth, when they are all sitting round the fire. I
should like you to see it when it's snug, it's such a curious
place."

" So be it ! " returned Steerforth. " This evening."

"I shall not give them any notice that we are here, you
know," said I, delighted. "We must take them by surprise."

"Ohj of course! It's no fun," said Steerforth, "unless we



328 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

take them by surprise. Let us see the natives iu their aborig-
inal condition."

" Though they are that sort of people that you mentioned,"
I returned.

" Aha ! What ! you recollect my skirmishes with Rosa, do
you ? " he exclaimed, with a quick look. " Confound the girl,
I am half afraid of her. She's like a goblin to me. But never
mind her. Now what are you going to do ? You are going to
see your nurse, I suppose ? "

" Why, yes," I said, " I must see Peggotty first of all."

"Well," replied Steerforth, looking at his watch. " Sup-
pose I deliver you up to be cried over for a couple of hours.
Is that long enough ? "

I answered, laughing, that I thought we might get through
it in that time, but that he must come also ; for he would find
that his renown had preceded him, and that he was almost as
great a personage as I was.

u Til come anywhere you like," said Steerforth, " or do any-
thing you like. Tell me where to come to ; and in two hours
Pll produce myself in any state you please, sentimental 6r
comical."

I gave him minute directions for finding the residence of
Mr. Barkis, carrier to Blunderstone and elsewhere; and, on
this understanding, went out alone. There was a sharp brac-
ing air ; the ground was dry ; the sea was crisp and clear ;
the sun was diffusing abundance of light, if not much warmth ;
and everything was fresh and lively. I was so fresh and lively
myself, in the pleasure of being there, that I could have stopped
the people in the streets and shaken hands with them.

The streets looked small, of course. The streets that we
have only seen as children always do, I believe, when we go
back to them. But I had forgotten nothing in them, and
found nothing changed, until I came to Mr. Omer's shop.
Omer and Joram was now written up, where Omer used to
be; but the inscription, Draper, Tailor, Haberdasher,
Funeral Purxisher, &c, remained as it was.

My footsteps seemed to tend so naturally to the shop-door,
after I had read these words from over the way, that I went
across the road and looked in. There was a pretty woman at



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 329

the back of the shop, dancing a little child in her arms, while
another little fellow clung to her apron. I had no difficulty in
recognizing either Minnie or Minnie's children. The glass-
door of the parlor was not open ; but in the workshop across
the yard I could faintly hear the old tune playing, as if it had
never left off.

"Is Mr. Omer at home ? " said I, entering. "I should like
to see him, for a moment, if he is."

" Oh yes, sir, he is at home," said Minnie ; " this weather
don't suit his asthma out of doors. Joe, call your grand-
father ! "

The little fellow, who was holding her apron, gave such a
lusty shout, that the sound of it made him bashful, and he
buried his face in her skirts, to her great admiration. I heard
a heavy puffing and blowing coming towards us, and soon Mr.
Omer, shorter-winded than of yore, but not much older look-
ing, stood before me.

"Servant, sir," said Mr. Omer. "What can I do for you,

sir ? "

" You can shake hands with me, Mr. Omer, if you please,"
said I, putting out my own. " You were very good-natured
to me once, when I am afraid I didn't show that I thought so."

"Was I though?" returned the old man. "I'm glad to
hear it, but I don't remember when. Are you sure it was
me?"

" Quite."

" I think my memory has got as short as my breath," said
Mr. Omer, looking at me and shaking his head ; " for I don't
remember you."

" Don't you remember your coming to the coach to meet me,
and my having breakfast here, and our riding out to Blunder-
stone together : you, and I, and Mrs. Joram, and Mr. Joram
too — who wasn't her husband then ? "

" Why, Lord bless my soul ! " exclaimed Mr. Omer, after
being thrown by his surprise into a fit of coughing, " you don't
say so ! Minnie, my dear, you recollect ? Dear me, yes —the
party was a lady, I think ? "

" My mother," I rejoined.

"To — be — sure," said Mr. Omer, touching my waistcoat



330 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

with his f orefinger, " and there was a little child too ! There
was two parties. The little party was laid along with the
other party. Over at Blunderstone it was, of course. Dear
me ! And how have you been since ? "

Very well, I thanked him, as I hoped he had "been too.

" Oh ! nothing to grumble at, you know," said Mr. Oiner.
"I find my breath gets short, but it seldom gets longer as a
man gets older. I take it as it comes, and make the most of
it. That's the best way, ain't it ? "

Mr. Oiner coughed again, in consequence of laughing, and
was assisted out of his fit by his daughter, who now stood
close beside us, dancing her smallest child on the counter.

"Dear me!" said Mr. Omer. "Yes, to be sure. Two par-
ties ! Why, in that very ride, if you'll believe me, the day
was named for my Minnie to marry Joram. <Do name it,
sir/ says Joram. 'Yes, do, father/ says Minnie. And now
he's come into the business; And look here ! The youngest ! "

Minnie laughed, and stroked her banded hair upon her
temples, as her father put one of his fat fingers into the hand
of the child she was dancing on the counter.

" Two parties, of course ! " said Mr. Omer, nodding his head
retrospectively. " Ex-actly so ! And Joram's at work, at this
minute, on a gray one with silver nails, not this measurement "

— the measurement of the dancing child upon the counter —
" by a good two inches. — Will you take something ? "

I thanked him, but declined.

"Let me see," said Mr. Omer. "Barkis's the carrier's wife

— Peggotty's the boatman's sister — she had something to do
with your family ? She was in service there, sure ? "

My answering in the affirmative gave him great satisfaction.

"I believe my breath will get long next, my memory's get-
ting so much so," said Mr. Omer. "Well, sir, we've got a
young relation of hers here, under articles to us, that has as
elegant a taste in the dress-making business — I assure you I
don't believe there's a Duchess in England can touch her."

" Not little Em'ly ? " said I, involuntarily.

"Em'ly's her name," said Mr. Omer, "and she's little too.
But if you'll believe me, she has such a face of her own that
half the women in this town are mad against her."



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 331

" Nonsense, father ! " cried Minnie.

"My dear," said Mr. Omer, "I don't say it's the case with
you," winking at me, " but I say that half the women in Yar-
mouth — ah! and in five mile round — are mad against that
girl."

"Then she should have kept to her own station in life,
father," said Minnie, " and not have given them any hold to
talk about her, and then they couldn't have done it."

" Couldn't have done it, my dear ! " retorted Mr. Omer.
"Couldn't have done it! Is that your knowledge of life?
What is there that any woman couldn't do, that she shouldn't
do — especially on the subject of another woman's good
looks?"

I really thought it was all over with Mr. Omer, after he
had uttered this libellous pleasantry. He coughed to that
extent, and his breath eluded all his attempts to recover it
with that obstinacy, that I fully expected to see his head go
down behind the counter, and his little black breeches, with
the rusty little bunches of ribbons at the knees, come quivering
up in a last ineffectual struggle. At length, however, he got
better, though he still panted hard, and was so exhausted that
he was obliged to sit on the stool of the shop-desk.

"You see," he said, wiping his head, and breathing with
difficulty, "she hasn't taken much to any companions here;
she hasn't taken kindly to any particular acquaintances and
friends, not to mention sweethearts. In consequence, an ill-
natured story got about, that Em'ly wanted to be a lady.
Now, my opinion is, that it came into circulation principally
on account of her sometimes saying at the school, that if she
was a lady, she would like to do so and so for her uncle —
don't you see ? — and buy him such 'and such fine things."

"I assure you, Mr. Omer, she has said so to me," I returned
eagerly, " when we were both children."

Mr. Omer nodded his head and rubbed his chin. " Just so.
Then out of a very little, she could dress herself, you see,
better than most others could out of a deal, and that made
things unpleasant. Moreover, she was rather what might be
called wayward — I'll go so far as to say what I should call
wayward myself," said Mr. Omer, " — didn't know her own



332 THE PEE SON AL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

mind quite — a little spoiled — and couldn't, at first, exactly
bind herself down. No more than that was ever said against
her, Minnie ? "

"No, father," said Mrs. Joram. " That's the worst, I
believe."

"So, when she got a situation," said Mr. Omer, "to keep a
fractious old lady company, they didn't very well agree, and
she didn't stop. At last she came here, apprenticed for three
years. Nearly two of 'em are over, and she has been as good
a girl as ever was. Worth any six ! Minnie, is she worth
any six, now ? "

"Yes, father," replied Minnie. "Never say I detracted
from her ! "

"Very good," said Mr. Omer. "That's right. And so,
young gentleman," he added, after a few moments' further
rubbing of his chin, "that you may not consider me long-
winded as well as short-breathed, I believe that's all about it."

As they had spoken in a subdued tone, while speaking of
Em'ly, I had no doubt that she was near. On my asking now,
if that were not so, Mr. Omer nodded yes, and nodded towards
the door of the parlor. My hurried inquiry, if I might peep
in, was answered with a free permission ; and, looking through
the glass, I saw her sitting at her work. I saw her, a most
beautiful little creature, with the cloudless blue eyes, that had
looked into my childish heart, turned laughingly upon another
child of Minnie's who was playing near her ; with enough of
wilfulness in her bright face to justify what I had heard; with
much of the old capricious coyness lurking in it 5 but with
nothing in her pretty looks, I am sure, but what was meant
for goodness and for happiness, and what was on a- good and
happy course.

The tune across the yard that seemed as if it never had left
off — alas ! it was the tune that never does leave off — was
beating, softly, all the while.

" Wouldn't you like to step in," said Mr. Omer, " and speak
to her ? Walk in and speak to her, sir ! Make yourself at
home ! "

I was too bashful to do so then — I was afraid of confusing
her, and I was no less afraid of confusing myself: but I



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 333

informed myself of the hour at which she left of an evening,
in order that our visit might be timed accordingly ; and taking
leave of Mr. Omer, and his pretty daughter, and her little
children, went away to my dear old Peggotty's.

Here she was, in the tiled-kitchen, cooking dinner ! The
moment I knocked at the door she opened it, and asked me
what I pleased to want. I looked at her with a smile, but she
gave me no smile in return. I had never ceased to write to
her, but it must have been seven years since we had met.

" Is Mr. Barkis at home, ma'ain ? " I said, feigning to speak
roughly to her.

"He's at home, sir," returned Peggotty, "but he's bad abed
with the rheumatics."

"Don't he go over to Blunderstone now ?" I asked.

"When he's well he do," she answered.

" Do you ever go there, Mrs. Barkis ? "

She looked at me more attentively, and I noticed a quick
movement of her hands towards each other.

"Because I want to ask a question about a house there, that
they call the — what is it ? — the Bookery," said I.

She took a step backward, and put out her hands in an
undecided frightened way, as if to keep me off.

" Peggotty ! " I cried to her.

She cried, " My darling boy ! " and we both burst into tears,
and were locked in one another's arms.

What extravagancies she committed; what laughing and
crying over me ; what pride she showed, what joy, what sor-
row that she whose pride and joy I might have been, could
never hold me in a fond embrace ; I have not the heart to tell.
I was troubled with no misgivings that it was young in me to
respond to her emotions. I had never laughed and cried in all
my life, I dare say — not even to her — more freely than I did
that morning.

"Barkis will be so glad," said Peggotty, wiping her eyes
with her apron, "that it'll do him more good than pints of
liniment. May I go and tell him you are here ? Will you
come up and see him, my dear ? "

Of course I would. But Peggotty could not get out of the
room as easily as she meant to, for as often as she got to the



334 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

door and looked round at me, she came back again to have
another laugh and another cry upon niy shoulder. At last, to
make the matter easier, I went up stairs with her ; and having
waited outside for a minute, while she said a w T ord of prepara-
tion to Mr. Barkis, presented myself before that invalid.

He received me with absolute enthusiasm. He was too
rheumatic to be shaken hands with, but he begged me to shake
the tassel on the top of his nightcap, which I did most cor-
dially. When I sat down by the side of the bed, he said that
it did him a world of good to feel as if he was driving me on
the Blunderstone road again. As he lay in bed, face upward,
and so covered, with that exception, that he seemed to be
nothing but a face — like a conventional cherubim — he looked
the queerest object I ever beheld.

" What name was it as I wrote up in the cart, sir ? " said
Mr. Barkis, with a slow rheumatic smile.

H Ah ! Mr. Barkis, we had some grave talks about that mat-
ter, hadn't we ? "

" I was willin' a long time, sir ? " said Mr. Barkis.

" A long time," said I.

" And I don't regret it," said Mr. Barkis. " Do you remem-
ber what you told me once, about her making all the apple
parsties and doing all the cooking ? "

" Yes, very well," I returned.

" It was as true," said Mr. Barkis, " as turnips is. It was
as true," said Mr. Barkis, nodding his nightcap, which was his
only means of emphasis, " as taxes is. And nothing's truer
than them."

Mr. Barkis turned his eyes upon me, as if for my assent to
this result of his reflections in bed ; and I gave it.

"^Nothing's truer than them," repeated Mr. Barkis ; "a man
as poor as I am finds that out in his mind when he's laid up.
I'm a very poor man, sir."

"I am sorry to hear it, Mr. Barkis."

" A very poor man, indeed I am," said Mr. Barkis.

Here his right hand came slowly and feebly from under the
bedclothes, and with a purposeless uncertain grasp took hold
of a stick which was loosely tied to the side of the bed. After
some poking about with this instrument, in the course of



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 335

which his face assumed a variety of distracted expressions,
Mr. Barkis poked it against a box, an end of which had been
visible to me all the time. Then his face became composed.

" Old clothes/' said Mr. Barkis.

» Oh ! « said I.

"I wish it was Money, sir," said Mr. Barkis.

" I wish it was, indeed," said I.

"But it ain't," said Mr. Barkis, opening both his eyes as
wide as he possibly could.

I expressed myself quite sure of that, and Mr. Barkis, turn-
ing his. eyes more gently to his wife, said:

" She's the usef ullest and best of women, C. P. Barkis. All
the praise that any one can give to C. P. Barkis, she deserves,
and more ! My dear, you'll get a dinner to-day, for company ;
something good to eat and drink, will you ? "

I should have protested against this unnecessary demonstra-
tion in my honor, but that I saw Peggotty, on the opposite
side of the bed, extremely anxious I should not. So I held
my peace.

" I have got a trifle of money somewhere about me, my dear,"
said Mr. Barkis, "but Pm a little tired. If you and Mr.
David will leave me for a short nap, I'll try and find it when
I wake."

We left the room in compliance with this request. When
we got outside the door, Peggotty informed me that Mr. Bar-
kis, being now " a little nearer " than he used to be, always
resorted to this same device before producing a single coin from
his store ; and that he endured unheard-of agonies in crawling
out of bed alone, and taking it from that unlucky box. In
effect, we presently heard him uttering suppressed groans of
the most dismal nature, as this magpie proceeding racked him
in every joint ; but while Peggotty's eyes were full of compas-
sion for him, she said his generous impulse would do him
good, and it was better not to check it. So he groaned on
until he had got into bed again, suffering, I have no doubt, a
martyrdom'; and then called jis in, pretending to have just
woke up from a refreshing sleep, and to produce a guinea from
under his pillow. His satisfaction in which happy imposition
on us, and in having preserved the impenetrable secret of the



336 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

box, appeared to be a sufficient compensation to him for all
his tortures.

I prepared Peggotty for Steerforth/s arrival, and it was not
long before he came. I am persuaded she knew no difference
between his having been a personal benefactor of hers, and a
kind friend to me, and that she would have received him with
the utmost gratitude and devotion in any case. But his easy,
spirited good-humor ; his genial manner, his handsome looks,
his natural gift of adapting himself to whomsoever he pleased,
and making direct, when he cared to do it, to the main point
of interest in anybody's heart ; bound her to him wholly in
five minutes. His manner to me, alone, would have won her.
But, through all* these causes combined, I sincerely believe she
had a kind of adoration for him before he left the house that
night.

He stayed there with me to dinner — if I were to say will-
ingly, I should not half express how readily and gaily. He
went into Mr. Barkis's room like light and air, brightening
and refreshing it as if he were healthy weather. There was
no noise, no effort, no consciousness, in anything he did ; but
in everything an indescribable lightness, a seeming impossi-
bility of doing anything else, or doing anything better, which
was so graceful, so natural, and agreeable, that it overcomes
me, even now, in the remembrance.

We made merry in the little parlor, where the Book of
Martyrs, unthumbed since my time, was laid out upon the
desk as of old, and where I now turned over its terrific pic-
tures, remembering the old sensations they had awakened, but
not feeling them. When Peggotty spoke of what she called
my room, and of its being ready for me at night, and of her
hoping I would occupy it, before I could so much as look at
Steerforth, hesitating, he was possessed of the whole case.

"Of course," he said. " You'll sleep here, while we stay,
and I shall sleep at the hotel."

"But to bring you so far," I returned, "and to separate,
seems bad companionship, Steerforth."

"Why in the name of Heaven, where do you naturally
belong ! " he said. " What is c seems ; compared to that ! " It
was settled at once.



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 337

He maintained all his delightful qualities to the last, until
we started forth, at eight o'clock, for Mr. Peggotty's boat.
Indeed, they were more and more brightly exhibited as the
hours went on ; for I thought even then, and I have no doubt
now, that the consciousness of success in his determination to
please, inspired him with a new delicacy of perception, and
made it, subtle as it was, more easy to him. If any one had
told me, then, that all this was a brilliant game, played for
the excitement of the moment, for the employment of high
spirits, in the thoughtless love of superiority, in a mere waste-
ful careless course of winning what was worthless to him, and
next minute thrown away — I say, if any one had told me such
a lie that night, I wonder in what manner of receiving it my
indignation would have found a vent !

Probably only in an increase, had that been possible, of the
romantic feelings of fidelity and friendship with which I
walked beside him, over the dark wintry sands, towards the
old boat ; the wind sighing around us even more mournfully
than it had sighed and moaned upon the night when I first
darkened Mr. Peggotty's door.

" This is a wild kind of place, Steerforth, is it not ? "
"Dismal enough in the dark," he said; "and the sea roars
as if it were hungry for us. Is that the boat, where I see a
light yonder ? "

" That's the boat," said I.

"And it's the same I saw this morning," he returned. "I
came straight to it, by instinct, I suppose."

We said no more as we approached the light, but made softly
for the door. I laid my hand upon the latch ; and whispering
Steerforth to keep close to me, went in.

A murmur of voices had been audible on the outside,
and, at the moment of our entrance, a clapping of hands :
which latter noise, I was surprised to see, proceeded from the
generally disconsolate Mrs. Gummidge. But Mrs. Gummidge
was not the only person there, who was unusually excited.
Mr. Peggotty, his face lighted up with uncommon satisfaction,
and laughing with all his might, held his rough arms wide
open, as if for little Em'ly to run into them ; Ham, with a
mixed expression in his face of admiration, exultation, and a
vol. i—22



338 THE PERSONAL HISTOEY AND EXPERIENCE

lumbering sort of bashfulness that sat upon him very well,
held little Em'ly by the hand, as if he were presenting her to
Mr. Peggotty; little Em'ly herself, blushing and shy, but
delighted with Mr. Peggotty's delight, as her joyous eyes
expressed, was stopped by our entrance (for she saw us first)
in the very act of springing from Ham to nestle in Mr. Peg-
gotty's embrace. In the first glimpse we had of them all, and
at the moment of our passing from the dark cold night into
the warm light room, this was the way in which they were all
employed: Mrs. Gummidge in the back ground, clapping her
hands like a madwoman.

The little picture was so instantaneously dissolved by our
going in, that one might have doubted whether it had ever
been. I was in the midst of the astonished family, face to
face with Mr. Peggotty, and holding out my hand to him,
when Ham shouted :

" Mas'r Davy ! It's Mas'r Davy ! »

In a moment we were all shaking hands with xme another,
and asking one another how we did, and telling one another
how glad we were to meet, and all talking at once. Mr.
Peggotty was so proud and overjoyed to see us, that he did
not know what to say or do, but kept over and over again
shaking hands with me, and then with Steerforth, and then
with me, and then ruffling his shaggy hair all over his head,
and laughing with such glee and triumph, that it was a treat
to see him.

"Why, that you two gent'lmen — gent'lmen growed —
should come to this here roof to-night, of all nights in my
life," said Mr. Peggotty, " is such a thing as never happened
afore, I do rightly believe ! Em'ly, my darling, come here !
Come here, my little witch ! Theer's Mas'r Dav} T 's friend,
my dear ! Theer's the gent'lman as you've heerd on, Em'ly.
He comes to see you, along with Mas'r Davy, on the brightest
night of your uncle'a life as ever was or will be, Gorm the
t'other one, and horroar for it ! "

After delivering this speech all in a breath, and with extraor-
dinary animation and pleasure, Mr. Peggotty put one of his
large hands rapturously on each side of his niece's face, and
kissing it a dozen times, laid it with a gentle pride and love




<





upon his broad chest, and patted it as if his hand had been
a lady's. Then he let her go ; and as she ran into the little
chamber where I used to sleep, looked round upon us, quite
hot and out of breath with his uncommon satisfaction.

" If you two gent'lmen — gent'lmen growed now, and such
gent'lmen — " said Mr. Peggotty.

"So th' are, so Ware!" cried Ham. "Well said! So
th' are. Mas'r Davy bor — gent'lmen growed — so th' are ! "

"If you two gent'lmen, gent'lmen growed," said Mr. Peg-
gotty, " don't ex-cuse me for being in a state of mind, when
you understand matters, I'll arks your pardon. Em'ly, my
d ear ? — She knows Fm a going to tell," here his delight broke
out again, " and has made off. Would you be so good as look
arter her, Mawther, for a minute ? "

Mrs. Gummidge nodded and disappeared.

u If this ain't," said Mr. Peggotty, sitting down among us
by the fire, " the brightest night o' my life, I'm a shellfish —
biled too — and more I can't say. This here little Em'ly, sir,"
in a* low voice to Steerforth, " — her as you see a blushing
here just now — "

Steerforth only nodded ; but with such a pleased expression
of interest, and of participation in Mr. Peggotty's feelings,
that the latter answered him as if he had spoken.

" To be sure," said Mr. Peggotty. " That's her, and so she
is. Thankee, sir."

Ham nodded to me several times, as if he would have said
so too.

" This here little Em'ly of ours," said Mr. Peggotty, " has
been, in our house, what I suppose (I'm an ignorant man, but
that's my belief) no one but a little bright-eyed creetur can
be in a house. She ain't my child ; I never had one ; but I
couldn't love her more. You understand ! I couldn't do it ! "

" I quite understand," said Steerforth,

"I know you do, sir," returned Mr. Peggotty, "and thankee
again. Mas'r Davy, he can remember what she was ; you
may judge for your own self what she is ; but neither of you
can't fully know what she has been, is, and w r ill be, to my
loving art. I am rough, sir," said Mr. Peggotty, " I am as
rough as a sea Porkypine ; but no one, unless, mayhap, it is a



340 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

woman, can know, I think, what our little Em'ly is to me.
And betwixt ourselves," sinking his voice lower yet, "that
woman's name ain't Missis Grummidge neither, though she has
a world of merits."

Mr. Peggotty ruffled his hair again with both hands, as a
further preparation for what he was going to say, and went
on with a hand upon each of his knees.

" There was a certain person as had know'd our Em'ly,
from the time when her father was drownded ; as had seen
her constant; when a babby, when a young gal, when a
woman. Not much of a person to look at, he warn't," said
Mr. Peggotty, " something o' my own build — sough — a good
deal o' the sou'-wester in him — wery salt — but, on the whole,
a honest sort of a chap, with his art in the right place."

I thought I had never seen Ham grin to anything like the
extent to which he sat grinning at us now.

"What does this here blessed tarpaulin go and do," said
Mr. Peggotty, with his face one high noon of enjoyment, " but
he loses that there art of his to our little Em'ly. He f oilers
her about, he makes hisself a sort o' servant to her, he loses
in a great measure his relish for his wittles, and in the long
run he makes it clear to me wot's amiss. Now I could wish
myself, you see, that our little Em'ly was in a fair way of
being married. I could wish to see her, at all ewents, under
articles to a honest man as had a right to defend her. I don't
know how long I may live, or how soon I may die; but I
know that if I was capsized, any night, in a gale of wind in
Yarmouth Roads here, and was to see the town-lights shining
for the last time over the rollers as I couldn't make no head
against, I could go down quieter for thinking ' There's a man
ashore there, iron-true to my little Em'ly, God bless her, and no
wrong can touch my Em'ly while so be as that man lives ! ' "

Mr. Peggotty, in simple earnestness, waved his right arm,
as if he were waving it at the town-lights for the last time,
and then, exchanging a nod with Ham, whose eye he caught,
proceeded as before.

" Well ! I counsels him to speak to Em'ly. He's big
enough, but he's bashfuller than a little un, and he don't like.
So I speak. i What ! Him ! ' says Em'ly. ' Him that I've



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 341

know'd so intimate so many years, and like so much! Oh,
uncle ! I never can have him. He's such a good fellow ! ' I
gives her a kiss, and I says no more to her than 6 My dear,
you're right to speak out, you're to choose for yourself, you're
as free as a little bird.' Then I aways to him, and I says, C I
wish it could have been so, but it can't. But you can both be
as you was, and wot I say to you is, Be as you was with her,
like a man.' He says to me, a shaking of my hand, 6 1 will ! '
he says. And he was — honorable and manful — for two
year going on, and we was just the same at home here as
afore."

Mr. Peggotty's face, which had varied in its expression with
the various stages of his narrative, now resumed all its former
triumphant delight, as he laid a hand upon my knee and a
hand upon Steerforth's (previously wetting them both, for the
greater emphasis of the action), and divided the following
speech between us :

" All of a sudden, one evening — as it might be to-night —
comes little Em'ly from her work, and him with her! There
ain't so much in that, you'll say. No, because he takes care
on her, like a brother, arter dark, and indeed afore dark, and
at all times. But this tarpaulin chap, he takes hold of her
hand, and he cries out to me, joyful, ' Look here ! This is to be
my little wife ! ' And she says, half bold and half shy, and
half a laughing and half a crying, < Yes, uncle ! If you please.'
' — If I please!" cried Mr. Peggotty, rolling his head in an
ecstasy at the idea ; " Lord, as if I should do anythink else !
— 'If you please, I am steadier now, and I have thought
better of it, and I'll be as good a little wife as I can to him,
for he's a dear, good fellow!' Then Missis Gummidge, she
claps her hands like a play, and you come in. There ! the
murder's out ! " said Mr. Peggotty — " You come in ! It took
place this here present hour ; and here's the man that'll marry
her, the minute she's out of her time."

Ham staggered, as well he might, under the blow Mr.
Peggotty dealt him in his unbounded joy, as a mark of con-
fidence and friendship ; but feeling called upon to say some-
thing to us, he said, with much faltering and great difficulty :

"Shewarn'tno higher than you was, Mas'r Davy — when



342 THE PEE SON AL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

you first come — when I thought what she'd grow up to be.
I see her grow up — gent'lmen — like a flower. Pd lay down
my life for her — Mas'r Davy — Oh! most content and cheerful !
She's more to me — gent'lmen — than — she's all to me that
ever I can want, and more than ever I — than ever I could
say. I — I love her true. There ain't a gent'lman in all the
land — nor yet sailing upon all the sea — that can love his lady
more than I love her, though there's many a common man —
would say better — what he meant."

I thought it affecting to see such a sturdy fellow as Ham
was now, trembling in the strength of what he felt for the
pretty little creature who had won his heart. I thought the
simple confidence reposed in us by Mr. Peggotty and by
himself, was, in itself, affecting. I was affected by the story
altogether. How far my emotions were influenced by the
recollections of my childhood, I don't know. Whether I had
come' there with any lingering fancy that I was still to love
little Em'ly, I don't know. I know that I was filled with
pleasure by all this ; but at first, with an indescribably sensi-
tive pleasure, that a very little would have changed to pain.

Therefore, if it had depended upon me to touch the prevail-
ing chord among them with any skill, I should have made
a poor hand *of it. But it depended upon Steerforth ; and he
did it with such address, that in a few minutes we were all as
easy and as happy as it was possible to be.

" Mr. Peggotty/' he said, " you are a thoroughly good fellow, '
and deserve to be as happy as you are to-night. My hand upon
it ! Ham, I give you joy, my boy. My hand upon that, too !
Daisy, stir the fire, and make it a brisk one ! and Mr. Peggotty,
unless you can induce your gentle niece to come back (for
whom I vacate this seat in the corner), I shall go. Any gap
at your fireside on such a night — such a gap least of all — I
wouldn't make, for the wealth of the Indies ! "

So Mr. Peggotty went into my old room to fetch little Em'ly.
At first little Em'ly didn't like to come, and then Ham went.
Presently they brought her to the fireside, very much con-
fused, and very shy, — but she soon became more assured
when she found how gently and respectfully Steerforth spoke
to her ; how skilfully he avoided anything that would embar-



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 343

rass her ; how he talked to Mr. Peggotty of boats, and ships,
and tides, and fish ; how he referred to me about the time
when he had seen Mr. Peggotty at Salem House ; how de-
lighted he was with the boat and all belonging to it ; how
lightly and easily he carried on, until he brought us, by
degrees, into a charmed circle, and we were all talking away
without any reserve.

Em'ly, indeed, said little all the evening ; but she looked,
and listened, and her face got animated, and she was charming.
Steerf orth told a story of a dismal shipwreck (which arose out
of his talk with Mr. Peggotty), as if he saw it all before him

and little Em'ly's eyes were fastened on him all the time,

as if she saw it too. He told us a merry adventure of his
own, as a relief to that, with as much gaiety as if the narrative
were as fresh to him as it was to us — and little Em'ly laughed
until the boat rang with the musical sounds, and we all
laughed (Steerforth too), in irresistible sympathy with what
was so pleasant and light-hearted. He got Mr. Peggotty to
sing, or rather to roar, " When the stormy winds do blow, do
blow, do blow ; " and he sang a sailor's song himself, so
pathetically and beautifully, that I could have almost fancied
that the real wind creeping sorrowfully round the house, and
murmuring low through our unbroken silence, was there to
listen.

As to Mrs. Gummidge, he roused that victim of despondency
with a success never attained by any one else (so Mr. Peggotty
informed me), since the decease of the old one. He left her
so little leisure for being miserable that she said next day she
thought she must have been bewitched.

But he set up no monopoly of the general attention, or the
conversation. When little Em'ly grew more courageous, and
talked (but still bashfully) across the fire to me, of our old
wanderings upon the beach, to pick up shells and pebbles ;
and when I asked her if she recollected how I used to be
* devoted to her; and when we both laughed and reddened,
casting these looks back on the pleasant old times, so unreal
to look at now; he was silent and attentive, and observed
us thoughtfully. She sat, at this time, and all the evening,
on the old locker in her old little corner by the fire — Ham



344 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

beside her, where I used to sit. I could not satisfy myself
whether it was in her own little tormenting way, or in a
maidenly reserve before us, that she kept quite close to the
wall, and away from him ; but I observed that she did so, all
the evening.

As I remember, it was almost midnight when we took our
leave. We had had some biscuit and dried fish for supper,
and Steerf orth had produced from his pocket a full flask of Hol-
lands, which we men (I may say we men, now, without a blush)
had emptied. We parted merrily ; and as they all stood
crowded round the door to light us as far as they could upon
our road, I saw the sweet blue eyes of little Em'ly peeping
after us, from behind Ham, and heard her soft voice calling to
us to be careful how we went.

" A most engaging little Beauty ! n said Steerforth, taking
my arm. " Well ! It's a quaint place, and they are quaint
company ; and it's quite a new sensation to mix with them."

" How fortunate we are, too," I returned, " to have arrived
to witness their happiness in that intended marriage ! I never
saw people so happy. How delightful to see it, and to be
made the sharers in their honest joy, as we have been ! "

" That's rather a chuckle-headed fellow for the girl, isn't
he ? " said Steerforth.

He had been so hearty with him, and with them all, that I
felt a shock in this unexpected and cold reply. But turning
quickly upon him, and seeing a laugh in his eyes, I answered,
much relieved :

" Ah, Steerforth ! It's well for you to joke about the poor !
You may skirmish with Miss Dartle, or try to hide your sym-
pathies in jest from me, but I know better. When I see how
perfectly you understand them, how exquisitely you can enter
into happiness like this plain fisherman's, or humor a love like
my old nurse's, I know that there is not a joy or sorrow, not an
emotion, of such people, that can be indifferent to you. And I
admire and love you for it, Steerforth, twenty times the more ! ' ;

He stopped, and looking in my face, said, " Daisy, I believe
you are in earnest, and are good. I wish we all were ! "
Next moment he was gaily singing Mr. Peggotty's song, as we
walked at a round pace back to Yarmouth.



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 345



CHAPTER XXII.

SOME OLD SCENES, AND SOME NEW PEOPLE.

Steerforth and I stayed for more than a fortnight in that
part of the country. We were very mnch together, I need not
say j but occasionally we were asunder for some hours at a
time. He was a good sailor, and I was but an indifferent one ;
and when he went out boating with Mr. Peggotty, which was
a favorite amusement of his, I generally remained ashore. My
occupation of Peggotty's spare-room put a constraint upon me,
from which he was free : for, knowing how assiduously she
attended on Mr. Barkis all day, I did not like to remain out
late at night ; whereas Steerforth, lying at the Inn, had nothing
to consult but his own humor. Thus it came about, that I
heard of his making little treats for the fishermen at Mr. Peg-
gotty's house of call, " The Willing Mind," after I was in bed,
and of his being afloat, wrapped in fisherman's clothes, whole
moonlight nights, and coming back when the morning tide
was at flood. By this time, however, I knew that his restless
nature and bold spirits delighted to find a vent in rough toil
and hard weather, as in any other means of excitement that
presented itself freshly to him; so none of his proceedings

surprised me.

Another cause of our being sometimes apart, was, that I had
naturally an interest in going over to Blunderstone, and revis-
iting the old familiar scenes of my childhood ; while Steerforth,
after being there once, had naturally no great interest in going
there again. Hence, on three or four days that I can at once
recall, we went our several ways after an early breakfast, and
met again at a late dinner. I had no idea how he employed
his time in the interval, beyond a general knowledge that he
was very popular in the place, and had twenty means of
actively diverting himself where another man might not have
found one.



346 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

For my own part, my occupation in my solitary pilgrimages
was to recall every yard of the old road as I went along it, and
to haunt the old spots, of which I never tired. I haunted
them, as my memory had often done, and lingered among
them as my younger thoughts had lingered when I was far
away. The grave beneath the tree, where both my parents
lay — on which I had looked out, when it was my father's
only, with such curious feelings of compassion, and by which
I had stood, so desolate, when it was opened to receive my
pretty mother and her baby — the grave which Peggotty's own
faithful care had ever since kept neat, and made a garden of,
I walked near, by the hour. It lay a little off the churchyard
path, in a quiet corner, not so far removed but I could read
the names upon the stone as I walked to and fro, startled by
the sound of the church-bell when it struck the hour, for it
was like a departed voice to me. My reflections at these times
were always associated with the figure I was to make in life, and
the distinguished things I was to do. My echoing footsteps went
to no other tune, but were as constant to that as if I had come
home to build my castles in the air at a living mother's side.

There were great changes in my old home. The ragged
nests, so long deserted by the rooks, were gone ; and the trees
were lopped and topped out of their remembered shapes. The
garden had run wild, and half the windows of the house were
shut up. It was occupied, but only by a poor lunatic gentle-
man, and the people who took care of him. He was always
sitting at my little window, looking .out into the churchyard ;
and I wondered whether his rambling thoughts ever went upon
any of the fancies that used to occupy mine, on the rosy morn-
ings when I peeped out of that same little window in my night-
clothes, and saw the sheep quietly feeding in the light of the
rising sun.

Our old neighbors, Mr. and Mrs. Grayper, were gone to
South America, and the rain had made its way through the
roof of their empty house, and stained the outer walls. Mr.
Chillip was married again to a tall, raw-boned, high-nosed
wife ; and they had a weazen little baby, with a heavy head
that it couldn't hold up, and two weak staring eyes, with which
it seemed to be always wondering why it had ever been born.



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 347

It was with a singular jumble of sadness and pleasure that
I used to linger about my native place, until the reddening
winter sun admonished me that it was time to start on my
returning walk. But, when the place was left behind, and
especially when Steerforth and I were happily seated over our
dinner by a blazing fire, it was delicious to think of having
been there. So it was, though in a softened degree, when I
went to my neat room at night ; and, turning over the leaves
of the crocodile-book (which was always there, upon a little
table), remembered with a grateful heart how blessed I was in
having such a friend as Steerforth, such a friend as Peggotty,
and such a substitute for what I had lost as my excellent and
generous aunt.

My nearest way to Yarmouth, in coming back from these
long walks, was by a ferry. It landed me on the flat between
the town and the sea, which I could make straight across, and
so save myself a considerable circuit by the high road. Mr.
Peggotty's house being on that waste-place, and not a hundred
yards out of my track, I always looked in as I went by.
Steerforth was pretty sure to be there expecting me, and we
went on together through the frosty air and gathering fog
towards the twinkling lights of the town.

One dark evening, when I was later than usual — for I had,
that day, been making my parting visit to Blunderstone, as we
were now about to return home — I found him alone in Mr.
Peggotty's house, sitting thoughtfully before the fire. He
was so intent upon his own reflections that he was quite un-
conscious of my approach. This, indeed, he might easily have
been if he had been less absorbed, for footsteps fell noiselessly
on the sandy ground outside ; but even my entrance failed to
rouse him. I was standing close to him, looking at him ; and
still, with a heavy brow, he was lost in his meditations.

He gave such a start when I put my hand upon his shoul-
der, that he made me start too.

"You come upon me," he said, almost angrily, "like a
reproachful ghost ! "

"I was obliged to announce myself somehow," I replied.
" Have I called you down from the stars ? "
" No," he answered. " No."



348 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" Up from anywhere, then ? " said I, taking my seat near
him.

"I was looking at the pictures in the fire," he returned.

" But you are spoiling them for me," said I, as he stirred
it quickly with a piece of burning wood, striking out of it a
train of red-hot sparks that went careering up the little chim-
ney, and roaring out into the air.

" You would not have seen them," he returned. " I detest
this mongrel time, neither day nor night. How late you are !
Where have you been ? "

" I have been taking leave of my usual walk," said I.

" And I have been sitting here," said Steerforth, glancing
round the room, "thinking that all the people we found so
glad on the night of our coming down, might — to judge from
the present wasted air of the place — be dispersed, or dead, or
come to I don't know what harm. David, I wish to God I had
had a judicious father these last twenty years ! "

" My dear Steerforth, what is the matter ? "

" I wish with all my soul I had been better guided ! " he
exclaimed. " I wish with all my soul I could guide myself
better ! "

There was a passionate dejection in his manner that quite
amazed me. He was more unlike himself than I could have
supposed possible.

" It would be better to be this poor Peggotty, or his lout of
a nephew," he said, getting up and leaning moodily against
the chimneypiece, with his face towards the fire, " than to be
myself, twenty times richer and twenty times wiser, and be
the torment to myself that I have been, in this DeviPs bark
. x l a boat, within the last half-hour ! "

I w?s so confounded by the alteration in him, that at first
I could only observe him in silence, as he stood leaning his
."read upon his hand, and looking gloomily down at the fire.
At length I begged him, with all the earnestness I felt, to tell
me what had -occurred to cross him so unusually, and to let
me sympathize with him, if I could not hope to advise him.
Before I had well concluded, he began to laugh — fretfully at
first, but soon with returning gaiety.

"Tut, it's nothing, Daisy! nothing!" he replied. "I told



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 349

you at the inn in London, I am heavy company for myself
sometimes. I have been a nightmare to myself, just now —
must have had one, I think. At odd dull times, nursery tales
come up into the memory, unrecognized for what they are.
I believe I have been confounding myself with the bad boy
who ' didn't care/ and became food for lions — a grander kind
of going to the dogs, I . suppose. What old women call the
horrors, have been creeping over me from head to foot. I
have been afraid of myself."

" You are afraid of nothing else, I think," said I.

" Perhaps not, and yet may have enough to be afraid, of
too," he answered. "Well ! So it goes by ! I am not about
to be hipped, again, David ; but I tell you, my good fellow,
once more, that it would have been well for me (and for more
than me) if I had had a steadfast and judicious father ! "

His face was always full of expression, but I never saw it
express such a dark kind of earnestness as when he said these
words, with his glance bent on the fire.

" So much for that ! " he said, making as if he tossed some-
thing light into the air, with his hand.

" « Why, being gone, I am a man again,'

like Macbeth. And now for dinner ! If I have not (Macbeth-
like) broken up the feast with most admired disorder, Daisy."

" But where are they all, I wonder ! " said I.

"God knows," said Steerforth. "After strolling to the
ferry looking for you, I strolled in here and found the place
deserted. That set me thinking, and you found me thinking."

The advent of Mrs. G-ummidge with a basket, explained how
the house had happened to be empty. She had hurried out to
buy something that was needed against Mr. Peggotty's return
with the tide ; and had left the door open in the meanwhile,
lest Ham and little Em'ly, with whom it was an early night,
should come home while she was gone. Steerforth, after very
much improving Mrs. Gummidge's spirits by a cheerful salu-
tation, and a jocose embrace, took my arm, and hurried me
away.

He had improved his own spirits, no less than Mrs. Gum-



350 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

midge's, for they were again at their usual flow, and he was
full of vivacious conversation as we went along.

" And so," he said, gaily, " we abandon this buccaneer life
to-morrow, do we ? "

"So we agreed," I returned. "And our places by the coach
are taken, you know."

" Ay ! there's no help for it, I suppose," said Steerf orth. " I
have almost forgotten that there is anything to do in the
world but to go out tossing on the sea here. I wish there was
not."

"As long as the novelty should last," said I, laughing.

"Like enough," he returned; "though there's a sarcastic
meaning in that observation for an amiable piece of innocence
like my young friend. Well! I dare 'say I am a capricious
fellow, David. I know I am ; but while the iron is hot, I can
strike it vigorously too. I could pass a reasonably good exam-
ination already, as a pilot in these waters, I think."

" ]\ir. Peggotty says you are a wonder," I returned.

"A nautical phenomenon, eh ?" laughed Steerf orth.

" Indeed he does, and you know how truly ; knowing how
ardent you are in any pursuit you follow, and how easily you
can master it. And that amazes me most in you, Steerf orth —
that you should be contented with such fitful uses of your
powers."

" Contented ? " he answered, merrily. " I am never con-
tented, except with your freshness, my gentle Daisy. As to
fitfulness, I have never learnt the art of binding myself to any
of the wheels on which the Ixions of these days are turning
round and round. I missed it somehow in a bad apprentice-
ship, and now don't care about it. — You know I have bought
a boat down here ? "

" What an extraordinary fellow you are, Steerf orth ! " I
exclaimed, stopping — for this was the first I had heard of it.
" When you may never care to come near the place again ! "

" I don't know that," he returned. " I have taken a fancy
to the place. At all events," walking me briskly on, " I have
bought a boat that was for sale — a clipper, Mr. Peggotty
says ; and so she is — and Mr. Peggotty will be master of her
in my absence."



OF DAVID COPPEIIFIELD. 351

"Now I understand you, Steerforth ! " said I, exultingly.
"You pretend you have bought it for yourself, but you have
really done so to confer a benefit on him. I might have known
as much at first, knowing you. My dear kind Steerforth, how
can I tell you what I think of your generosity ? "

"Tush!" he answered, turning red. "The less said, the
better."

" Didn't I know ? " f cried I, " didn't I say that there was not
a joy, or sorrow, or any emotion, of such honest hearts that
was indifferent to you ? "

"Ay, ay," he answered, "you told me all that. There let it
rest, we have said enough ! "

Afraid of offending him by pursuing the subject when he
made so light of it, I only pursued it in my thoughts as we
went on at even a quicker pace than before.

" She must be newly rigged," said Steerforth, " and I shall
leave Littimer behind to see it done, that I may know she is
quite complete. Did I tell you Littimer had come down ? "

"No."

" Oh, yes ! came down this morning, with a letter from my
mother."

As our looks met, I observed that he was pale even to his
lips, though he looked very steadily at me. I feared that some
difference between him and his mother might have led "to his
being in the frame of mind in which I had found him at the
solitary fireside. I hinted so.

" Oh, no ! " he said, shaking his head, and giving a slight
laugh. "Nothing of the sort! Yes. He is come down, that
man of mine."

" The same as ever ? " said I.

" The same as ever," said Steerforth. " Distant and quiet
as the North Pole. He shall see to the boat being fresh
named. She's the Stormy Petrel now. What does Mr. Peg-
gotty care for Stormy Petrels ! I'll have her christened again."

" By what name ? " I asked.

"The Little Em'ly."

As he had continued to look steadily at me, I took it as a
reminder that he objected to being extolled for his considera-
tion. I could not help showing in my face how much it



352 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

pleased me, but I said little, and he resumed his usual smile,
and seemed relieved.

"But see here," he said, looking before us, "where the
original little Em'ly comes ! And that fellow with her, eh ?
Upon my soul, he's a true knight. He never leaves her ! "

Ham was a boat-builder in these days, having improved a
natural ingenuity in that handicraft, until he had become a
skilled workman. He was in his working-dress, and looked
rugged enough, but manly withal, and a very fit protector for
the blooming little creature at his side. Indeed, there was a
frankness in his face, an honesty, and an undisguised show of
his pride in her, and his love for her, which were, to me, the
best of good looks. I thought, as they came towards us, that
they were well matched, even in that particular.

She withdrew her hand timidly from his arm as we stopped
to speak to them, and blushed as she gave it to Steerforth and
to me. When they passed on, after we had exchanged a few
words, she did not like to replace that hand, but, still appear-
ing timid and constrained, walked by herself. I thought all
this very pretty and engaging, and Steerforth seemed to think
so too, as we looked after them fading away in the light of a
young moon.

Suddenly there passed us — evidently following them — a
young woman whose approach we had not observed, but whose
face I saw as she went by, and thought I had a faint remem-
brance of. She was lightly dressed, looked bold, and haggard,
and flaunting, and poor; but seemed, for the time, to have
given all that to the wind which was blowing, and to have
nothing in her mind but going after them. As the dark dis-
tant level, absorbing their figures into itself, left but itself
visible between us and the sea and clouds, her figure disap-
peared in like manner, still no nearer to them than before.

"That is a black shadow to be following the girl," said
Steerforth, standing still ; "what does it mean ? "

He spoke in a low voice that sounded almost strange to me.

" She must have it in her mind to beg of them, I think,"
said I.

" A beggar would be no novelty," said Steerforth ; " but it is a
strange thing that the beggar should take that shape to-night,"





" Why ? " I asked him.

"For no better reason, truly, than because I was thinking,"
he said, after a pause, " of something like it, when it came by.
Where the Devil did it come from, I wonder ! "

"From the shadow of this wall, I think," said I, as we
emerged upon a road on which a wall abutted.

" It's gone !" he returned, looking over his shoulder. "And
all ill go with it. Now for our dinner ! "

But, he looked again over his shoulder towards the sea-line
glimmering afar off ; and yet again. And he wondered about
it, in some broken expressions, several times, in the short
remainder of our walk ; and only seemed to forget it when the
light of fire and candle shone upon us, seated warm and merry,

at table.

Littimer was there, and had his usual effect upon me.
When I said to him that I hoped Mrs. Steerforth and Miss
Dartle were well, he answered respectfully (and of course
respectably), that they were tolerably well, he thanked me,
and had sent their compliments. This was all, and yet he
seemed to me to say as plainly as a man could say : " You are
very young, sir ; you are exceedingly young."

We had almost finished dinner, when taking a step or two
towards the table, from the corner where he kept watch upon
us, or rather upon me, as I felt, he said to his master :

"I beg your pardon, sir. Miss Mowcher is down here."

"Who ?" cried Steerforth, much astonished.

" Miss Mowcher, sir."

" Why, what on earth does slie do here ? " said Steerforth.

« It appears to be her native part of the country, sir. She
informs me that she makes one of her professional visits here,
every year, sir. I met her in the street this afternoon, and
she wished to know if she might have the honor of waiting on
you after dinner, sir."

"Do you know the Giantess in question, Daisy?" inquired
Steerforth.

I was obliged to confess— I felt ashamed, even of being at
this disadvantage before Littimer— that Miss Mowcher and I
were wholly unacquainted.

" Then you shall know her," said Steerforth, "for she is
vol. 1—23



354 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

one of the seven wonders of the world. When Miss Mowcher
comes, show her in."

I felt some curiosity and excitement about this lady, es-
pecially as Steerforth burst into a fit of laughing when I
referred to her, and positively refused to answer any question
of which I made her the subject. I remained, therefore, in
a state of considerable expectation until the cloth had been
removed some half an hour, and we were sitting over our
decanter of wine before the fire, when the door opened,
and Littimer, with his habitual serenity quite undisturbed,
announced :

" Miss Mowcher ! "

I looked at the doorway and saw nothing. I was still look-
ing at the doorway, thinking that Miss Mowcher was a long
while making her appearance, w r hen, to my infinite astonish-
ment, there came waddling round a sofa which stood between
me and it, a pursy dwarf, of about forty or forty-five, with a
very large head and face, a pair of roguish gray eyes, and such
extremely little arms, that, to enable herself to lay a finger
archly against her snub nose as she ogled Steerforth, she was
obliged to meet the finger halfway, and lay her nose against
it. Her chin, which was what is called a double-chin, was so
fat that it entirely swallowed up the strings of her bonne
bow and all. Throat she had none ; waist she had none ; leg?
she had' none, worth mentioning; for though she was moi*e
than full-sized down to where her waist would have been, if
she had had any, and though she terminated, as human beings
generally do, in a pair of feet, she was so short that she stood
at a common-sized chair as at a table, resting a bag she carried
on the seat. This lady; dressed in an off-hand, easy style;
bringing her nose and her forefinger together, with the diffi-
culty I have described ; standing with her head necessarily on
one side, and, with one of her sharp eyes shut up, making an
uncommonly knowing face ; after ogling Steerforth for a few
moments, broke into a torrent of words.

"What! My flower!" she pleasantly began, shaking her
large head at him. " You're there, are you ! Oh, you naughty
boy, fie for shame, what do you do so far away from home ?
Up to mischief, Fll be bound. Oh, you're a downy fellow,





Steerforth, so you are," and I'm another, ain't I ? Ha, ha, ha!
You'd have betted a hundred pound to five, now, that you
wouldn't have seen me here, wouldn't you ? Bless you, man
alive I'm everywhere. I'm here, and there, and where not,
like 'the conjuror's half-crown in the lady's hankercher.
Talking of hankerchers — and talking of ladies —what a com-
fort you are to your blessed mother, ain't you, my dear boy,
over one of my shoulders, and I don't say which!"

Miss Mowcher untied her bonnet, at this passage of her
discourse, threw back the strings, and sat down, panting, on a
footstool, in front of the fire — making a kind of arbor of the
dining-table, -which spread its mahogany shelter above her

head.

" Oh, my stars and what's-their-names ! " she went on,
clapping a hand on each of her little knees, and glancing
shrewdly at me. " I'm of too full a habit, that's the fact,
Steerforth. After a flight of stairs, it gives me as much
trouble to draw every breath I want, as if it was a bucket of
water. If you saw me looking out of an upper window, you'd
think I was a fine woman, wouldn't you ?"

" I should think that, wherever I saw you," replied Steer-
forth.

" Gro along, you dog, do ! " cried the little creature, making
a whisk at him with the handkerchief with which she was
wiping her face, " and don't be impudent ! But I give you
my word and honor I was at Lady Mithers's last week —
there's a woman. How she wears ! — and Mithers himself
came into the room where I was waiting for her — there's a
man ! How he wears ! and his wig too, for he's had it these
ten years — and he went on at that rate in the complimentary
line, that I began to think I should be obliged to ring the bell.
Ha ! ' ha ! ha ! He's a pleasant wretch, but he wants principle."

" What were you doing for Lady Mithers ? " asked Steer-
forth.

" That's tellings, my blessed infant," she retorted, tapping
her nose again, screwing up her face, and twinkling her eyes
like an imp of supernatural intelligence. " ISTever you mind !
You'd like to know whether I stop her hair from falling off,
or dye it, or touch up her complexion, or improve her eye-



356 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

brows, wouldn't you ? And so you shall, my darling — when
I tell you ! Do you know what my great grandfather's name
was ? "

"No/' said Steerforth.

"It was Walker, my sweet pet," replied Miss Mowcher,
" and he came of a long line of Walkers, that I inherit all the
Hookey estates from."

I never beheld anything approaching to Miss Mowcher's
wink, except Miss Mowcher's self-possession. She had a
wonderful way too, when listening to what was said to her,
or when waiting for an answer to what she had said herself, of
pausing with her head cunningly on one side, and one eye
turned up like a magpie's. Altogether I was lost in amaze-
ment, and sat staring at her, quite oblivious, I am afraid, of
the laws of politeness.

She had by this time drawn the chair to her side, and was
busily engaged in producing from the bag (plunging in her
short arm to the shoulder, at every dive) a number of small
bottles, sponges, combs, brushes, bits of flannel, little pairs of
curling irons, and other instruments, which she tumbled in a
heap upon the chair. From this employment she suddenly
desisted, and said to Steerf orth^ much to my confusion :

" Who's your friend ? "

"Mr. Copperfield," said Steerforth; "he wants to know you."

" Well, then, he shall ! I thought he looked as if he
did ! " returned Miss Mowcher, waddling up to me, bag in
hand, and laughing oh me as she came. "Face like a
peach ! " standing on tiptoe to pinch my cheek as I sat.
" Quite tempting ! I'm very fond of peaches. Happy to
make your acquaintance, Mr. Copperfield, I'm sure."

I said that I congratulated myself on having the honor to
make hers, and that the happiness was mutual.

"Oh my goodness, how polite we are!" exclaimed Miss
Mowcher, making a preposterous attempt to cover her large
face with her morsel of a hand. " What a world of gammon
and spinnage it is, though, ain't it ! "

This was addressed confidentially to both of us, as the
morsel of a hand came away from the face, and buried itself,
arm and all, in the bag again.



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 357

"What do you mean, Miss Mowcher ? " said Steerforth.

"Ha! ha! ha ! What a refreshing set of humbugs we are,
to be sure, ain't we, my sweet child ? " replied that morsel of
a woman, feeling in the bag with her head on one side and
her eye in the air. "Look here!" taking something out.
"Scraps of the Eussian Prince's nails! Prince Alphabet
turned topsy-turvy, I call him, for his name's got all the
letters in it, higgledy-piggledy."

"The Russian Prince is a client of yours, is he?" said
Steerforth.

" I believe you, my pet," replied Miss Mowcher. " I keep
his nails in order for him. Twice a week! Pingers and

toes ! "

"He pays well, I hope ? " said Steerforth.

"Pays as he speaks, my dear child — through the nose,"
replied Miss Mowcher. "None of your close shavers the
Prince ain't. You'd say so, if you saw his moustachios. Eed
by nature, black by art."

" By your art, of course," said Steerforth.

Miss Mowcher winked assent. "Porced to send for me.
Couldn't help it. The climate affected his dye ; it did very
well in Eussia, but it was no go here. You never saw such a
rusty Prince in all your born days as he was. Like old
iron ! "

"Is that why you called him a humbug just now?"
inquired Steerforth.

" Oh, you're a broth of a boy, ain't you ? " returned Miss
Mowcher, shaking her head violently. "I said what a set
of humbugs we were in general, and I showed you the
scraps of the Prince's nails to prove it. The Prince's nails
do more for me in private families of the genteel sort,
than all my talents put together. I always carry 'em about.
They're the best introduction. If Miss Mowcher cuts the
Prince's nails, she must be all right. I give 'em away
to the young ladies. They put 'em in albums, I believe.
Ha! ha! ha! Upon my life, 'the whole social system' (as
the men call it when they make speeches in Parliament) is a
system of Prince's nails ! " said this least of women, trying to
fold her short arms, and nodding her large head.



358 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

Steerforth laughed heartily, and I laughed too. Miss
Mowcher. continuing all the time to shake her head (which
was very much on one side), and to look into the air with one
eye, and to wink with the other.

" Well, well ! " she said, smiting her small knees, and
rising, "this is not business. Come, Steerforth, let's explore
the polar regions, and have it over."

She then selected two or three of the little instruments,
and a little bottle, and asked (to my surprise) if the table
would bear. On Steerforth's replying in the affirmative,
she pushed a chair against it, and begging the assistance of
my hand, mounted up, pretty nimbly, to the top, as if it were
a stage.

"If either of you saw my ankles/' she said, when she was
safely elevated, " say so, and I'll go home and destroy
myself."

" I did not," said Steerforth.

"/did not," saidl.

"Well, then," cried Miss Mowcher, "I'll consent to live.
Now, ducky, ducky, ducky, come to Mrs. Bond and be killed."

This was an invocation to Steerforth to place himself under
her hands ; who, accordingly, sat himself down, with his
back to the table, and his laughing face towards me, and
submitted his head to her inspection, evidently for no other
purpose than our entertainment. To see Miss Mowcher stand-
ing over him, looking at his rich profusion of brown hair
through a large round magnifying glass, which she took out of
her pocket, was a most amazing spectacle.

5 You're a pretty fellow !" said Miss Mowcher, after a brief
inspection. " You'd be as bald as a friar on the top of your
head in twelve months, but for me. Just half-a-minute, ruy
young friend, and we'll give you a polishing that shall keep
your curls on for the next ten years ! "

With this, she tilted some of the contents of the little bottle
on to one of the little bits* of flannel, and, again imparting
some of the virtues of that preparation to one of the little
brushes, oegan rubbing and scraping away with both on the
crown of Steerforth's head in the busiest manner I ever wit-
nessed, talking all the time.





" There's Charley Pyegrave, the duke's son," she said.
" You know Charley ? " peeping round into his face.
" A little," said Steerf orth.

"What a man he is! There's a whisker! As to Charley's
legs, if they were only a pair (which they ain't), they'd defy
competition. Would you believe he tried to do without me —
in the Life-Guards, too ? "
" Mad ! " said Steerf orth.

"It looks like it. However, mad or sane, he tried," re-
turned Miss Mowcher. " What does he do, but, lo and behold
you, he goes into a perfumer's shop, and wants to buy a bottle
of the Madagascar Liquid."

" Charley does ? " said Steerf orth.

u Charley does. But they haven't got any of the Madagas-
car Liquid."

" What is it ? Something to drink ? " asked Steerf orth.
"To drink?" returned Miss Mowcher, stopping to slap his
cheek. "To doctor his own moustachios with, you know.
There was a woman in the shop — elderly female — quite a
Griffin — who had never even heard of it by name. 'Begging
pardon, sir,' said the Griffin to Charley, /it's not — not — not
rouge, is it ? ' 'Kouge,' said Charley to the Griffin. 'What
the unmentionable to ears polite, do you think I want with
rouge ? ' 'No offence, sir,' said the Griffin ; < we have it asked
for by so many names, I thought it might be.' Now that, my
child," continued Miss Mowcher, rubbing all the time as busily
as ever, " is another instance of the refreshing humbug I was
speaking of. /do something in that way myself — perhaps a
good deal — perhaps a little — sharp's the word, my dear boy
— never mind!"

"In what way do you mean? In the rouge way?" said
Steerforth.

" Put this and that together, my tender pupil/' returned the
wary Mowcher, touching her nose, "work it by the rule of
Secrets in all trades, and the product will give you the desired
result. I say J do a little in that way myself. One Dowager
she calls it lip-salve. Another, she calls it gloves. Another,
she calls it tudker-edging. Another, she calls it a fan. I call it
whatever they call it. I supply it for 'em, but we keep up the



360 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

trick so, to one another, and make believe with such a face,
that they'd as soon think of laying it on, before a whole draw-
ing-room, as before me. And when I wait upon 'em, they'll
say to me sometimes — with it on — thick, and no mistake —
< How am I looking, Mowcher ? Am I pale ? ' Ha ! ha ! ha !
ha ! Isn't that refreshing, my young friend ! "

I never did in my days behold anything like Mowcher as
she stood upon the dining-table, intensely enjoying this re-
freshment, rubbing busily at Steerforth's head, and winkiny
at me over it.

"Ah! "she said. "Such things are not much in demand
hereabouts. That sets me off again ! I haven't seen a pretty
woman since I've been here, Jemmy."

" No ? " said Steerforth.

"Not the ghost of one," replied Miss Mowcher.

"We could show her the substance of one, I think?" said
Steerforth, addressing his eyes to mine. " Eh, Daisy ? "

" Yes, indeed," said I.

"Aha?" cried the little creature, glancing sharply at my
face, and then peeping round at Steerforth's. " Umph ? "

The first exclamation sounded like a question put to both of
us, and the second like a question put to Steerforth only. She
seemed to have found no answer to either, but continued to
rub, with her head on one side and her eye turned up, as if she
were looking for an answer in the air, and were confident of
its appearing presently.

" A sister of yours, Mr. Copperfield ? " she cried, after a
pause, and still keeping the same look out. " Ay, ay ? "

"No," said Steerforth, before I could reply. "Nothing of
the sort. On the contrary, Mr. Copperfield used — or I am
much mistaken — to have a great admiration for her."

" Why, hasn't he now ? " returned Miss Mowcher. " Is he
fickle ? oh, for shame ! Did he sip every flower, and change
every hour, until Polly his passion requited ? — Is her name
Polly ? "

The Elfin suddenness with which she pounced upon me with
this question, and a searching look, quite disconcerted me for
a moment.

" No, Miss Mowcher," I replied. " Her name is Emily."



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 361

" Aha ? " she cried exactly as before. " Umph ? What a
rattle I am ! Mr. Copperfield, ain't I volatile ? "

Her tone and look implied something that was not agreeable
to me in connection with the subject. So I said, in a graver
manner than any of us had yet assumed :

« She is as virtuous as she is pretty. She is engaged to be
married to a most worthy and deserving man in her own
station of life. T esteem her for her good sense, as much as I
admire her for her good looks."

" Well said ! " cried Steerforth. " Hear, hear, hear ! Now
HI quench the curiosity of this little Fatima, my dear Daisy,
by leaving her nothing to guess at. She is at present ap-
prenticed, Miss Mowcher, or articled, or whatever it may be,
to Omer and Joram, Haberdashers, Milliners, and so forth, in
this town. Do you observe ? Omer and Joram. The promise
of which my friend has spoken, is made and entered into with
her cousin ; Christian name, Ham ; surname, Peggotty ; occu-
pation, boat-builder; also of this town. She lives with a
relative; Christian name, unknown; surname, Peggotty; oc-
cupation, seafaring ; also of this town. She is the prettiest
and most engaging little fairy in the world. I admire her —
as my friend does — exceedingly. If it were not that I might
appear to disparage her Intended, which I know my friend
would not like, I would add, that to me she seems to be throw-
ing herself away ; that I am sure she might do better ; and
that I swear she was born to be a lady."

Miss Mowcher listened to these words, which were very
slowly and distinctly spoken, with her head on one side, and
her eye in the air, as if she were still looking for that answer.

When he ceased she became brisk again in an instant, and
rattled away with surprising volubility.

"Oh! And that's all about it, is it?" she exclaimed,
trimming his whiskers with a little restless pair of scissors,
that went glancing round his head in all directions. " Very
well: very well! Quite a long story. Ought 'to end 'and
they lived happy ever afterwards ' ; oughtn't it ? Ah ! What's
that game at forfeits ? I love my love with an E, because
she's enticing ; I hate her with an E, because she's engaged.
I took her to the sign of the exquisite, and treated her with



362 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

an elopement, her name's Eniily, and she lives in the east ?
Ha ! ha ! ha ! Mr. Copperfield, ain't I volatile ? "

Merely looking at me with extravagant slyness, and not
waiting for any reply, she continued, without drawing breath :

" There ! If ever any scapegrace was trimmed and touched
up to perfection, you are, Steerforth. If I understand any
noddle in the world, I understand yours. Do you hear me
when I tell you that, my darling ? I understand yours, "
peeping down into his face. " Now you may mizzle, Jemmy,
(as we say at Court), and if Mr. Copperfield will take the
chair I'll operate on. hini."

"What do you say, Daisy?" inquired Steerforth, laughing,
and resigning his seat. "Will you be improved ? "

" Thank you, Miss Mowcher, not this evening."

" Don't say no," returned the little woman, looking at me
with the aspect of a connoisseur; "a little bit more eyebrow?"

" Thank you," I returned, " some other time."

"Have it carried half a quarter of an inch towards the
temple," Said Miss Mowcher. " We can do it in a fortnight."

" No, I thank you. Not at present."

" Go in for a tip," she urged. " No ? Let's get the scaf-
folding up, then, for a pair of whiskers. Come ! "

I could not help blushing as I declined, for I felt we were
on my weak point, now. But Miss Mowcher, finding that I
was not at present disposed for any decoration within the
range of her art, and that I was, for the time being, proof
against the blandishments of the small bottle which she held
up before one eye to enforce her persuasions, said we would
make a beginning on an early day, and requested the aid of
my hand to descend from her elevated station. Thus assisted,
she skipped down with much agility, and began to tie her
double chin into her bonnet.

"The fee," said Steerforth, "is — "

"Five bob," replied Miss Mowcher, "and dirt cheap my
chicken. Ain't I volatile, Mr. Copperfield ? "

I replied politely: "Not at all." But I thought she was
rather so, when she tossed up his two half-crowns like a goblin
pieman, caught them, dropped them in her pocket, and gave it
a loud slap.



OF DAVID COPPEEFIELD. 363

"That's the Till!" observed Miss Mowcher, standing at
the chair again, and replacing in the bag a miscellaneous col-
lection of little objects she had emptied out of it. " Have I
got all my traps ? It seems so. It won't do to be like long
Ned Beadwood, when they took him to church 'to marry him
to somebody/ as he says, and left the bride behind. Ha ! ha !
ha ! A wicked f ascal, Ned, but droll ! Now, I know I'm
going to break your hearts, but I am forced to leave you.
You must call up all your fortitude, and try to bear it. Good
by, Mr. Copperfield! Take care of yourself, Jockey of
Norfolk ! How I have been rattling on ! It's all the fault of
you two wretches, I forgive you! 'Bob swore!' — as the
Englishman said for ' Good night,' when he first learnt French,
and thought it so like English, f Bob swore,' my ducks ! "

With the bag slung over her arm, and rattling as she wad-
dled away, she waddled to the door; where she stopped to
inquire if she should leave us a lock of her hair. " Ain't I
volatile ? " she added, as a commentary on this offer, and,
with her finger on her nose, departed.

Steerforth laughed to that degree, that it was impossible for
me to help laughing too ; though I am not sure I should have
done so, but for this inducement. When we had had our laugh
quite out, which was after some time, he told me that Miss
Mowcher had quite an extensive connection, and made herself
useful to a variety of people in a variety of ways. Some peo-
ple trifled with her as a mere oddity, he said ; but she was as
shrewdly and sharply observant as any one he knew, and as
long-headed as she was short-armed. He told me that what
she had said of being here, and there, and everywhere, was
true enough ; for she made little darts into the provinces, and
seemed to pick up customers everywhere, and to know every-
body. I asked him what her disposition was : whether it was
at all mischievous, and if her sympathies were generally on
the right side of things ; but, not succeeding in attracting his
attention to these questions after two or three attempts, I for-
bore or forgot to repeat them. He told me instead, with much
rapidity, a good deal about her skill, and her profits ; and about
her being a scientific cupper, if I should ever have occasion for
her services in that capacity.



364 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

She was the principal theme of our conversation during the
evening : and when we parted for the night Steerforth called
after me over the banisters, " Bob swore ! " as I went down
stairs.

I was surprised, when I came to Mr. Barkis's house to find
Ham walking up and down in front of it, and still more sur-
prised to learn from him that little Em'ly was inside. I natu-
rally inquired why he was not there too, instead of pacing the
streets by himself ?

"Why, you see, Mas'r Davy," he rejoined, in a hesitating
manner, "Em'ly, she's talking to some ; un in here."

" I should have thought," said I, smiling/ " that that was a
reason for your being in here too, Ham."

" Well, Mas'r Davy, in a general way, so 't would be," he
returned ; " but look'ee here, Mas'r Davy," lowering his voice,
and speaking very gravely. "It's a young woman, sir — a
young woman that Em'ly know'd once, and doen't ought to
know no more."

When I heard these words, a light began to fall upon the
figure I had seen following them, some hours ago.

"It's a poor wurem, Mas'r Davy," said Ham, "as is trod
under foot by all the town. Up street and down street. The
mowld o' the churchyard don't hold any that the folk shrink
away from more."

"Did I see her to-night, Ham, on the sands, after we met
you ? "

"Keeping us in sight?" said Ham. "It's like you did,
Mas'r Davy. Not that I know'd then, she was theer, sir, but
alojig of her creeping soon arterwards under Em'ly's little
winder, when she see the light come, and whisp'ring ' Em'ly,
Em'ly, for Christ's sake, have a woman's heart towards me.
I was once like you ! ' Those was solemn words, Mas'r Davy,
fur to hear ! "

" They were indeed, Ham. What did Em'ly do ? "

" Says Em'ly, e Martha, is it you ? Oh, Martha, can it be
you ! ' — for they had sat at work together, many a day, at
Mr. Omer's."

"I recollect her now!" cried I, recalling one of the two



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 365

girls I had seen when I first went there. "I recollect her
quite well ! "

"Martha Endell," said Ham. "Two or three year older
than Em'ly, but was at the school with her."

" I never heard her name/' said I. " I didn't mean to
interrupt you."

" For the matter o' that, Mas'r Davy/' replied Ham, " all's
told a'most in them words, 'Em'ly, Em'ly, for Christ's sake,
have a woman's heart towards me. I was once like you ! '
She wanted to speak to Em'ly. Em'ly couldn't speak to her
theer, for her loving uncle was come home, and he wouldn't
— no, Mas'r Davy," said Ham, with great earnestness, "he
couldn't, kind naturd, tender-hearted as he is, see them two
together, side by side, for all the treasures that's wrecked in
the sea."

I felt how true this was. I knew it, on the instant, quite as
well as Ham.

" So Em'ly writes in pencil on a bit of paper," he pursued,
"and gives it to her out o' window to bring here. 'Show
that/ she says, 'to /ny aunt, Mrs. Barkis, and she'll set you
down by her fire, for the love of, me, till uncle is gone out,
and I can come.' By and by she tells me what I tell you,
Mas'r Davy, and asks me to bring her. What can I do ? She
doen't ought to know any such, but I can't deny her, when
the tears is on her face."

He put his hand into the breast of his shaggy jacket, and
took out with great care a pretty little purse.

" And if I could deny her when the tears was on her face,
Mas'r Davy," said Ham, tenderly adjusting it on the rough
palm of his hand, " how could I deny her when she give me
this to carry for her — knowing what she brought it for?
Such a toy as it is ! " said Ham, thoughtfully looking on it.
" With such a little money in it, Em'ly my dear ! "

I shook him warmly by the hand when he had put it away
again — for that was more satisfactory to me than saying any-
thing — and we walked up and down, for a minute or two, in
silence. The door opened then, and Peggotty appeared,
beckoning to Ham to come in. I would have kept away, but
she came after me, entreating me to come in too. Even then,



366 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

I would have avoided the room where they all were, but for
its being the neat-tiled kitchen I have mentioned more than
once. The door opening immediately into it, I found myself
among them, before I considered whither T was going.

The girl — I the same I had seen upon the sands — was near
the fire. She was sitting on the ground, with her head and
one arm lying on a chair. I fancied, from the disposition of
her figure, that Enrly had but newly risen from the chair, and
that the forlorn head might perhaps have been lying on her lap.
I saw but little of the girl's face, over which her hair fell loose
and scattered, as if she had been disordering it with her own
hands ; but I saw that she was young, and of a fair complex-
ion. Peggotty had been crying. So had little Em'ly. Not a
word was spoken when we first went in ; and the Dutch clock by
the dresser seemed, in the silence, to tick twice as loud as usual.

Em'ly spoke first.

" Martha wants," she said to Ham, " to go to London."

" Why to London ? " returned Ham.

He stood between them, looking on the prostrate girl with
a mixture of compassion for her, and of jealousy of her hold-
ing any companionship with her whom he loved so well, which
I have always remembered distinctly. They both spoke as if
she were ill; in a soft, suppressed tone that was plainly
heard, although it hardly rose above a whisper.

" Better there than here," said a third voice aloud — Mar-
tha's, though she did not move. "No one knows me there.
Everybody knows me here."

" What will she do there ? " inquired Ham.

She lifted up her head, and looked darkly round at him for
a moment ; then laid it down again, and curved her right arm
about her neck, as a woman in a fever, or in an agony of pain
from a shot, might twist herself.

" She will try to do well," said little Em'ly. " You don't
know what she has said to us. Does he — do they — aunt ? "

Peggotty shook her head compassionately.

"I'll try," said Martha, -"if you'll help me away. I never
can do worse than I have done here. I may do better. Oh ! "
with a dreadful shiver, " take me out of these streets, where
the whole town knows me from a child ! "







367



As Em'ly held out her hand to Ham, I saw him put in it a
little canvas bag. She took it, as if she thought it were her
purse, and made a step or two forward; but finding her mis-
take, came back to where he had retired near me, and showed
it to him.

"It's all yourn, Em'ly," I could hear him say. "I haven't
nowt in all the wureld that ain't yourn, my dear. It ain't of
no delight to me, except for you ! "

The tears rose freshly in her eyes, but she turned away and
went to Martha. What she gave her, I don't know. I saw
her stooping over her, and putting money in her bosom. She
whispered something, and asked was that enough? "More
than enough," the other said, and took her hand and kissed

it.

Then Martha arose, and gathering her shawl about her,
covering her face with it, and weeping aloud, went slowly to
the door. She stopped a moment before going out, as if she
would have uttered something or turned back ; but no word
passed her lips. Making the same low, dreary, wretched
moaning in her shawl, she went away.

As the door closed, little Em'ly looked at us three in a
hurried manner, and then hid her face in her hands, and fell
to sobbing.

"Doen't, Em'ly!" said Ham, tapping her gently on the
shoulder. " Doen't, my dear ! You doen't ought to cry so,

pretty ! "

" Oh, Ham ! " she exclaimed, still weeping pitifully, " I am
not as good a girl as I ought to be ! I know I have not the
thankful heart sometimes I ought to have ! "

" Yes, yes, you have, I'm sure," said Ham.

" ]STo ! no ! no ! " cried little Em'ly, sobbing and shaking
her head. "I am not as good a girl as I ought to be. Not
near ! not near ! "

And still she cried as if her heart would break.

" I try your love too much. I know I do ! " she sobbed.
"I'm often cross to you, and changeable with you, when I
ought to be far different. You are never so to me. Why am
I ever so to you, when I should think of nothing but how to
be grateful, and to make you happy ! "



368 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" You always make me so," said Ham, " my dear ! I am
happy in the sight of you. I am happy, all day long, in the
thoughts of you."

"Ah ! that's not enough !" she cried. "That is because you
are good; not because I am! Oh, my dear, it might have
been a better fortune for you, if you had been fond of some
one else — of some one steadier and much worthier than me,
who was all bound up in you, and never vain and changeable
like me ! "

"Poor little tender-heart," said Ham, in a low voice.
" Martha has overset her, altogether."

"Please, aunt," sobbed Em'ly, "come here, and let me lay
my head upon you. Oh, I am very miserable to-night, aunt !
Oh, I am not as good a girl as I ought to be. I am not, I
know ! "

Peggotty had hastened to the chair before the fire. Em'ly
with her arms around her neck, kneeled by her, looking up
most earnestly into her face.

" Oh, pray, aunt, try to help me ! Ham, dear, try to help
me ! Mr. David, for the sake of old times, do, please, try to
help me ! I want to be a better girl than I am. I want to
feel a hundred times more thankful than I do. I want to feel
more, what a blessed thing it is to be the wife of a good man,
and to lead a peaceful life. Oh me, oh me ! Oh, my heart,
my heart ! "

She dropped her face on my old nurse's breast, and, ceasing
this supplication, which in its agony and grief was half a
woman's, half a child's, as all her manner was (being, in that,
more natural, and better suited to her beauty, as I thought,
than any other manner could have been), wept silently, while
my old nurse hushed her like an infant.

She got calmer by degrees, and then we soothed her ; now
talking encouragingly, and now jesting a little with her, until
she began to raise her head and speak to us. So we got on,
until she was able to smile, and then to laugh, and then to
sit up, half ashamed ; while Peggotty recalled her stray ring-
lets, dried her eyes, and made her neat again, lest her uncle
should wonder, when she got home, why his darling had been
crying.



OF DAVID GOPPEBFIELD. 369

I saw her do, that night, what I had never seen her do
before. I saw her innocently kiss her chosen husband on the
cheek, and creep close to his bluff form as if it were her best
support. When they went away together, in the waning
moonlight, and I looked after them, comparing their departure
in my mind with Martha's, I saw that she held his arm with
both her hands, and still kept close to him.

vol. i — 24



370 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE



CHAPTER XXIII.

I CORROBORATE MR. DICK, AND CHOOSE A PROFESSION.

When I awoke in the morning I thought yery much of little
Em'ly, and her emotion last night, after Martha had left. I
felt as if I had come into the knowledge of those domestic
weaknesses and tendernesses in a sacred confidence, and that
to disclose them, even to Steerforth, would be wrong. I had
no gentler feeling towards any one than towards the pretty
creature who had been my playmate, and whom I have always
been persuaded, and shall always be persuaded, to my dying
day, I then devotedly loved. The repetition to any ears —
even to Steerf orth's — of what she had been unable to repress
when her heart lay open to me by an accident, I felt would be
a rough deed, unworthy of myself, unworthy of the light of
our pure childhood, which I always saw encircling her head.
I made a resolution, therefore, to keep it in my own breast ;
and there it gave her image a new grace.

While we were at breakfast, a letter was delivered to me
from my aunt. As it contained matter on which I thought
Steerforth could advise me as well as any one, and on which
I knew I should be delighted to consult him, I resolved to
make it a subject of discussion on our journey home. Por the
present we had enough to do, in taking leave of all our friends.
Mr. Barkis was far from being the last among them, in his
regret at our departure ; and I believe would even have opened
the box again, and sacrificed another guinea, if it would have
kept us eight-and-forty hours in Yarmouth. Peggotty, and
all her family, were full of grief at our going. The whole
house of Omer and Joram turned out to bid us good by ; and
there were so many seafaring volunteers in attendance on
Steerforth, when our portmanteaus went to the coach, that if
we had had the baggage of a regiment with us, we should hardly
have wanted porters to carry it. In a word, we departed to





the regret and admiration of all concerned, and left a great
many people very sorry behind us.

" Do you stay long here, Littimer ? " said I, as he stood
waiting to see the coach start.

" No, sir," he replied ; " probably not very long, sir."

"He can hardly say just now," observed Steerforth, care-
lessly. "He knows what he has to do, and he'll do it."

" That I am sure he will," said I.

Littimer touched his hat in acknowledgment of my good
opinion, and I felt about eight years old. He touched it once
more, wishing us a good journey ; and we left him standing
on the pavement, as respectable a mystery as any pyramid in
Egypt.

For some little time we held no conversation, Steerforth
being unusually silent, and I being sufficiently engaged in
wondering, within myself, when I should see the old places
again, and what new changes might happen to me or them
in the meanwhile. At length Steerforth,, becoming gay and
talkative in a moment, as he could become anything he liked
at any moment, pulled me by the arm :

"Find a voice, David. What about the letter you were
speaking of at breakfast ? "

" Oh ! " said I, taking it out of my pocket. " It's from my
aunt."

" And what does she say, requiring consideration ? "

"Why, she reminds me, Steerforth," said I, "that I came
out on this expedition to look about me, and to think a little."

" Which, of course, you have done ? "

"Indeed I can't say I have, particularly. To tell you the
truth, I am afraid I had forgotten it."

"Well! look about you now, and make up for your negli-
gence," said Steerforth. " Look to the right, and you'll see a
flat country, with a good deal of marsh in it ; look to the left,
and you'll see the same. Look to the front, and you'll find no
difference ; look to therear, and there it is still."

I laughed, and replied that I saw no suitable profession in
the whole prospect ; which was perhaps to be attributed to its
flatness.

"What says our aunt on the subject ? " inquired Steerforth,



372 THE PERSONAL HISTOBT AND EXPERIENCE

glancing at the letter in my hand. " Does she suggest any-
thing ? "

" Why, yes," said I. " She asks me, here, if I think I
should like to be a proctor ? What do you think of it ? "

" Well, I don't know," replied Steerforth, coolly. "You may
as well do that as anything else, I suppose ? "

I could not help laughing again, at his balancing all callings
and professions so equally ; and I told him so.

" What is a proctor, Steerforth ? " said I.

" Why, he is a sort of monkish attorney," replied Steerforth.
u He is, to some faded courts held in Doctors' Commons — a
lazy old nook near St. Paul's Churchyard — what solicitors are
to the courts of law and equity. He is a functionary whose
existence, in the natural course of things, would have termi-
nated about two hundred years ago. I can tell you best what
he is, by telling you what Doctors' Commons is. It's a little
out-of-the-way place, where they administer what is called
ecclesiastical law, and play all kinds of tricks with obsolete
old monsters of acts of Parliament, which three-fourths of the
world know nothing about, and the other fourth supposes to
have been dug up, in a fossil state, in the days of the Edwards.
It's a place that has an ancient monopoly in suits about peo-
ple's wills and people's marriages, and disputes among ships
and boats."

u Nonsense, Steerforth!" I exclaimed. "You don't mean
to say that there is any affinity between nautical matters and
ecclesiastical matters ? "

" I don't, indeed, my dear boy," he returned ; " but I mean
to say that they are managed and decided by the same set of
people, down in that same Doctors' Commons. You shall go
there one day, and find them blundering through half the
nautical terms in Young's Dictionary, apropos of the < Nancy '
having run down the * Sarah Jane/ or Mr. Peggotty and the
Yarmouth boatmen having put off in a gale of wind with an
anchor and cable to the c Nelson' Indiaman in distress; and
you shall go there another day, and find them deep in the evi-
dence, pro and con, respecting a clergyman who has misbehaved
himself ; and you shall find the judge in the nautical case the
advocate in the clergyman's case, or contrariwise. They are



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 373

like actors : now a man's a judge, and now he is not a judge ;
now he's one thing, now he's another ; now he's something else,
change and change about; but it's always a very pleasant
profitable little affair of private theatricals, presented to an
uncommonly select audience."

"But advocates and proctors are not one and the same?"
said I, a little puzzled. " Are they ? "

"No," returned Steerforth, " the advocates are civilians —
men who have taken a doctor's degree at college — which is
the first reason of my knowing anything about it. The proc-
tors employ the advocates. Both get very comfortable fees,
and altogether they make a mighty snug little party. On the
whole I would recommend you to take to Doctors' Commons
kindly, David. They plume themselves on their gentility
there, I can tell you, if that's any satisfaction."

I made allowance for Steerforth's light way of treating the
subject, and considering it with reference to the staid air of
gravity and antiquity which I associated with that "lazy old
nook near St. Paul's Churchyard," did not feel indisposed
towards my aunt's suggestion; which she left to my free
decision, making no scruple of telling me that it had occurred
to her, on her lately visiting her own proctor in Doctors' Com-
mons for the purpose of settling her will in my favor.

" That's a laudible proceeding on the part of our aunt, at all
events," said Steerforth, when I mentioned it; "and one
deserving of all encouragement. Daisy, my advice is that you
take kindly to Doctors' Commons."

I quite made up my mind to do so. I then told Steerforth
that my aunt was in town awaiting me (as I found from her
letter), and that she had taken lodgings for a week at a kind
of private hotel in Lincoln's Inn Fields, where there was a
stone staircase, and a convenient door in the roof ; my aunt
being firmly persuaded that every house in London was going
to be burnt down every night.

We achieved the rest of our journey pleasantly, sometimes
recurring to Doctors' Commons, and anticipating the distant
days when I should be a proctor there, which Steerforth pic-
tured in a variety of humorous and whimsical lights, that made
us both merry. When we came to our journey's end, he went



374 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

home, engaging to call upon me next day but one ; and I drove
to Lincoln's Inn Fields, where I found my aunt up, and wait-
ing supper.

If I had been round the world since we parted, we could
hardly have been better pleased to meet again. My aunt cried
outright as she embraced me ; and said, pretending to laugh,
that if my poor mother had been alive, that silly little creature
would have shed tears, she had no doubt.

"So you have left Mr. Dick behind, aunt ? " said I. "I
am sorry for that. Ah, Janet, how do you do ? "

As Janet courtesied, hoping I was well, I observed my
aunt's visage lengthen very much.

" I am sorry for it, too," said my aunt, rubbing her nose.
" I have had no peace of mind, Trot, since I have been here."

Before I could ask why, she told me.

"I am convinced," said my aunt; laying her hand with
melancholy firmness on the table, "that Dick's character is
not a character to keep the donkeys off. I am confident he
wants strength of purpose. I ought to have left Janet at
home, instead, and then my mind might perhaps have been
at ease. If ever there was a donkey trespassing on my green,"
said my aunt, with emphasis, "there was one this afternoon
at four o'clock. A cold feeling came over me from head to
foot, and I know it was a donkey ! "

I tried to comfort her on this point, but she rejected
consolation.

"It was a donkey," said my aunt; "and it was the one with
the stumpy tail which that Murdering sister of a woman rode,
when she came to my house." This had been, ever since, the
only name my aunt knew for Miss Murdstone. " If there is
any Donkey in Dover, whose audacity it is harder to me to
bear than another's, that," said my aunt, striking the table,
" is the animal ! "

* Janet ventured to suggest that my aunt might be disturbing
herself unnecessarily, and that she believed the donkey in ques-
tion was then engaged in the sand and gravel line of business,
and was not available for purposes of trespass. But my aunt
wouldn't hear of it.

Supper was comfortably served and hot, though my aunt'



OF DAVID COPPEEFIELD. 375

rooms were very high up — whether that she might have
more stone stairs for her money, or might be nearer to the
door in the roof I don't know — and consisted of a roast f owl,
a steak, and some vegetables, to all of which I did ample
justice, and which were all excellent. But my aunt had her
own ideas concerning London provision, and ate but little.

" I suppose this unfortunate fowl was born and brought up
in a cellar," said my aunt, " and never took the air except on
a hackney-coach-stand. I hope the steak may be beef, but I
don't believe it. Nothing's genuine in the place, in my opin-
ion, but the dirt."

"Don't you think the fowl may have come out of the
country, aunt ? " I hinted.

" Certainly not," returned my aunt. " It would be no pleas-
ure to a London tradesman to sell anything which was what
he pretended it was."

I did not venture to controvert this opinion, but I made a
good supper, which it greatly satisfied her to see me do.
When the table was cleared, Janet assisted her to arrange her
hair, to put on her nightcap,. which was of a smarter con-
struction than usual ("in case of fire," my aunt said), and to
fold her gown back over her knees, these being her usual
preparations for warming herself before going to bed. I
then made her, according to certain established regulations
from which no deviation, however slight, could ever be per-
mitted, a glass of hot white wine and water, and a slice of
toast cut into long thin strips. With these accompaniments
we were left alone to finish the evening, my aunt sitting
opposite to me drinking her wine and water; soaking her
strips of toast in it, one by one, before eating them ; and
looking benignantly on me, from among .the borders of her
nightcap.

" Well, Trot," she began, " what do you think of the proctor
plan ? Or have you not begun to think about it yet ? " .

" I have thought a good deal about it, my dear aunt, and I
have talked a good deal about it with Steerforth. I like it
very much indeed. I like it exceedingly."

" Come ! " said my aunt. u That's cheering ! "

" I have only one difficulty, aunt."



376 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" Say what it is, Trot/ 5 she returned.

"Why, I want to ask, aunt, as this seems, from what I
understand, to be a limited profession, whether my entrance
into it would not be very expensive ? "

"It will cost," returned my aunt, "to article you, just a
thousand pounds."

"Now, my dear aunt," said I, drawing my chair nearer,
"I am uneasy in my mind about that. It's a large sum of
money. You have expended a great deal on my education,
and have always been as liberal to me in all things, as it was
possible to be. You have been the soul of generosity. Surely
there are some ways in which I might begin life with hardly
any outlay, and yet begin with a good hope of getting on by
resolution and exertion. Are you sure that it would not be
better to try that course ? Are you certain that you can
afford to part with so much money, and that it is right that it
should be so expended ? I only ask you, my second mother,
to consider. Are you certain ? "

My aunt finished eating the piece of toast on which she was
then engaged, looking me full in the face all the while ; and
then setting her glass on the chimney-piece, and folding her
hands upon her folded skirts, replied as follows :

"Trot, my child, if I have any object in life, it is to provide
for your being a good, a sensible, and a happy man. I am
bent upon it — so is Dick. I should like some people that I
know to hear Dick's conversation on the subject. Its sagacity
is wonderful. But no one knows the resources of that man's
intellect except myself ! "

She stopped for a moment to take my hand between hers,
and went on :

" It's in vain, Trot, to recall the past, unless it works some
influence upon the present. Perhaps I might have been better
friends with your poor father. Perhaps I might have been
better friends with that poor child your mother, even after
your sister Betsey Trotwood, disappointed me. When you
came to me, a little runaway boy, all dusty and way-worn, per-
haps I thought so. From that time until now, Trot, you have
ever been a credit to me and a pride and a pleasure. I have
no other claim upon my means ; at least " — here to my sur-





prise she hesitated, and was confused — " no, I have no other
claim upon my means — and you are my adopted child. Only
be a loving child to me in my age, and bear with my whims
and fancies ; and you will do more for an old woman whose
prime of life was not so happy or conciliating as it might have
been, than ever that old woman did for you."

It was the first time I had heard my aunt refer to her past
history. There was a magnanimity in her quiet way of doing
so, and of dismissing it, which would have exalted her in my
respect and affection, if anything could.

" All is agreed and understood between us now, Trot." said
my aunt, " and we need talk of this no more. Give me a kiss,
and we'll go to the Commons after breakfast to-morrow."

We had a long chat by the fire before we went to bed. I
slept in a room on the same floor with my aunt's, and was a
little disturbed in the course of the night by her knocking at
my door as often as she was agitated by a distant sound of
hackney-coaches or market-carts, and inquiring " if I heard the
engines ? " But towards morning she slept better, and suf-
fered me to do so too.

At about mid-day, we set out for the office of Messrs. Spen-
low and Jorkins in Doctors' Commons. My aunt, who had this
other general opinion in reference to London, that every man
she saw was a pickpocket, gave me her purse to carry for her,
which had ten guineas in it and some silver.

We made a pause at the toy-shop in Meet-street, to see the
giants of St. Dunstan's strike upon the bells — we had timed
our going, so as to catch them at it, at twelve o'clock — and
then went on towards Ludgate Hill and St. Paul's Churchyard.
We were crossing to the former place, when I found that my
aunt greatly accelerated her speed, and looked frightened. I
observed, at the same time, that a lowering ill-dressed man
who had stopped and stared at us in passing, a little before,
was coming so close after us, as to brush against her.

" Trot ! My dear Trot ! " cried my aunt, in a terrified whis-
per, and pressing my arm. " I don't know what I am to do."

" Don't be alarmed," said I. "There's nothing to be afraid
of. Step into a shop, and I'll soon get rid of this fellow."



378 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" No, no, child ! " she returned. " Don't speak to him f 01
the world. I entreat, I order you ! "

" Good Heaven, aunt ! " said I. " He is nothing but a
sturdy beggar."

"You don't know what he is!" replied my aunt. "You
don't know who he is ! You don't know what you say ! "

We had stopped in an empty doorway, while this was pass-
ing, and he had stopped too.

" Don't look at him ! " said my aunt, as I turned my head
indignantly, " but get me a coach, my dear, and wait for me in
St. Paul's Churchyard."

" Wait for you," I repeated.

"Yes," rejoined my aunt, "I must go alone. I must go
with him."

" With him, aunt ? This man ? "

" I am in my senses," she replied, " and I tell you I must.
Get me a coach ! "

However much astonished I might be, I was sensible that I
had no right to refuse compliance with such a peremptory
command. I hurried away a few paces, and called a hackney
chariot which was passing empty. Almost before I could let
down the steps, my aunt sprang in, I don't know how, and the
man followed. She waved her hand to me to go away, so
earnestly, that, all confounded as I was, I turned from them at
once. In doing so, I heard her say to the coachman, " Drive
anywhere ! Drive straight on ! " and presently the chariot
passed me, going up the hill.

What Mr. Dick had told me, and what I had supposed to
be a delusion of his, now came into my mind. I could not
doubt that this person was the person of whom he had made
such mysterious mention, though what the nature of his hold
upon my aunt could possibly be, I was quite unable to imagine.
After half an hour's cooling in the churchyard, I saw the
chariot coming back. The driver stopped beside me, and my
aunt was sitting in it alone.

She had not yet sufficiently recovered from her agitation to
be quite prepared for the visit we had to make. She desired
me to get into the chariot, and to tell the coachman to drive
slowly up and down a little while. She said no more, except,





" My dear child, never ask me what it was, and don't refer to
it," until she had perfectly regained her composure, when she
told me she was quite herself now, and we might get out. On
her giving me her purse, to pay the driver, I found that all
the guineas were gone, and only the loose silver remained.

Doctors' Commons was approached by a little low archway.
Before we had taken many paces down the street beyond it,
the noise of the city seemed to melt, as if by magic, into
a softened distance. A few dull courts, and narrow ways,
brought us to the skylighted offices of Spenlow and Jorkins ;
in the vestibule of which temple, accessible to pilgrims with-
out the ceremony of knocking, three or four clerks were at
work as copyists. One of these, a little dry man, sitting by
himself, who wore a stiff brown wig that looked as if it were
made of gingerbread, rose to receive my aunt, and show us
into Mr. Spenlow's room.

" Mr. Spenlow's in Court, ma'am," said the dry man ; " it's
an Arches day; but it's close by, and I'll send for him
directly."

As we were left to look about us while Mr. Spenlow was
fetched, I availed myself of the opportunity. The furniture
of the room was old-fashioned and dusty ; and the green baize
on the top of the writing-table had lost all its color, and was
as withered and pale as an old pauper. There were a great
many bundles of papers on it, some indorsed as Allegations,
and some (to my surprise) as Libels, and some as being in the
Consistory Court, and some in the Arches Court, and some in
the Prerogative Court, and some in the Admiralty Court, and
some in the Delegates' Court ; giving me occasion to wonder
much, how many Courts there might be in the gross, and how
long it would take to understand them all. Besides these,
there were sundry immense manuscript Books of Evidence
taken on affidavit, strongly bound, and tied together in massive
sets, a set to each cause, as if every cause were a history in
ten or twenty volumes. All this looked tolerably expensive,
I thought, and gave me an agreeable notion of a proctor's
business. I was casting my eyes with increasing complacency
over these and many similar objects, when hasty footsteps
were heard in the room outside, and Mr. Spenlow, in a black



380 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

gown trimmed with white fur, came hurrying in, taking off his
hat as he came.

He was a little light-haired gentleman, with undeniable
"boots, and the stiffest of white cravats and shirt-collars. He
was buttoned up mighty trim and tight, and must have taken
a great deal of pains with his whiskers, which were accurately
curled. His gold watch-chain was so massive, that a fancy
came across me, that he ought to have a sinewy golden arm, to
draw it out with, like those which are put up over the gold-
beaters' shops. He was got up with such care, and was so
stiff, that he could hardly bend himself ; being obliged, when
he glanced at some papers on his desk, after sitting down in
his chair, to move his whole body, from the bottom of his
spine, like Punch.

I had previously been presented by my aunt, and had been
courteously received. He now said :

"And so, Mr. Copperfield, you think of entering into our
profession ? I casually mentioned to Miss Trotwood, when I
had the pleasure of an interview with her the other day," —
with another inclination of his body — Punch again — " that
there was a vacancy here. Miss Trotwood was good enough
to mention that she had a nephew who was her peculiar care,
and for whom she was seeking to provide genteelly in life.
That nephew, I believe, I have now the pleasure of " — Punch
again.

I bowed my acknowledgments, and said, my aunt had men-
tioned to me that there was that opening, and that I believed
I should like it very much. That I was strongly inclined to
like it, and had taken immediately to the proposal. That I
could not absolutely pledge myself to like it, until I knew
something more about it. That although it was little else
than a matter of form, I presumed I should have an op-
portunity of trying how I liked it, before I bound myself to it
irrevocably.

" Oh surely ! surely ! " said Mr. Spenlow. " We always, in
this house, propose a month — an initiatory month. I should
be happy, myself, to propose two months — three — an indefi-
nite period, in fact — but I have a partner. Mr. Jorkins."

"And the premium, sir," I returned, "is a thousand pounds."



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 381

"And the premium, Stamp included, is a thousand pounds,"
said Mr. Spenlow. " As I have mentioned to Miss Trotwood,
I am actuated by no mercenary considerations ; few men are
less so, I believe ; but Mr. Jorkins has his opinions on these
subjects, and I am bound to respect Mr. Jorkins's opinions.
Mr. Jorkins thinks a thousand pounds too little, in short."

"I suppose, sir," said I, still* desiring to spare my aunt,
"that it is not the custom here, if an articled clerk were par-
ticularly useful, and made himself a perfect master of his
profession — " I could not help blushing, this looked so like
praising myself — "I suppose it is not the custom, in the later
years of his time, to allow him any — "

Mr. Spenlow, by a great effort, just lifted his head far
enough out of his crav&t, to shake it, and answered, anticipat-
ing the word " salary."

"No. I will not say what consideration I might give -to
that point myself, Mr. Copperfield, if I were unfettered. Mr.
Jorkins is immovable."

I was quite dismayed by the idea of this terrible Jorkins.
But I found out afterwards that he was a mild man of a heavy
temperament, whose place in the business was to keep himself
in the back-ground, and be constantly exhibited by name as
the most obdurate and ruthless of men. If a clerk wanted
his salary raised, Mr. Jorkins wouldn't listen to such a prop-
osition. If a client were slow to settle his bill of costs, Mr.
Jorkins was resolved to have it paid; and however painful
these things might be (and always were) to the feelings of
Mr. Spenlow, Mr. Jorkins would have his bond. The heart
and hand of the good angel Spenlow would have been always
open, but for the restraining demon Jorkins. As I have
grown older, I think I have had experience of some other
houses doing business on the principle of Spenlow and Jorkins !

It was settled that I should begin my month's probation as
soon as I pleased, and that my aunt need neither remain in
town nor return at its expiration, as the articles of agreement
of which I was to be the subject, could easily be sent to her at
home for her signature. When we had got so far, Mr. Spen-
low offered to take me into Court then and there and show
me what sort of place it was. As I was willing enough to



382 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

know, we went out with this object, leaving my aunt behind 5
who would trust herself, she said, in no such place, and who,
I think, regarded all Courts of Law as a sort of powder-mills
that might blow up at any time.

Mr. Spenlow conducted me through a paved courtyard
formed of grave brick houses, which I inferred, from the
Doctors' names upon the doors, to be the official abiding-places
of the learned advocates of whom Steerforth had told me ; and
into a large dull room, not unlike a chapel to my thinking, on
the left hand. The upper part of this room was fenced off
from the rest ; and there, on the two sides of a raised platform
of the horse-shoe form, sitting on easy old-fashioned dining-
room chairs, were sundry gentlemen in red gowns and gray
wigs, whom I found to be the Doctors aforesaid. Blinking
over a little desk like a pulpit-desk, in the curve of the horse-
shoe, was an old gentleman, whom, if I had seen him in an
aviary, I should certainly have taken for an owl, but who, I
learned, was the presiding judge. In the space within the
horse-shoe, lower than these, that is to say on about the level
of the floor, were sundry other gentlemen of Mr. Spenlow's
rank, and dressed like him in black gowns with white fur
upon them, sitting at a long green table. Their cravats were
in general stiff, I thought, and their looks haughty ; but in this
last respect, I presently conceived I had done them an injustice,
for when two or three of them had to rise and answer a ques-
tion of the presiding dignitary, I never saw anything more
sheepish. The public represented by a boy with a comforter,
and a shabby-genteel man secretly eating crumbs out of his
coat pockets, was warming itself at a stove in the centre of
the Court. The languid stillness of the place was only broken
by the chirping of this fire and by the voice of one of the Doc-
tors, who was wandering slowly through a perfect library of
evidence, and stopping to put up, from time to time, at little
roadside inns of argument on the journey. Altogether, I have
never, on any occasion, made one at such a cosey, dozy, old-
fashioned, time-forgotten, sleepy-headed little family-party in
all my life ; and I felt it would be quite a soothing opiate to
belong to it in any character — except perhaps as a suitor.

Very well satisfied with the dreamy nature of this retreat, I





informed Mr. Spenlow that I had seen enough for that time,
and we rejoined my aunt; in company with whom I presently
departed from the Commons, feeling very young when I went
out of Spenlow and Jorkins's, on account of the clerks poking
one another with their pens to point me out.

We arrived at Lincoln's Inn Fields without any new
adventures except encountering an unlucky donkey in a coster-
monger's cart, who suggested painful associations to my aunt.
We had another long talk about my plans, when we were
safely housed ; and as I knew she was anxious to "get home,
and, between fire, food, and pickpockets, could never be con-
sidered at her ease for half-an-hour in London, I urged her not
to be uncomfortable on my account, but to leave me to take
care of myself.

" I have not been here a week to-morrow, without consid-
ering that too, my dear/' she returned. " There is a furnished
little set of chambers to be let in the Adelphi, Trot, which
ought to suit you to a marvel.''

With this brief introduction, she produced from her pocket
an advertisement, carefully cut out of a newspaper, setting
forth that in Buckingham Street in the Adelphi there was to
be let furnished, with a view of the river, a singularly desirable
and compact set of chambers, forming a genteel residence for
a young gentleman, a member of one of the Inns of Court, or
otherwise, with immediate possession. Terms moderate, and
could be taken for a month only if required.

" Why, this is the very thing, aunt ! " said I, flushed with
the possible dignity of living in chambers.

" Then come," replied my aunt, immediately resuming the
bonnet she had a minute before laid aside. H We'll go and
look at 'em."

Away we went. The advertisement directed us to apply to
Mrs. Crupp on the premises, and we rung the area bell, which
we supposed to communicate with Mrs. Crupp. It was not
until we had rung three or four times that we could prevail on
Mrs. Crupp to communicate with us, but at last she appeared,
being a stout lady with a flounce of flannel petticoat below a
nankeen gown.



384 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

"Let us see these chambers of yours, if you please, ma'am/ 5
said my aunt.

"For this gentleman?" said Mrs. Crupp, feeling in her
pocket for her keys.

" Yes, for my nephew," said my aunt.

" And a sweet set they is for sich ! " said Mrs. Crupp.

So we went up stairs.

They were on the top of the house — a great point with my
aunt, being near the fire-escape — and consisted of a little
half-blind entry where you could see hardly anything, a little
stone-blind pantry where you could see nothing at all, a sitting-
room, and a bed-room. The furniture was rather faded, but
quite good enough for me ; and, sure enough, the river was
outside the windows.

As I was delighted with the place, my aunt and Mrs. Crupp
withdrew into the pantry to discuss the terms, while I remained
on the sitting-room sofa, hardly daring to think it possible
that I could be destined to live in such a noble residence.
After a single combat of some duration, they returned, and I
saw, to my joy, both in Mrs/Crupp's countenance and in my
aunt's, that the deed was done.

" Is it the last occupant's furniture ? " inquired my aunt.

" Yes, it is, ma'am," said Mrs. Crupp.

"What's become of him ? " asked my aunt.

Mrs. Crupp was taken with a troublesome cough, in the
midst of which she articulated with much difficulty. "He
was took ill here, ma'am, and — ugh ! ugh ! ugh ! dear me ! —
and he died."

" Hey ! What did he die of ? " asked my aunt.

" Well, ma'am, he died of drink," said Mrs. Crupp in con-
fidence. "And smoke."

" Smoke ? You don't mean chimneys ? " said my aunt.

"No, ma'am," returned Mrs. Crupp. "Cigars and pipes."

" That's not catching, Trot, at any rate," remarked my aunt,
turning to me.

" No, indeed," said I.

In short, my aunt, seeing how enraptured I was with the
premises, took them for a month, with leave to remain for
twelve months when that time was out. Mrs. Crupp was to





find linen, and to cook; every other necessary was already
provided ; and Mrs. Crupp expressly intimated that she should
always yearn towards me as a son. I was to take possession
the day after to-morrow, and Mrs. Crupp said thank Heaven
she had now found summun she could care for !

On our way back, my aunt informed me how she confidently
trusted that the life I was now to lead would make me firm
and self-reliant, which was all I wanted. She repeated this
several times next day, in the intervals of our arranging for
the transmission of my clothes and books from Mr. Wickfield's ;
relative to which, and to all my late holiday, I wrote a long
letter to Agnes, of which my aunt took charge, as she was to
leave on the succeeding day. Not to lengthen these particu-
lars, I need only add, that she made a handsome provision for
all my possible wants during my month of trial; that Steer-
forth, to my great disappointment, and hers too, did not make
his appearance before she went away ! that I saw her safely
seated in the Dover coach, exulting in the coming discomfiture
of the vagrant donkeys, with Janet at her side ; and that when
the coach was gone, I turned my face to the Adelphi, ponder-
ing on the old days when I used to roam about its subterranean
arches, and on the happy changes which had brought me to
the surface.

vol. i—25



38G THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE



CHAPTER XXIV.

MY FIRST DISSIPATION.

It was a wonderfully fine thing to have that lofty castle to
myself, and to feel, when I shut my outer door, like Robinson
Crusoe, when he had got into his fortification, and pulled his
ladder up after him. It was a wonderfully fine thing to walk
about town with the key of my house in my pocket, and to
know that I could ask any fellow to come home, and make
quite sure of its being inconvenient to nobody, if it were not
so to me. It was a wonderfully fine thing to let myself in
and out, and to come and go without a word to any one, and
to ring Mrs. Crupp up, gasping, from the depths of the earth,
when I wanted her — and when she was disposed to come.
All this, I say, was wonderfully fine ; but I must say, too, that
there were times when it was very dreary.

It was fine in the morning, particularly in the fine morn-
ings. It looked a very fresh, free life, by daylight: still
fresher, and more free, by sunlight. But as the day declined,
the life seemed to go down too. I don't know how it was ;
it seldom looked well by candle-light. I wanted somebody to
talk to, then. I missed Agnes. I found a tremendous blank,
in the place of that smiling repository of my confidence. Mrs.
Crupp appeared to be a long way off. I thought about my
predecessor, who had died of drink and smoke : and I could
have wished he had been so good as to live, and not bother
me with his decease.

After two days and nights, I felt as if I had lived there for
a year, and yet I was not an hour older, but was quite as much
tormented by my own youthfulness as ever.

Steerf orth not yet appearing, which induced me to apprehend
that he must be ill, I left the Commons early on the third
day, and walked out to Highgate. Mrs. Steerforth was very
glad to see me, and said that he had gone away with one of



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 387

his Oxford friends to see another who lived near St. Alban's,
but that she expected him to return to-morrow. I was so fond
of him, that I felt quite jealous of his Oxford friends.

As she pressed me to stay to dinner, I remained, and I believe
we talked about nothing but him all day. I told her how
much the people liked him at Yarmouth, and what a delightful
companion he had been. Miss Dartle was full of hints and
mysterious questions, but took a great interest in all our
proceedings there, and said, " was it really though ? " and so
forth, so often, that she got everything out of me she wanted
to know. Her appearance was exactly what I have described
it, when I first saw her ; but the society of the two ladies was
so agreeable, and came so natural to me, that I felt myself
falling a little in love with her. I could not help thinking,
several times in the course of the evening, and particularly
when I walked home at night, what delightful company she
would be in Buckingham Street.

I was taking my coffee and roll in the morning,' before going
to the Commons — and I may observe in this place that it is
surprising how much coffee Mrs. Crupp used, and how weak
it was, considering — when Steerf orth himself walked in, to
my unbounded joy.

" My dear Steerforth," cried I, " I began to think I should
never see you again ! "

" I was carried off, by force of arms," said Steerf orth, " the
very next morning after I got home. Why, Daisy, what a
rare old bachelor you are here ! "

I showed him over the establishment, not omitting the
pantry, with no little pride, and he commended it highly.
" I tell you what, old boy," he added, u I shall make quite
a town-house of this place, unless you give me notice to
quit."

This was a delightful hearing. I told him if he waited for
that, he would have to wait till doomsday.

"But you shall have some breakfast!" said I, with my
hand on the bell-rope, " and Mrs. Crupp shall make you some
fresh coffee, and I'll toast you some bacon in a bachelor's
Dutch-oven that I have got here."

" ISTo, no ! " said Steerf orth. " Don't ring ! I can't ! I am



^ 388 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

going to breakfast with one of these fellows who is at the
Piazza Hotel, in Co vent Garden."

" But you'll come back to dinner ? " said I,

" I can't, upon my life. There's nothing I should like bet-
ter, but I must remain with these two fellows. We are all
three off together to-morrow morning."

"Then bring them here to dinner/' I returned. "Do you
think they would come ? "

"Oh ! they would come fast enough/' said Steerforth; "but
we should inconvenience you. You had better come and dine
with us somewhere."

I would not by any means Consent to this, for it occurred
to me that I really ought to have a little housewarming, and
that there never could be a better opportunity. I had a new
pride in my rooms after his approval of them, and burned
with a desire to develop their utmost resources. I therefore
made him promise positively in the names of his two friends,
and we appointed six o'clock as the dinner-hour.

When he was gone, I rang for Mrs. Crupp, and acquainted
her with my desperate design. Mrs. Crupp said, in the first
place, of course it was well known she couldn't be expected to
wait, but she knew a handy young man, who she thought
could be prevailed upon to do it, and whose terms would be
five shillings, and what I pleased. I said, certainly we would
have him. Next, Mrs. Crupp said it was clear she couldn't be
in two places at once (which I felt to be reasonable), and that
" a young gal " stationed in the pantry with a bed-room candle,
there never to desist from washing plates, would be indis-
pensable. I said, what would be the expense of this young
female, and Mrs.- Crupp said she supposed eighteen-pence
would neither make me nor break me. I said I supposed not ;
and that was settled. Then Mrs. Crupp said, Now about the
dinner.

It was a remarkable instance of want of forethought on the
part of the ironmonger who had made Mrs. Crupp's kitchen
fire-place, that it was capable of cooking nothing but chops'
and mashed potatoes. As to a fish-kittle, Mrs. Crupp said,
well ! would I only come and look at the range. She couldn't
say fairer than that. Would I come and look at it ? As I



/
OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 389

should not have been much the wiser if I had looked at it, I
declined, and said, " Never mind fish." But Mrs. Crupp said,
Don't say that ; oysters was in, and why not them ? So that
was settled. Mrs. Crupp then said what she would recommend
would be this. A pair of hot roast fowls — from the pastry-
cook's ; a dish of stewed beef, with vegetables — from the
pastry-cook's ; two little corner things, as a raised pie and a
dish of kidneys — from the pastry-cook's ; a tart, and (if I
liked) a shape of jelly — from the pastry-cook's. This, Mrs.
Crupp said, would leave her at full liberty to concentrate her
mind on the potatoes, and to serve up the cheese and celery
as she could wish to see it done.

I acted on Mrs. Crupp's opinion, and gave the order at the
pastry-cook's myself. Walking along the Strand, afterwards,
and observing a hard mottled substance in the window of a
ham and beef shop, which resembled marble, but was labelled
" Mock Turtle," I went in and bought a slab of it, which I
have since seen reason to believe would have sufficed for
fifteen people. This preparation, Mrs. Crupp, after some
difficulty, consented to warm up ; and it shrunk so much in a
liquid state, that we found it what Steerf orth called " rather
a tight fit " for four.

These preparations happily completed, I bought a little
dessert in Covent Garden Market, and gave a rather extensive
order at a retail wine-merchant's in that vicinity. When I
came home in the afternoon, and saw the bottles drawn up in
a square on the pantry-floor, they looked so numerous (though
there were two missing, which made Mrs. Crupp very
uncomfortable), that I was absolutely frightened at them.

One of Steerforth's friends was named Grainger, and the
other Markham. They were both very gay and lively fellows ;
Grainger, something older than Steerforth ; Markham, youth-
ful-looking, and I should say not more than twenty. I
observed that the latter always spoke of himself indefinitely,
as " a man," and seldom or never in the first person singular.

"A man might get on very well here, Mr. Copperfield,"
said Markham — meaning himself.

"It's not a bad situation," said I, " and the rooms are
really commodious."



390 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" I hope you have both brought appetites with you ? " said
Steerforth.

"Upon my honor," returned Markham, "town seems to
sharpen a man's appetite. A man is hungry all day long. A
man is perpetually eating."

Being a little embarrassed at first, and feeling much too
young to preside, I made Steerforth take the head of the table
when dinner was announced, and seated myself opposite to
him. Everything was very good ; we did not spare the wine ;
and he exerted himself so brilliantly to make the thing pass
off well, that there was no pause in our festivity. I was not
quite such good company during dinner, as I could have
wished to be, for my chair was opposite the door, and my
attention was distracted by observing that the handy young
man went out of the room very often, and that his shadow
always presented itself, immediately afterwards, on the wall
of the entry, with a bottle at his mouth. The " young gal *
likewise occasioned me some uneasiness : not so much by
neglecting to wash the plates, as by breaking them. For be-
ing of an inquisitive disposition, and unable to confine herself
(as her positive instructions were) to the pantry, she was con-
stantly peering in at us, and constantly imagining herself
detected ; in which belief, she several times retired upon the
plates (with which she had carefully paved the floor), and did
great deal of destruction.

These, however, were small drawbacks, and easily forgotten
when the cloth was cleared, and the dessert put on the
table ; at which period of the entertainment the handy young
man was discovered to be speechless. Giving him private
directions to seek the society of Mrs. Crupp, and to remove
the "young gal" to the basement also, I abandoned myself
to enjoyment.

I began by being singularly cheerful and light-hearted ; all
sorts of half-forgotten things to talk about, came rushing
into my mind, and made me hold forth in a most unwonted
manner. I laughed heartily at my own jokes, and everybody
else's; called Steerforth to order for not passing the wine;
made several engagements to go to Oxford ; announced that I
meant to have a dinner party exactly like that, once a week



OF DAVID C0PPEBF1ELD. 391

until 'further notice ; and madly took so much snuff out of
Grainger's box, that I was obliged to go into the pantry, and
have a private fit of sneezing ten minutes long.

I went on, by passing the wine faster and faster yet, and
continually starting up with a corkscrew to open more wine^
long before any was needed. I proposed Steerforth's health.
I said he was my dearest friend, the protector of my boyhood,
and the companion of my prime. I said I was delighted to
propose his health. I said I owed him more obligations than
I could ever repay, and held him in a higher admiration than
I could ever express. I finished by saying, "111 give you
Steerf orth ! God bless him ! Hurrah ! ;; We gave him three
times three, and another, and a good one to finish with. I
broke my glass in going round the table to shake hands with
him, and I said (in two words) "Steerforth, you'retheguiding-
starofmyexistence."

I went on, by finding suddenly that somebody was in the
middle of a song. Markham was the singer, and he sang
" When the heart of a man is depressed with care." He said,
when he had sung it, he would give us " Woman ! " I took
objection to that, and I couldn't allow it. I said it was not a
respectful way of proposing the toast, and I would never
permit that toast to be drunk in my house otherwise than as
" The Ladies ! V I was very high with him, mainly I think
because I saw Steerf orth and Grainger laughing at me — or at
him — or at both of us. He said a man was not to be dictated
to. I said a man was. He said a man was not to be insulted,
then. I said he was right there — never under my roof,
where the Lares were sacred, and the laws of hospitality para-
mount. He said it was no derogatiou from a man's dignity to
confess that I was a devilish good fellow. I instantly pro-
posed his health.

' Somebody was smoking. We were all smoking. I was
smoking, and trying to suppress a rising tendency to shudder.
Steerforth had made a speech about me, in the course of which
I had been affected almost to tears. I returned thanks, and
hoped the present company would dine with me to-morrow,
and the day after — each day at five o'clock, that we might
enjoy the pleasures of conversation and society through a long



392 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

evening. I felt called upon to propose an individual. I would
give them my aunt. Miss Betsey Trotwood, the best of her
sex ! ,

Somebody was leaning out of my bed-room window, refresh-
ing his forehead against the cool stone of the parapet, and
feeling the air upon his face. It was myself. I was addressing
myself as " Copperfield," and saying, "Why did you try to
smoke ? You might have known you couldn't do it." Now,
somebody was unsteadily contemplating his features in the
looking-glass. That was I too. I was very pale in the look-
ing-glass ; my eyes had a vacant appearance ; and my hair —
only my hair, nothing else — looked drunk.

Somebody said to me, "Let us go to the theatre, Copper-
field ! " There was no bed-room before me, but again the
jingling table covered with glasses ; the lamp ; Grainger on
my right hand, Markham on my left, and Steerforth opposite
— all sitting in a mist, and a long way off. The theatre ?
To be sure. The very thing. Come along ! But they must
excuse me if I saw everybody out first, and turned the lamp
off — in case of fire.

Owing to some confusion in the dark, the door was gone. I
was feeling for it in the window-curtains, when Steerforth
laughing, took me by the arm and led me out. We went
down stairs, one behind another. Near the bottom, somebody
fell, and rolled down. Somebody else said it was Copperfield.
I was angry at that false report, until, finding myself on my
back in the passage, I began to think there might be some
foundation for it.

A very foggy night, with great rings round the lamps in the
streets ! There was an indistinct talk of its being wet. /
considered it frosty. Steerforth dusted me under a lamp-post,
and put my hat into shape, which somebody produced from
somewhere in a most extraordinary manner, for I hadn't had
it on before. Steerforth then said, " You are all right, Copper-
field, are you not ? " and I told him, " jSTeverberrer."

A man, sitting in a pigeon-hole-place, looked out of the fog,
and took money from somebody, inquiring if I was one of the
gentlemen paid for, and appearing rather doubtful (as I
remember in the glimpse I had of him) whether to take the



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 393

money for me or not. Shortly afterwards, we were very high
up in a very hot theatre, looking down into a large pit, that
seemed to me to smoke; the people with whom it was
crammed were so indistinct. There was a great stage, too,
looking very clean and smooth after the streets ; and there
were people upon it, talking about something or other, but not
at all intelligibly. There was an abundance of bright lights,
and there was music, and there were ladies down in the boxes,
and I don't know what more. The whole "building looked to
me, as if it were learning to swim ; it. conducted itself in such
an unaccountable manner, when I tried to steady it.

On somebody's motion, we resolved to go down stairs to
the dress-boxes, where the ladies were. A gentleman lounging,
full dressed, on a sofa, with an opera-glass in his hand, passed
before my view, and also my own figure at full length in a
glass. Then I was being ushered into one of these boxes,
and found myself saying something as I sat down, and people
about me crying " Silence ! " to somebody, and ladies casting
indignant glances at me, and — what ! yes ! — Agnes, sitting
on the seat before me, in the same box, with a lady and gen-
tleman beside her whom I didn't know. I see her face now,
better than I did then I dare say, with its indelible look of
regret and wonder turned upon me.

" Agnes ! " I said, thickly, " Lorblessmer ! Agnes ! "

"Hush! Pray !" she answered, I could not conceive why.
" You disturb the company. Look at the stage ! "

I tried, on her injunction, to fix it, and to hear something of
what was going on there, but quite in vain. I looked at her
again by and by, and saw her shrink into her corner, and put
her gloved hand to her forehead.

"Agnes !" I said. " Fmaf raidyou'renorwell."

"Yes, yes. Do not mind me, Trotwood," she returned.
" Listen ! Are you going away soon ? "

" Amigoarawaysoo ? " I repeated.

"Yes."

I had a stupid intention of replying that I was going to
wait, to hand her down stairs. I suppose I expressed it some-
how ; for after she had looked at me attentively for a little
while, she appeared to understand, and replied in a low tone :



394 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

u I know you will do as I ask you, if I tell you I am verj.
earnest in it. Go away now, Trotwood, for my sake, and asL
your friends to take you home."

She had so far improved me, for the time, that though I was
angry with her, I felt ashamed, and with a short " Goori ! K
(which I intended for "Good night!") got up and went
away. They followed, and I stepped at once out of the box-
door into my bed-room, where only Steerforth was with me,
helping me to undress, and where I was by turns telling him
that Agnes was my sister, and adjuring him to bring the cork-
screw, that I might open another bottle of wine.

How somebody, lyin^ in my bed, lay saying and doing all
this over again, at cross purposes, in a feverish dream all
night — the bed a rocking sea, that was never still ! How, as
that somebody slowly settled down into myself, did I begin to
parch, and feel as if my outer covering of skin were a hard
board ; my tongue the bottom of an empty kettle, furred with
long service, and burning up over a slow fire ; the palms of
my hands, hot plates of metal which no ice could cool !

But the agony of mind, the remorse and shame I felt, when
I became conscious next day ! My horror of having com-
mitted a thousand offences I had forgotten, and which nothing
could ever expiate — my recollection of that indelible look
which Agnes had given me — the torturing impossibility of
communicating with her, not knowing, beast that I was, how
she came to be in London, or where she stayed — my disgust
of the very sight of the room where the revel had been held
— my racking head — the smell of smoke, the sight of
glasses, the impossibility of going out, or even getting up "
Oh, what a day it was !

Oh, what an evening, when I sat down by my fire to a basin
of mutton broth, dimpled all over with fat, and thought I was
going the way of my predecessor, and should succeed to 'his
dismal story as well as to his chambers, and had half a mind
to rush express to Dover and reveal all ! What an evening,
when Mrs. Crupp, coming in to take away the broth-basin,
produced one kidney on a cheese-plate as the entire remains
of yesterday's feast, and I was really inclined to fall upon her






OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 395

nankeen breast, and say, in heartfelt penitence, "Oh, Mrs.
Crupp, Mrs. Crupp, never mind the broken meats ! I am very
miserable ! " — only that I doubted, even at that pass, if Mrs.
Crupp were quite the sort of woman to confide in !



396 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE



CHAPTER XXV.

GOOD AND BAD ANGELS.

I was going out at my door on the morning after that
deplorable day of headache, sickness, and repentance, with an
odd confusion in my mind relative to the date of my dinner-
party, as if a body of Titans had taken an enormous lever and
pushed the day before yesterday some months back, when I
saw a ticket-porter coming up stairs, with a letter in his hand.
He was taking his time about his errand, then ; but when he
saw me on the top of the staircase, looking at him over the
banisters, he swung into a trot, and came up panting as if he
had run himself into a state of exhaustion.

"T. Copperfield, Esquire," said the ticket-porter, touching
his hat with his little cane.

I could scarcely lay claim to the name : I was so disturbed
by the conviction that the letter came from Agnes. However,
I told him I was T. Copperfield, Esquire, and he believed it,
and gave me the letter, which he said required an answer. I
shut him out on the landing to wait for the answer, and went
into my chambers again, in such a nervous state that I was
fain to lay the letter down on my breakfast-table, and familiar-
ize myself with the outside of it a little, before I could resolve
to break the seal.

I found, when I did open it, that it was a very kind note,
containing no reference to my condition at the theatre. All it
said, was, " My dear Trotwood. I am staying at the house of
papa's agent, Mr. Waterbrook, in Ely-place, Holborn. Will
you come and see me to-day, at any time you like to appoint ?
Ever yours affectionately, Agnes."

It took me such a long time to write an answer at all to my
satisfaction, that I don't know what the ticket-porter can have
thought, unless he thought I was learning to write. I must
have written half-a-dozen answers at least. I began one,



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 397

"How can I ever hope, my dear Agnes, to efface from your
remembrance the disgusting impression " — there I didn't like
it, and then I tore it up. I began another, " Shakspeare has
observed, my dear Agnes, how strange it is that a man should
put an enemy into his mouth " — that reminded me ,of Mark-
ham, and it got no farther. I even tried poetry. I began one
note, in a six syllable line, " Oh, do not remember " — but that
associated itself with the fifth of November, and became an
absurdity. After many attempts, I wrote, "My dear Agnes.
Your letter is like you, and what could I say of it that would
be higher praise than that ? I will come at four o'clock.
Affectionately and sorrowfully, T. C." With this missive
(which I was in twenty minds at once about recalling, as
soon as it was out of my hands), the ticket-porter at last
departed.

If the day were half as tremendous to any other professional
gentleman in Doctors' Commons as it was to me, I sincerely
believe he made some expiation for his share in that rotten old
ecclesiastical cheese. Although I left the office at half-past
three, and was prowling about the place of appointment within
a few minutes afterwards, the appointed time was exceeded
by a full quarter of an hour, according to the clock of St.
Andrews, Holborn, before I could muster up sufficient desper-
ation to pull the private bell-handle let into the left-hand
door-post of Mr. Waterbrook's house.

The professional business of Mr. Waterbrook's establish-
ment was done on the ground floor, and the genteel business
(of which there was a good deal) in the upper part of the
building. I was shown into a pretty but rather close drawing-
room, and there sat Agnes, netting a purse.

She looked so quiet and good, and reminded me so strongly
of my airy fresh school days at Canterbury, and the sodden,
smoky, stupid wretch I had been the other night, that, nobody
being by, I yielded to my self-reproach and shame, and — in
short, made a fool of myself. I cannot deny that I shed tears.
To this hour I am undecided whether it was upon the whole
the wisest thing I could have done, or the most ridiculous.

"If it had been any one but you, Agnes," said I, turning
away my head, " I should not have minded it half so much.



398 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

But that it should have been you who saw me ! I almost wish
I had been dead, first."

She put her hand — its touch was like no other hand — upon
my arm for a moment ; and I felt so befriended a^d comforted,
that I could not help moving it to my lips, and gratefully
kissing it.

"Sit down," said Agnes, cheerfully. " Don't be unhappy,
Trotwood. If you cannot confidently trust me, whom will
you trust ? "

" Ah, Agnes ! " I returned. " You are my good Angel ! "

She smiled rather sadly, I thought, and shook her head.

" Yes, Agnes, my good Angel ! Always my good Angel ! "

" If I were, indeed, Trotwood," she returned, " there is one
thing that I should set my heart on very much."

I looked at her inquiringly ; but already with a fore-
knowledge of her meaning.

"On warning you," said Agnes, with a steady glance,
" against your bad Angel."

" My dear Agnes," I began, " if you mean Steerforth — "

" I do, Trotwood," she returned.

"Then, Agnes, you wrong him very much. He my bad
Angel, or any one's ! He, anything but a guide, a support,
and a friend to me ! My dear Agnes ! Now, is it not unjust,
and unlike you, to judge him from what you saw of me the
other night ? "

" I do not judge him from what I saw of you the other
night," she quietly replied.

"From what, then?"

"From many things — trifles in themselves, but they do not
seem to me to be so, when they are put together. I judge
him, partly from your account of him, Trotwood, and your
character, and the influence he has over you."

There was always something in her modest voice that
seemed to touch a chord within me, answering to that sound
alone. It was always earnest ; but when it was very earnest,
as it was now, there was a thrill in it that quite subdued me.
I sat looking at her as she cast her eyes down on her work ; I
sat seeming still to listen to her ; and Steerforth, in spite of
all my attachment to him, darkened in that tone.



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 399

"It is very bold in me," said Agnes, looking up again,
" who have lived in such seclusion, and can know so little of
the world, to give you my advice so confidently, or even to
have this strong opinion. But I know in what it is engen-
dered, Trotwood, — in how true a remembrance of our having
grown up together, and in how true an interest in all relating
to you. It is that which makes me bold. I am certain that
what I say is right. I am quite sure it is. I feel as if it
were some one else speaking to you, and not I, when I caution
you that you have made a dangerous friend."

Again I looked at her, again I listened to her after she was
silent, aud again his image, though it was still fixed in my
heart, darkened.

"I am not so unreasonable- as to expect," said Agnes,
resuming her usual tone, after a little while, " that you will,
or that you can, at once, change any sentiment that has
become a conviction to you ; least of all a sentiment that is
rooted in your trusting disposition. You ought not hastily to
do that. I only ask you, Trotwood, if you ever think of me
— I mean," with a quiet smile, for I was going to interrupt
her, and she knew why, " as often as you think of me — to
think of what I have said. Do you forgive me for all this ? "

"I will forgive you, Agnes," I replied, "when you come to
do Steerforth justice, and to like him as well as I do."

" Not until then ? " said Agnes.

I saw a passing shadow on her face when I made this men-
tion of him, but she returned my smile, and we were again
as unreserved in our mutual confidence as of old.

" And when, Agnes," said I, " will you forgive me the other
night ? "

" When I recall it," said Agnes.

She would have dismissed the subject so, but I was too full
of it to allow that, and insisted on telling her how it happened
that I had disgraced myself, and what chain of accidental
circumstances had had the theatre for its final link. It was a
great relief to me to do this, and to enlarge on the obligation
that I owed to Steerforth for his care of me when I was
unable to take care of myself.

"'You must not forget," said Agnes, calmly changing the



400 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

conversation as soon as I had concluded, " that you are always
to tell me, not only when you fall into trouble, but when you
fall in love. Who has succeeded to Miss Larkins, Trotwood ? "

" No one, Agnes."

" Some one, Trotwood," said Agnes, laughing, and holding
up her finger.

" No, Agnes, upon my word ! There is a lady, certainly,
at Mrs. Steerforth's house, who is very clever, and whom I
like to talk to — Miss Dartle — but I don't adore her."

Agnes laughed again at her own penetration, and told me
that if I were faithful to her in my confidence she thought
she should keep a little register of my violent attachments,
with the date, duration, and termination of each, like the
table of the reigns of the kings and queens, in the History of
England. Then she asked me if I had seen Uriah.

" Uriah Heep ? " said I. "No. Is he in London ? "

" He comes to the office down stairs, every day," returned
Agnes. " He was in London a week before me. I am afraid
on disagreeable business, Trotwood."

" On some business that makes you uneasy, Agnes, I see,"
said I. " What can that be ? "

Agnes laid aside her work, and replied, folding her hands
.upon one another, and looking pensively at me out of those
beautiful soft eyes of hers :

" I believe he is going to enter into partnership with papa."

" What ? Uriah ? ' That mean, fawning fellow, worm him-
self into such promotion ? " I cried, indignantly. " Have
you made no remonstrance about it, Agnes ? Consider what
a connection it is likely to be. You must speak out. You
must not allow your father to take such a mad step. You
must prevent it, Agnes, while there's time."

Still looking at me, Agnes shook her head while I was
speaking, with a faint smile at my warmth: and then replied:

" You remember our last conversation about papa ? It was
not long after that — not more than two or three days — when
he gave me the first intimation of what I tell you. It was sad
to see him struggling between his desire to represent it to me
as a matter of choice on his part, and his inability to conceal
that it was forced upon him. I felt very sorry."





" Forced upon him, Agnes ? Who forces it upon him ? "

"Uriah/' she replied, after a moment's hesitation, "has
made himself indispensable to papa. He is subtle and watch-
ful. He has mastered papa's weaknesses, fostered them, and
taken advantage of them, until — to say all that I mean in
a word, Trotwood, until papa is afraid of him."

There was more that she might have said; more that she
knew, or that she suspected ; I clearly saw. I could not give
her pain by asking what it was, for I knew that she withheld
it from me to spare her father. It had long been going on to
this I was sensible : yes, I could not but feel, on the least
reflection, that it had been going on to this for a long time. I
remained silent.

"His ascendancy over papa," said Agnes, "is very great.
He professes humility and gratitude — with truth, perhaps : I
hope so — but his position is really one of power, and I fear
he makes a hard use of his power."

I said he was a hound, which, at the moment, was a great
satisfaction to me.

" At the time I speak of, as the time when papa spoke to
me," pursued Agnes, "he had told papa that he was going
away ; that he was very sorry and unwilling to leave, but that
he had better prospects. Papa was very much depressed then,
and more bowed down by care than ever you or I have seen
him; but he seemed relieved by this expedient of the part-
nership, though at the same time he seemed hurt by it and
ashamed of it."

" And how did you receive it, Agnes ? "

"I did, Trotwood," she replied, "what I hope was right.
Feeling sure that it was necessary for papa's peace that the
sacrifice should be made, I entreated him to make it. I said
it would lighten the load of his life — I hope it will ! — and
that it would give me increased opportunities of being his
companion. Oh, Trotwood ! " cried Agnes, putting her hands
before her face, as her tears started on it, " I almost feel as if
I had been papa's enemy, instead of his loving child. For I
know how he has altered, in his devotion to me. I know how
he has narrowed the circle of his sympathies and duties, in
the concentration of his whole mind upon me, I know what
vol. % — 26



402 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

a multitude of things he has shut out for my sake, and how
his anxious thoughts of me have shadowed his life, and
weakened his strength and energy, by turning them alwaj^s
upon one idea. If I could ever set this right! If I could
ever work out his restoration, as I have so innocently been the
cause of his decline ! n

I had never before seen Agnes cry. I had seen tears in her
eyes when I had brought new honors home from school, and
I had seen them there when we last spoke about her father,
and I had seen her turn her gentle head aside when we took
leave of one another; but I had never seen her grieve like
this. It made me so sorry that I could only say, in a foolish,
helpless manner, "Pray, Agnes, don't! Don't, my dear
sister ! "

But Agnes was too superior to me in character and purpose,
as I know well now, whatever I might know or not know then,
to be long in need of my entreaties. The beautiful, calm
manner, which makes her so different in my remembrance
from everybody else, came back again, as if a cloud had passed
from a serene sky.

"We are not likely to remain alone much longer," said
Agnes, "and while I have an opportunity, let me earnestly
entreat you, Trotwood, to be friendly to Uriah. Don't repel
him. Don't resent (as I think you have a general disposition
to do) what may be uncongenial to you in him. He may not
deserve it, for we know no certain ill of him. In any case,
think first of papa and me ! "

Agnes had no time to say more, for the room-door opened,
and Mrs. Waterbrook, who was a large lady — or w^ho wore a
large dress : I don't exactly know which, for I don't know
which was dress and which was lady — came sailing in. I had
a dim recollection of having seen her at the theatre, as if I had
seen her in a pale magic lantern ; but she appeared to remember
me perfectly, and still to suspect me of being in a state of
intoxication.

Finding by degrees, however, that I was sober, and (I hope)
that I was a modest young gentleman, Mrs. Waterbrook
softened towards me considerably, and inquired, firstly, if I
went much into the parks, and secondly, if I went much into



OF DAVID GOPPEBFIELD. 403

society. On my replying to both these questions in the
negative, it occurred to me that I fell again in her good
opinion ; but she concealed the fact gracefully, and invited me
to dinner next day. I accepted the invitation, and took my
leave ; making a call on Uriah in the office as I went out, and
leaving a card for him in his absence.

When I went to dinner next day, and, on the street-door
being opened, plunged into a vapor-bath of haunch of mutton ;
I divined that I was not the only guest ; for I immediately
identified the ticket-porter in disguise, assisting the family
servant, and waiting at the foot of the stairs to carry up my
name. He looked, to the best of his ability, when he asked
me for it confidentially, as if he had never seen me before ; but
well did I know him, and well did he know me. Conscience
made cowards of us both.

Sat I found Mr. Waterbrook to be a middle-aged gentleman, with
a short throat, and a good deal of shirt-collar, who only wanted
a black nose to be the portrait of a pug-dog. He told me he
was happy to have the honor of making my acquaintance ;
and when I had paid my homage to Mrs. Waterbrook, presented
me, with much ceremony, to a very awful lady in a black
velvet dress, and a great black velvet hat, whom I remember
as looking like a near relation of Hamlet's — say his aunt.

Mrs. Henry Spiker was this lady's name ; and her husband
was there too : so cold a man, that his head, instead of being
gray, seemed to be sprinkled with hoar-frost. Immense def-
erence was shown to the Henry Spikers, male and female ;
which Agnes told me was on account of Mr. Henry Spiker
being solicitor to something or to somebody, I forget what or
which, remotely connected with the Treasury.

I found Uriah Heep among the company, in a suit of black,
and in deep humility. He told me, when I shook hands with
him, that he was proud to be noticed by me, and that he really
felt obliged to me for my condescension. I could have wished
he had been less obliged to me, for he hovered about me in his
gratitude all the rest of the evening ; and whenever I said a
word to Agnes, was sure, with his shadowless eyes and cadav-
erous face, to be looking gauntly down upon us from behind.

There were other guests — all iced for the occasion, as it



404 THE PEBSONAL HISTOBY AND EXPEBIENGE

struck me, like the wine. But, there was one who attracted
my attention before he came in, on account of my hearing him
announced as Mr. Traddles ! My mind flew back to Salem
House ; and could it be Tommy, I thought, who used to draw
the skeletons !

I looked for Mr. Traddles with unusual interest. He was a
sober, steady-looking young man of retiring manners, with a
comic head of hair, and eyes that were rather wide open ; and
he got into an obscure corner so soon, that I had some difficulty
in making him out. At length I had a good view of him,
and either my vision deceived me, or it was the old unfortu-
nate Tommy.

I made my way to Mr. "Waterbrook, and said, that I believed
I had the pleasure of seeing an old schoolfellow there.

" Indeed ? " said Mr. Waterbrook, surprised. " You are too
young to have been at school with Mr. Henry Spiker ? "

" Oh, I don't mean him ! " I returned. " I mean the gentle-
man named Traddles."

" Oh ! Ay, ay ! Indeed ! " said my host, with much dimin-
ished interest. "Possibly."

" If it's really the same person," said I, glancing towards
him, "it was at a place called Salem House where we were
together, and he was an excellent fellow."

" Oh, yes. Traddles is a good fellow," returned my host,
nodding his head with an air of toleration. " Traddles is quite
a good fellow."

" It's a curious coincidence," said I.

" It is really," returned my host, a quite a coincidence, that
Traddles should be here at all : as Traddles was only invited
this morning, when the place at table, intended to be occupied
by Mrs. Henry Spiker's brother, became vacant, in consequence
of his indisposition. A very gentlemanly man, Mrs. Henry
Spiker's brother, Mr. Copperfield."

I murmured an assent, which was full of feeling, considering
that I knew nothing at all about him ; and I inquired what
Mr. Traddles was by profession.

"Traddles," returned Mr. Waterbrook, "is a young man
reading for the bar. Yes. He is quite a good fellow — no-
body's enemy but his own."





" Is he his own enemy ? " said I; sorry to hear this.

"Well," returned Mr. Waterbrook, pursing up his mouth,
and playing with his watch-chain, in a comfortable, prosperous
sort of way. "I should say he was one of those men who
stand in their own light. Yes, I should say he would never,
for example, be worth five hundred pound. Traddles was
recommended to me by a professional friend. Oh, yes. Yes.
He has a kind of talent, for drawing briefs, and stating a case
in writing, plainly. I am able to throw something in Traddles's
way, in the course of the year ; something — for him — consid-
erable. Oh, yes. Yes."

I was much impressed by the extremely comfortable and
satisfied manner, in which Mr. Waterbrook delivered himself
of this little word " Yes," every now and then. There was
wonderful expression in it. It completely conveyed the idea
of a man who had been born, not to say with a silver spoon,
but with a scaling-ladder, and had gone on mounting all the
heights of life one after another, until now he looked, from
the top of the fortifications, with the eye of a philosopher and
a patron, on the people down in the trenches.

My reflections on this theme were still in progress when
dinner was announced. Mr. Waterbrook went down with v
Hamlet's aunt. Mr. Henry Spiker took Mrs. Waterbrook.
Agnes, whom I should have liked to take myself, was given to
a simpering fellow with weak legs. Uriah, Traddles, and I,
as the junior part of the company, went down last, how we
could. I was not so vexed at losing Agnes as I might have
been, since it gave me an opportunity of making myself
known to Traddles on the stairs, who greeted me with great
fervor : while Uriah writhed with such obtrusive satisfaction
and self-abasement, that I could gladly have pitched him over
the banisters.

Traddles and I were separated at table, being billeted in
two remote corners : he in the glare of a red velvet lady : I,
in the gloom of Hamlet's aunt. The dinner was very long,
and the conversation was about the Aristocracy — and Blood.
Mrs. Waterbrook repeatedly told us, that if she had a weak-
ness, it was Blood.

It occurred to me several times that we should have got on



406 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

better, if we had not been quite so genteel. We were so ex-
ceedingly genteel, that our scope was very limited. A Mr.
and Mrs. Gulpidge were of the party, who had something to
do at second-hand (at least, Mr. Gulpidge had), with the law
business of the Bank; and what with the Bank, and what
with the Treasury, we were as exclusive as the Court Circular.
To mend the matter, Hamlet's aunt had the family failing of
indulging in soliloquy, and held forth in a desultory manner,
by herself, on every topic that was introduced. These were
few enough, to be sure; but as we always fell back upon
Blood, she had as wide a field for abstract speculation as her
nephew himself.

We might have been a party of Ogres, the conversation
assumed such a sanguine complexion.

"I confess I am of Mrs. Waterbrook's opinion," said Mr.
Waterbrook, with his wine-glass at his eye. "Other things
are all very well in their way, but give me Blood ! "

" Oh ! There is nothing," observed Hamlet's aunt, " so
satisfactory to one ! There is nothing that is so much one's
beau idial of — of all that sort of thing, speaking generally.
There are some low minds (not many, I am happy to believe,
but there are some) that would prefer to do w T hat I should call
bow down before idols. Positively Idols ! Before services,
intellect, and so on. But these are intangible points. Blood is
not so. We see Blood in a nose, and we know it. We meet with
it in a chin, and we say, ' There it is ! That's Blood ! ' It is an
actual matter of fact. We point it out. It admits of no doubt."

The simpering fellow with the weak legs, who had taken
Agnes down, stated the question more decisively yet, I thought.

" Oh, you know, deuce take it," said this gentleman, looking
round the board with an imbecile smile, "we can't forego
Blood, you know. We must have Blood, you know. Some
young fellows, you know, may be a little behind their station,
perhaps, in point of education and behavior, and may go a
little wrong, you know, and get themselves and other people
into a variety of fixes — and all that — but deuce take it, it's
delightful to reflect that they've got Blood in 'em ! Myself,
I'd rather at any time be knocked down by a man who had got
Blood in him, than I'd be picked up by a man who hadn't ! "





This sentiment, as compressing the general question into a
nutshell, gave the utmost satisfaction, and brought the gentle-
man into great notice until the ladies retired. After that, I
observed that Mr. Gulpidge and Mr. Henry Spiker, who had
hitherto been very distant, entered into a defensive alliance
against us, the common enemy, and exchanged a mysterious
dialogue across the table for our defeat and overthrow.

" That affair of the first bond for four thousand five hundred
pounds has not taken the course that was expected, Spiker,"
said Mr. Gulpidge.

" Do you mean the D. of A. ; s ? " said Mr. Spiker.

" The C. of B.'s ? " said Mr. Gulpidge.

Mr. Spiker raised his eyebrows, and looked much concerned.

" When the question was referred to Lord — I needn't name
him," said Mr. Gulpidge, checking himself —

"I understand," said Mr. Spiker, "K"

Mr. Gulpidge darkly nodded — "was referred to him, his
answer was, i Money, or no release/ "

" Lord bless my soul ! " cried Mr. Spiker.

"'Money, or no release/" repeated Mr. Gulpidge, firmly.
" The next in reversion — you understand me ? "

"K.," said Mr. Spiker, with an ominous look.

" — K. then positively refused to sign. He was attended at
Newmarket for that purpose, and he point-blank refused to do
it."

Mr. Spiker was so interested, that he became quite stony.

"So the matter rests at this hour," said Mr. Gulpidge,
throwing himself back is his chair. " Our friend Waterbrook
will excuse me if I forbear to explain myself generally, on
account of the magnitude of the interests involved."

Mr. Waterbrook was only too happy, as it appeared to me,
to have such interests, and such names, even hinted at, across
his table. He assumed an expression of gloomy intelligence
(though I am persuaded he knew no more about the discussion
than I did), and highly approved of the discretion that had
been observed. Mr. Spiker, after the receipt of such a con-
fidence, naturally desired to favor his friend with a confidence
of his own; therefore the foregoing dialogue was succeeded
by another, in which it was Mr. Gulpidge's turn to be surprised,



408 THE PERSONAL HISTOEY AND EXPERIENCE

and that by another in which the surprise came round to Mr.
Spiker's turn again, and so on, turn and turn about. All this
time we, the outsiders, remained oppressed by the tremendous
interests involved in the conversation ; and our host regarded us
with pride, as the victims of a salutary awe and astonishment.
I was very glad indeed to get up stairs to Agnes, and to talk
with her in a corner, and to introduce Traddles to her, who
was shy, but agreeable, and the same good-natured creature
still. As he was obliged to leave early, on account of going
away next morning for a month, I had not nearly so much con-
versation with him as I could have wished ; but we exchanged
addresses, and promised ourselves the pleasure of another
meeting when he should come back to town. He was greatly
interested to hear that I knew Steerforth, and spoke of him
with such warmth that I made him tell Agnes what he thought
of him. But Agnes only looked at me the while, and very
slightly shook her head when only I observed her.

As she was not among people with whom I believed she
could be very much at home, I was almost glad to hear that
she was going away .within a few days, though I was sorry at
the prospect of parting from her again so soon. This caused
me to remain until all the company were gone. Conversing
with her, and hearing her sing, was such a delightful reminder
to me of my happy life in the grave old house she had made so
beautiful, that I could have remained there half the night;
but, having no excuse for staying any longer, when the lights
of Mr. Waterbrook's society were all snuffed out, I took my
leave very much against my inclination. I felt then, more
than ever, that she was my better Angel ; and if I thought of
her sweet face and placid smile, as though they had shone on
me from some removed being, like an Angel, I hope I thought
no harm.

I have said that the company were all gone ; but I ought
to have excepted Uriah, whom I don't include in that denom-
ination, and who had never ceased to hover near us. He
was close behind me when I went down stairs. He was close
beside me when I walked away from the house, slowly fitting
his long skeleton fingers into the still longer fingers of a great
Guy Fawkes pair of gloves.





It was in no disposition for Uriah's company, but in remem-
brance of the entreaty i^giies had made to me, that I asked him
if he would come home to my rooms, and have some coffee.

"Oh, really, Master Copperfield," he rejoined, — "I beg
your pardon, Mister Copperfield, but the other comes so
natural. — I don't like that you should put a constraint upon
yourself to ask a numble person like me to your ouse."

"There is no constraint in the case/' said I. "Will you
come ? "

" I should like to, very much," replied Uriah, with a writhe.

" Well, then, come along ! " said I.

I could not help being rather short with him, but he appeared
not to mind it. We went the nearest way, without convers-
ing much upon the road; and he was so humble in respect
of those scarecrow gloves, that he was still putting them on,
and seemed to have made no advance in that labor, when we
got to my place.

I led him up the dark stairs, to prevent his knocking his
head against anything, and really his damp cold hand felt so
like a frog in mine, that I was tempted .to drop it and run
away. Agnes and hospitality prevailed, however, and I con-
ducted him to my fireside. When I lighted my candles, he
fell into meek transports with the room that was revealed to
Mm ; and when I heated the coffee in an unassuming block-
tin-vessel in which Mrs. Crupp delighted to prepare it (chiefly,
I believe, because it was not intended for the purpose, being a
shaving-pot, and because there was a patent invention of great
price mouldering away in the pantry), he professed so much
emotion, that I could joyfully have scalded him.

" Oh, really, Master C6pperfield, — I mean Mister Copper-
field," said Uriah, "to see you waiting upon me is what I
never could have expected! But, one way and another, so
many things happen to me which I never could have expected,
I am sure, in my umble station, that it seems to rain blessings
on my ed. You have heard something, I des-say, of a change
in my expectations, Master Copperfield, / should say, Mister
Copperfield?"

As he sat on my sofa, with his long knees drawn up under
his coffee-cup, his hat and gloves upon the ground close to



410 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

him, his spoon going softly round and round, his shadowless
red eyes, which looked as if they had scorched their lashes off,
turned towards me without looking at me, the disagreeable
dints I have formerly described in his nostrils coming and
going with his breath, and a snaky undulation pervading his
frame from his chin to his boots, I decided in my own mind
that I disliked him intensely. It made me very uncomfortable
to have him for a guest, for I was young then, and unused to
disguise what I so strongly felt.

" You have heard something, I des-say, of a change in my
expectations, Master Copperfield — I should say, Mister Cop-
perfield ? " observed Uriah.

" Yes," said I, " something."

" Ah ! I thought Miss Agnes would know of it ! " he quietly
returned. "Pin glad to find Miss Agnes knows of it. Oh,
thank you, Master — Mister Copperfield ! "

I could have thrown my bootjack at him (it lay ready on
the rug), for having entrapped me into the disclosure of any-
thing concerning Agnes, however immaterial. But I only
drank my coffee.

" What a prophet you have shown yourself, Mister Copper-
field ! " pursued Uriah. " Dear me, what a prophet you have
proved yourself to be ! Don't you remember saying to me
once, that perhaps I should be a partner in Mr. Wickfield^
business, and perhaps it might be Wickfield and Heep ! You
may not recollect it ; but when a person is umble, Master
Copperfield, a person treasures such things up ! "

" I recollect talking about it," said I, " though I certainly
did not think it very likely then."

" Oh ! who would have thought it likely, Mister Copper-
field ! " returned Uriah, enthusiastically, " I am sure I didn't
myself. I recollect saying with my own lips that I was much
too umble. So I considered myself really and truly."

He sat, with that carved grin on his face, looking at the
fire, as I looked at him.

"But the umblest persons, Master Copperfield," he pres-
ently resumed, " may be the instruments of good. I am glad
to think I have been the instrument of good to Mr. Wickfield,





and that I may be more so. Oh, what a worthy man he is,
Mister Copperfield, but how imprudent he has been ! "

" I am sorry to hear it," said I. I could not help adding,
rather pointedly, "on all accounts."

"Decidedly so, Mister Copperfield," replied Uriah. "On
all accounts. Miss Agnes's above all ! You don't remember
your own eloquent expressions, Master Copperfield; but /
remember how you said one day that everybody must admire
her, and how I thanked you for it ? You have forgot that, I
have no doubt, Master Copperfield ? "

"No," said I, drily.

" Oh, how glad I am, you have not ! " exclaimed Uriah.
" To think that you should be the first to kindle the sparks of
ambition in my umble breast, and that youVe not forgot
it f Oh ! — Would you excuse me asking for a cup more
coffee ? "

Something in the emphasis he laid upon the kindling of
those sparks, and something in the glance he directed at me as
he said it, had made me start as if I had seen him illuminated
by a blaze of light. Eecalled by his request, preferred in
quite another tone of voice, I did the honors of the shaving-
pot ; but I did them with an unsteadiness of hand, a sudden
sense of being no match for him, and a perplexed suspicious
anxiety as to what he might be going to say next, which I felt
could not escape his observation.

He said nothing at all. He stirred his coffee round and
round, he sipped it, he felt his chin softly with his grisly
hand, he looked at the fire, he looked about the room, he
gasped rather than smiled at me, he writhed and undulated
about, in his deferential servility, he stirred and sipped again,
but he left the renewal of the conversation to me.

"So, Mr. Wickfield," said I, at last, "who is worth five
hundred of you — or me ; " for my life, I think, I could not
have helped dividing that part of the sentence with an awk-
ward jerk; " has been imprudent, has he, Mr. Heep ? "

" Oh, very imprudent indeed, Master Copperfield," returned
Uriah, sighing modestly. " Oh, very much so ! But I wish
you'd call me Uriah, if you please. It's like old times."
"Well ! Uriah," said I, bolting it out with some difficulty.



412 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" Thank you ! " he returned, with fervor. " Thank you,
Master Copperfield ! It's like the blowing of old breezes or
the ringing of old bellses to hear you say Uriah. I beg your
pardon. Was I making any observation ? "

"About Mr. Wickfield," I suggested.

" Oh ! Yes, truly," said Uriah. " Ah ! Great imprudence,
Master Copperfield. It's a topic that I wouldn't touch upon,
to any soul but you. Even to you I can only touch upon it,
and no more. If any one else had been in my place during
the last few years, by this time he would have had Mr.
Wickfield (oh, what a worthy man he is, Master Copperfield,
too !) under his thumb. Un — der — his thumb," said Uriah,
very slowly, as he stretched out his cruel-looking hand above
my table, and pressed his own thumb down upon it, until it
shook, .and shook the room.

If I had been obliged to look at him with his splay foot on
Mr. Wickfield's head, I think I could scarcely have hated him
more.

" Oh, dear, yes, Master Copperfield," he proceeded in a soft
voice, most remarkably contrasting with the action of his
thumb, which did not diminish its hard pressure in the least
degree, "there's no doubt of it. There would have been loss,
disgrace, I don't know what all. Mr. Wickfield knows it.
I am the umble instrument of umbly serving him, and
he puts me on an eminence I hardly could have hoped to
reach. How thankful should I be ! " With his face turned
towards me, as he finished, but without looking at ine, he
took his crooked thumb off the spot where he had planted it,
and slowly and thoughtfully scraped his lank jaw with it, as
if he were shaving himself.

I recollect well how indignantly my heart beat, as I saw
his crafty face, with the appropriately red light of the fire
upon it, preparing for something else.

"Master Copperfield," he began — "but am I keeping you
up?"

" You are not keeping me up. I generally go to bed late."

" Thank you, Master Copperfield ! I have risen from my
umble station since first you used to address me, it is true ;
but I am umble still. I hope I never shall be otherwise than



OF DAVID GOPPEBFIELD. 413

umble. You will not think the worse of my umbleness, if I
make a little confidence to you, Master Copperfield ? Will
you f"

" Oh, no/' said I, with an effort.

" Thank you ! " He took out his pocket-handkerchief, and
began wiping the palms of his hands. " Miss Agnes, Master
Copperfield — "

"Well, Uriah?"

" Oh, how pleasant to be called Uriah spontaneously ! V he
cried ; and gave himself a jerk, like a convulsive fish. "You
thought her looking very beautiful, to-night, Master Copper-
field ? "

" I thought her looking as she always does : superior, in all
respects, to every one around her," I returned.

"Oh, thank you! It's so true!" he cried. "Oh, thank
you very much for that ! "

" Not at all," I said, loftily. " There is no reason why you
should thank me."

"Why that, Master Copperfield," said Uriah, "is in fact
the confidence that I am going to take the liberty of reposing.
Umble as I am," he wiped his hands harder, and looked at
them and at the fire by turns, " umble as my mother is, and
lowly as our poor but honest roof has ever been, the image of
Miss Agnes (I don't mind trusting you with my secret, Master
Copperfield, for I have always overflowed towards you since
the first moment I had the pleasure of beholding you in a
pony-shay) has been in my breast for years. Oh, Master
Copperfield, with what a pure affection do I love the ground
my Agnes walks on ! "

I believe I had a delirious idea of seizing the red-hot poker
out of the fire, and running him through with it. It went
from me with a shock, like a ball fired from a rifle : but the
image of Agnes, outraged by so much as a thought of this
red-headed animal's, remained in my mind when I looked at
him — sitting all awry as if his mean soul griped his body —
and made me giddy. He seemed to swell and grow before my
eyes ; the room seemed full of the echoes of his voice ; and
the strange feeling (to which, perhaps, no one is quite a
stranger) that all this had occurred before, at some indefinite



414 THE PEB SON AL HISTOBY AND EXPEBIENCE

time, and that I knew what he was going to say next, took
possession of me,

A timely observation of the sense of power that there was
in his face, did more to bring back to my remembrance the
entreaty of Agnes, in its full force, than any effort I could
have made. I asked him, with a better appearance of com-
posure than I could have thought possible a minute before,
whether he had made his feelings known to Agnes.

" Oh, no, Master Copperfield ! " he returned ; " oh, dear, no !
Not to any one but you. You see I am only just emerging
from my lowly station. I rest a good de^l of hope on her ob-
serving how useful I am to her father (for I trust to be very
useful to him, indeed, Master Copperfield), and how I smooth
the way for him, and keep him straight. She's so much
attached to her father, Master Copperfield (oh, what a lovely
thing it is in a daughter !), that I think she may come, on his
account, to be kind to me."

I fathomed the depth of the rascal's whole scheme, and
understood why he laid it bare.

"If you'll have the goodness to keep my secret, Master
Copperfield," he pursued, "and not, in general, to go against
me, I shall take it as a particular favor. You wouldn't wish
to make unpleasantness. I know what a friendly heart you've
got ; but having only known me on my umble footing (on my
umblest, I should say, for I am very umble still), you might,
unbeknown, go against me rather, with my Agnes. I call her
mine, you see, Master Copperfield. There's a song that says,
< I'd crowns resign, to call her mine ! ' I hope to do it, one of
these days."

Dear Agnes ! So much too loving and too good for any one
that I could think of, was it possible that she was reserved to
be the wife of such a wretch as this !

"There's no hurry at present, you know, Master Copper-
field," Uriah proceeded in his slimy way, as I sat gazing at
him, with this thought in my mind. "My Agnes is very
young still ; and mother and me will have to work our way
upards, and make a good many new arrangements, before it
would be quite convenient. So I shall have time gradually
to make her familiar with my hopes, as opportunities offer.





Oh, I'm so much obliged to you for this confidence ! Oh, it's
such a relief you can't think, to know that you understand our
situation, and are certain (as you wouldn't wish to make un-
pleasantness in the family) not to go against me ! "

He took the hand which I dared not withhold, and having
given it a damp squeeze, referred to his pale-faced watch.

"Dear me!" he said, "It's past one. The moments slip
away so, in the confidence of old times, Master Copperfield,
that it's almost half-past one ! "

I answered that I had thought it was later. Not that I had
really thought so, but because my conversational powers were
effectually scattered.

"Dear me!" he said, considering. "The ouse that I am
stopping at — a sort of a private hotel and boarding ouse, Master
Copperfield, near the New Kiver ed — will have gone to bed
these two hours."

" I am sorry," I returned, " that there's only one bed here,
and that I— "

" Oh, don't think of mentioning beds, Master Copperfield ! "
he rejoined, ecstatically, drawing up one leg. " But would you
have any objections to my laying down before the fire ? "

" If it comes to that," I said, " pray take my bed, and I'll
lie down before the fire."

His repudiation of this offer was almost shrill enough, in
the excess of its surprise and humility, to have penetrated to
the ears of Mrs. Crupp, then sleeping, I suppose, in a distant
chamber, situated at about the level of low water mark, soothed
in her slumbers by the ticking of an incorrigible clock, to
which she always referred me when we had any little differ-
ence on the score of punctuality, and which was never less
than three-quarters of an hour too slow, and had always been
put right in the morning by the best authorities. As no argu-
ments I could urge, in my bewildered condition, had the least
effect upon his modesty in inducing him to accept my bed-room,
I was obliged, to make the best arrangements I could, for his
repose before the fire. The mattress of the sofa (which was
a great deal too short for his lank figure), the sofa pillows, a
blanket, the table-cover, a clean breakfast-cloth, and a great-
coat, made him a bed and covering, for which he was more



416 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

than thankful. Having lent him a nightcap, which he put on
at once, and in which he made such an awful figure that I
have never worn one since, I left him to his rest.

I never shall forget that night. I never shall forget how I
turned and tumbled; how I wearied myself with thinking
about Agnes and this creature ; how I considered what could
I do, and what ought I to do ; how I could come to no other
conclusion than that the best course for her peace, was to do
nothing, and to keep to myself what I had heard. If I went
to sleep for a few moments, the image of Agnes with her ten-
der eyes, and of her father looking fondly on her, as I had so
often seen him look, arose before me with appealing faces, and
filled me with vague terrors. When I awoke, the recollection
that Uriah was lying in the next room sat heavy on me like
a waking nightmare; and oppressed me with a leaden dread,
as if I had had some meaner quality of devil for a lodger.

The poker got into my dozing thoughts besides, and wouldn't
come out. I thought, between sleeping and waking, that it
was still red hot, and I had snatched it out of the fire, and run
him through the body. I was so haunted at last by the idea,
though I knew there was nothing in it, that I stole into the
next room to look at him. There I saw him, lying on his back,
with his legs extending to I don't know where, gurglings tak-
ing place in his throat, stoppages in his nose, and his mouth
open like a post-office. He was so much worse in reality than
in my distempered fancy, that afterwards I was attracted to
him in very repulsion, and could not help wandering in and
out every half hour or so, and taking another look at him.
Still, the long, long night seemed heavy and hopeless as ever,
and no promise of day was in the murky sky.

When I saw him going down stairs early in the morning
(for, thank Heaven! he would not stay to breakfast), it
appeared to me as if the night was going away in his person.
When I went out to the Commons, I charged Mrs. Crupp
with particular directions to leave the windows open, that my
sitting-room might be aired ; and purged of his presence.



OF DAVID COPPEBFIULD. 417



CHAPTER XXVI.

J FALL INTO CAPTIVITY.

I saw no more of Uriah Heep, until the day when Agnes
left town. I was at the coach-office to take leave of her and
see her go ; and there was he, returning to Canterbury by the
same conveyance. It was some small satisfaction to me to
observe his spare, short-waisted, high-shouldered, mulberry-
colored great-coat perched up, in company with an umbrella
like a small tent, on the edge of the back seat on the roof,
while Agnes was, of course, inside ; but what. I underwent
in my efforts to be friendly with him, while Agnes looked
on, perhaps deserved that little recompense. At the coach-
window, as at the dinner-party, he hovered about us without
a moment's intermission, like a great vulture : gorging himself
on every syllable that I said to Agnes, or Agnes said to me.

In the state of trouble into which his disclosure by my fire
had thrown me, I had thought very much of the words Agnes
had used in reference to the partnership. "I did what I hope
was right. Feeling sure that it was necessary for papa's
peace that the sacrifice should be made, I entreated him to
make it." A miserable foreboding that she would yield to,
and sustain herself by, the same feeling in reference to any
sacrifice for his sake, had oppressed me ever since. I knew
how she loved him. I knew what the devotion of her nature
was. I knew from her own lips that she regarded herself as
the' innocent cause of his errors, and as owing him a great debt
she ardently desired to pay. I had no consolation in seeing
how different she was from this detestable Eufus with the
mulberry-colored great-coat, for I felt that in the very dif-
ference between them, in the self-denial of her pure soul and
the sordid baseness of his, the greatest danger lay. All this,
doubtless, he knew thoroughly, and had, in his cunning, con-
sidered well.

vol. i—27



418 TIIE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

Yet, I was so certain that the prospect of such a sacrifice
afar off, must destroy the happiness of Agnes ; and I was so
sure, from her manner, of its being unseen by her then, and
having cast no shadow on her yet j that I could as soon have
injured her, as given her any warning of what impended.
Thus ft was that we parted without explanation : she waving
her hand and smiling farewell from the coach-window; her
evil genius writhing on the roof, as if he had her in his
clutches and triumphed.

I could not get over this farewell glimpse of them for a
long time. When Agnes wrote to tell me of her safe arrival,
I was as miserable as when I saw her going away. When-
ever I fell into a thoughtful state, this subject was sure to
present itself, and all my uneasiness was sure to be redoubled.
Hardly a night passed without my dreaming of it. It became
a part of my life, and as inseparable from my life as my own
head.

I had ample leisure to refine upon my uneasiness : for Steer-
forth was at Oxford, as he wrote to me, and when I was not at
the Commons, I was very much alone. I believe I had at this
time some lurking distrust of Steerforth. I wrote to him
most affectionately in reply to his, but I think I was glad,
upon the whole, that he could not come to London just then.
I suspect the truth to be, that the influence of Agnes was upon
me, undisturbed by the sight of him ; and that it was the
more powerful with me, because she had so large a share in
my thoughts and interest.

In the meantime, days and weeks slipped away. I was
articled to Spenlow and Jorkins. I had ninety pounds a year
(exclusive of my house-rent and sundry collateral matters)
from my aunt. My rooms were engaged for twelve months
certain : and though I still found them dreary of an evening,
and the evenings long, I could settle down into a state of
equable low spirits, and resign myself to coffee ; which I seem,
on looking back, to have taken by the gallon at about this
period of my existence. At about this time, too, I made three
discoveries : first, that Mrs. Crupp was a martyr to a curious
disorder called " the spazzums," which was generally accom-
panied with inflammation of the nose, and required to be



OF I) AVID COPPEBFIELD. 419

constantly treated with peppermint ; secondly, that something
peculiar in the temperature of my pantry, made the brandy-
bottles burst ; thirdly, that I was alone in the world, and much
given to record that circumstance in fragments of English
versification.

On the day when I was articled, no festivity took place,
beyond my having sandwiches and sherry into the office for
the clerks, and going alone to the theatre at night. I went to
see " The Stranger " as a Doctors' Commons sort of play, and
was so dreadfully cut up, that I hardly knew myself in my
own glass when I got home. Mr. Spenlow remarked, on this
occasion, when we concluded our business, that he should have
been happy to have seen me at his house at Norwood to cele-
brate our becoming connected, but for his domestic arrange-
ments being in some disorder, on account of the expected
return of his daughter from finishing her education at Paris.
But, he intimated that when she came home he should hope to
have the pleasure of entertaining me. I knew that he was a
widower with one daughter, and expressed my acknowledg-
ments.

Mr. Spenlow was as good as his word. In a week or two,
he referred to this engagement, and said, that if I would do
him the favor to come down' next Saturday, and stay till Mon-
day, he would be extremely happy. Of course I said I would
do him the favor ; and he was to drive me down in his phae-
ton, and to bring me back.

When the day arrived, my very carpet-bag was an object of
veneration to the stipendiary clerks, to whom the house at
Norwood was a sacred mystery. One of them informed me
that he had heard that Mr. Spenlow ate entirely off plate and
china ; and another hinted at champagne being constantly on
draught, after the usual custom of table beer. The old clerk
with the wig, whose name was Mr. Tiffy, had been down on
business several times in the course of his career, and had on
each occasion penetrated to the breakfast-parlor. He described
it as an apartment of the most sumptuous nature, and said
that he had drunk brown East India sherry there, of a quality
so precious as to make a man w r ink.

We had an adjourned cause in the Consistory that day —



420 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

about excommunicating a baker who had been objecting in a
vestry to a paving-rate — and as the evidence was just twice
the length of Eobinson Crusoe, according to a calculation I
made, it was rather late in the day before we finished. How-
ever, we got him excommunicated for six weeks, and sentenced
in no end of costs ; and then the baker's proctor, and the
judge, and the advocates on both sides (who were all nearly
related), went out of town together, and Mr. Spenlow and I
drove away in the phaeton.

The phaeton was a very handsome affair ; the horses arched
their necks and lifted up their legs as if they knew they be-
longed to Doctors' Commons. There was a good deal of com-
petition in the Commons on all points of display, and it turned
out some very choice equipages then ; though I always have
considered, and always shall consider, that in my time the
great article of competition there was starch ; which I think
was worn among the proctors to as great an extent as it is in
the nature of man to bear.

We were very pleasant going down, and Mr. Spenlow gave
me some hints in reference to my profession. He said it was
the genteelest profession in the world, and must on no account
be confounded with the profession of a solicitor : being quite
another sort of thing, infinitely more exclusive, less mechanical,
and more profitable. We took things much more easily in the
Commons than they could be taken anywhere else, he observed,
and that set us, as a privileged class, apart. He said it was
impossible to conceal the disagreeable fact, that we were chiefly
employed by solicitors; but he gave me to understand that
they were an inferior race of men, universally looked down
upon by all proctors of any pretensions.

I asked Mr. Spenlow what he considered the best sort of
professional business ? He replied, that a good case of a dis-
puted will, where there was a neat little estate of thirty or
forty thousand pounds, was, perhaps, the best of all. In such
a case, he said, not only were there very pretty pickings in the
way of arguments at every stage of the proceedings, and moun-
tains upon mountains of evidence on interrogatory and counter-
interrogatory (to say nothing of an appeal lying, first to the
Delegates, and then to the Lords) ; but, the costs being pretty




I FALL INTO CAPTIVITY,



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 42]

sure to come out of the estate at last, both sides went at it in
a lively and spirited manner, and expense was no consideration.
Then, he launched into a general eulogium on the Commons.
What was to be particularly admired (he said) in the Com-
mons, was its compactness. It was the most conveniently
organized place in the world. It was the complete idea of
snugness. It lay in a nut-shell. For example : You brought
a divorce case, or a restitution case, into the Consistory. Very
good. You tried it in the Consistory. You made a quiet little
round game of it, among a family group, and you played it
out at leisure. Suppose you were not satisfied with the Con-
sistory, what did you do then ? Why, you went into the
Arches. What was the Arches ? The same court, in the
same room, with the same bar, and the same practitioners, but
another judge, for there the Consistory judge could plead any
court-day as an advocate. Well, you played your round game
out again. Still you were not satisfied. Very good. What
did you do then ? Why, you went to the Delegates. Who
were the Delegates ? Why, the Ecclesiastical Delegates were
the advocates without any business, who had looked on at the
round game when it was playing in both courts, and had
seen the cards shuffled, and cut, and played, and had talked
to all the players about it, and now came fresh, as judges, to
settle the matter to the satisfaction of everybody! Discon-
tented people might talk of corruption in the Commons,
closeness in the Commons, and the necessity of reforming
the Commons, said Mr. Spenlow, solemnly, in conclusion;
but when .the price of wheat per bushel had been highest,
the Commons had been busiest ; and a man might lay his hand
upon his heart, and say this to the whole world, — u Touch
the Commons, and down comes the country ! "

I listened to all this with attention ; and though, I must
say, I had my doubts whether the country was quite as much
obliged to the Commons as Mr. Spenlow made out, I respect-
fully deferred to his opinion. That about the price of wheat
per bushel, I modestly felt was too much for my strength, and
quite settled the question. I have never, to this hour, got the
better of that bushel of wheat. It has reappeared to anni-
hilate me, all through my life, in connection with all kinds of



422 THE FEB SON AL HISTOBY AND EXPEBIENCE

subjects. I don't know now, exactly, what it has to do with
me, or what right it has to crush me, on an infinite variety of
occasions ; but whenever I see my old friend the bushel
brought in by the head and shoulders (as he always is, I ob-
serve), I give up a subject for lost.

This is a digression. / was not the man to touch the
Commons, and bring down the country. I submissively ex-
pressed, by my silence, my acquiescence in all I had heard
from my superior in years and knowledge ; and we talked about
" The Stranger " and the Drama, and the pair of horses, until
we came to Mr. Spenlow's gate.

"^^There was a lovely garden te Mr. Spenlow's house; and
though that w r as not the best time of the year for seeing a
garden, it was so beautifully kept, that I was quite enchanted.
There was a charming lawn, there were clusters of trees, and
there were perspective walks that I could just distinguish in
the dark, arched over with trellis-work, on which shrubs and
flowers grew in the growing season. "Here Miss Spenlow
walks by herself/' I thought. " Dear me ! "

We went into the house, which was • cheerfully lighted up,
and into a hall where there were all sorts of hats, caps, great-
coats, plaids, gloves, whips, and walking-sticks. " Where is
Miss Dora?" said Mr.. Spenlow to the servant. "Dora!" I
thought. " What a beautiful name ! "

We turned into a room near at hand (I think it was the
identical breakfast-room, made memorable by the brown East
India sherry), and I heard a voice say, "Mr. Copperfield, my
daughter Dora, and my daughter Dora's confidential friend ! "
It was, no doubt, Mr. Spenlow's voice, but I didn't know it,
and I didn't care whose it was. All was over in a moment.
I had fulfilled my destiny. I was a captive and a slave. I
loved Dora Spenlow to distraction !

She was more than human to me. She was a Fairy, a
Sylph, I don't know what she was — anything that no one
ever saw, and everything that everybody ever wanted. I was
swallowed up in an abyss of love in an instant. There was
no pausing on the brink ; no looking down, or looking back ; I
was gone, headlong, before I had sense to say a word to her.

" I" observed a Avell-remembered voice, when I had bowed





and murmured something, "have seen Mr. Copperfield be-
fore."

The speaker was not Dora. No; the confidential friend,

Miss Murdstone !

I don't think I was much astonished. To the best of my
judgment, no capacity of astonishment was left in me. There
was nothing worth mentioning in the material world, but Dora
Spenlow, to be astonished about. I said, " How do you do,
Miss Murdstone ? I hope you are well." She answered,
" Very well." I said, " How is Mr. Murdstone ? " She replied,
" My brother is robust, I am obliged to you." ,

Mr. Spenlow, who, I suppose, had been surprised to see us
recognize each other, then put in his word.

"I am glad to find," he said, "Copperfield, that you and
Miss Murdstone are already acquainted."

" Mr. Copperfield and myself," said Miss Murdstone, with
severe composure, " are connections. We were once slightly
acquainted. It was in his childish days. Circumstances have
separated us since. I should not have known him."

I replied that I should have known her, anywhere. Which
was true enough.

" Miss Murdstone has the goodness," said Mr. Spenlow
to me, "to accept the office — if I may so describe it — of
my daughter Dora's confidential friend. My daughter Dora
having, unhappily, no mother, Miss Murdstone is obliging
enough to become her companion and protector."

A passing thought occurred to me that Miss Murdstone,
like the pocket instrument called a life-preserver, was not so
much designed for purposes of protection as of assault. But
as I had none but passing thoughts for any subject save
Dora, I glanced at her, directly afterwards, and was thinking
that I saw, in her prettily pettish manner, that she was
not very much inclined to be particularly confidential to her
companion and protector, when a bell rang, which Mr. Spenlow
said was the first dinner-bell, and so carried me off to dress.

The idea of dressing one's self, or doing anything in the
way of .action, in that state of love, was a little too ridiculous.
I could only sit down before *my fire, biting the key of my
carpet-bag, and think of the captivating, girlish, bright-eyed,



424 TEE PUB SON AL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

lovely Dora. What a form she had, what a face she had,
what a graceful, variable, enchanting manner !

The bell rang again so soon that I made a mere scramble
of my dressing, instead of the careful operation I could have
wished under the circumstances, and went down stairs.
There was some company. Dora was talking to an old
gentleman with a gray head. Gray as he was — and a great-
grandfather into the bargain, for he said so — I was madly
jealous of him.

What a state of mind I was in ! I was jealous of every-
body. I couldn't bear the idea of anybody knowing Mr.
Spenlow better than I did. It was torturing to me to hear
them talk of occurrences in which I had had no share. When
a most amiable person, with a highly-polished bald head,
asked me across the dinner-table, if that were the first occa-
sion of my seeing the grounds, I could have done anything
to him that was savage and revengeful.

I don't remember who was there, except Dora. I have not
the least idea what we had for dinner, besides Dora. My
impression is, that I dined off Dora entirely, and sent away
half-a-dozen plates untouched. I sat next to her. I talked
to her. She had the most delightful little voice, the gayest
little laugh, the pleasantest and most fascinating little ways,
that ever led a lost youth into hopeless slavery. She was
rather diminutive altogether. So much the more precious,
I thought.

When she went out of the room with Miss Murdstone (no
other ladies were of the party), I fell into a reverie, only
disturbed by the cruel apprehension that Miss Murdstone
would disparage me to her. The amiable creature with the
polished head told me a long story, which I think was about
gardening. I think I heard him say, " my gardener," several
times. I seemed to pay the deepest attention to him,
but I was wandering in a garden of Eden all the while with
Dora.

My apprehensions of being disparaged to the object of
my engrossing affection were revived when we went into the
drawing-room, by the grim and distant aspect of Miss Murd-
stone. But I was relieved of them in an unexpected manner.





" David Copperfield," said Miss Murdstone, beckoning me
aside into a window. " A word."

I confronted Miss Murdstone alone.

" David Copperfield," said Miss Murdstone, "I need not
enlarge upon family circumstances. They are not a tempting
subject."

" Far from it, ma'am," I returned.

"Far from it," assented Miss Murdstone. "I do not wish
to revive the memory of past differences, or of past outrages.
I have received outrages from a person — a female I am sorry
to say, for the credit of my sex — who is not to be mentioned
without scorn and disgust ; and therefore I would rather not
mention her."

I felt very fiery on my aunt's account ; but I said it would
certainly be better, if Miss Murdstone pleased, not to mention
her. I could not hear her disrespectfully mentioned, I added,
without expressing my opinion in a decided tone.

Miss Murdstone shut her eyes, and disdainfully inclined
her head ; then, slowly opening her eyes, resumed :

". David Copperfield, I shall not attempt to disguise the fact,
that I formed an unfavorable opinion of you in your child-
hood. It may have been a mistaken one, or you may have
ceased to justify it. That is not in question between us now.
I belong to a family, remarkable, I believe, for some firmness ;
and I am not the creature of circumstance or change. I may
have my opinion of you. You may have your opinion of me."

I inclined my head, in my turn.

"But it is not necessary," said Miss Murdstone, "that
these opinions should come into collision here. Under exist-
ing circumstances, it is as well on all accounts that they
should not. As the chances of life have brought us together
again, and may bring us together on other occasions, I would
say let us meet here as distant acquaintances. Family cir-
cumstances are a sufficient reason for our only meeting on that
footing, and it is quite unnecessary that either of us should
make the other the subject of remark. Do you approve of
this ? "

" Miss Murdstone," I returned, " I think you and Mr. Murd-
stone used me very cruelly, and treated my mother with great



426 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

unkindness. I shall always think so, as long as I live. But
I quite agree in what you propose."

Miss Murdstone shut her eyes again, and bent her head.
Then, just touching the back of my hand with the tips of
her cold stiff fingers, she walked away, arranging the little
fetters on her wrists and round her neck : which seemed to
be the same set, in exactly the same state, as when I had
seen her last. These reminded me, in reference to Miss
Murdstone's nature, of the fetters over a jail-door ; suggest-
ing on the outside, to all beholders, what was to be expected
within.

All I know of the rest of the evening is, that I heard the
empress of my heart sing enchanted ballads in the French lan-
guage, generally to the effect that, whatever was the matter,
we ought always to dance, Ta ra la, Ta ra la ! accompanying
herself on a glorified instrument, resembling a guitar. That I
was lost in blissful delirium. That I refused refreshment.
That my soul recoiled from punch particularly. That when
Miss Murdstone took her into custody and led her away, she
smiled and gave me her delicious hand. That I caught a view
of myself in a mirror, looking perfectly imbecile and idiotic.
That I retired to bed in a most maudlin state of mind, and
got up in a crisis of feeble infatuation.

It was a fine morning, and early, and I thought I would go
and take a stroll down one of those wire-arched walks, and
indulge my passion by dwelling on her image. On my way
through the hall, I encountered her little dog, who was called
Jip — short for Gipsy. I approached him tenderly, for I
loved even him ; but he showed his whole set of teeth, got
under a chair expressly to snarl, and wouldn't hear of the
least familiarity.

The garden was cool and solitary. I walked about, wonder-
ing what my feelings of happiness would be, if I could ever
become engaged to this dear wonder. As to marriage, and
fortune, and all that, I believe I was almost as innocently
undesigning then, as when I loved little Em/ly. To be allowed
to call her " Dora," to write to her, to dote upon and worship
her, to have reason to think that when she was with other
people she was yet mindful of me, seemed to me the summit



OF DAVID COPPJEBFIELD. 427

of human ambition — I am sure it was the summit of mine.
There is no doubt whatever that I was a lackadaisical young
spooney ; but there was a purity of heart in all this still, that
prevents my having quite a contemptuous recollection of it,
let me laugh as I may.

I had not been walking long, when I turned a corner, and
met her. I tingle again from head to foot as my recollection
turns that Corner, and my pen shakes in my hand.

" You — are — out early, Miss Spenlow," said I.

"It's so stupid at home," she replied, "and Miss Murd-
stone is so absurd ! She talks such nonsense about its being
necessary for the day to be aired, before I come out. Aired ! "
(She laughed here, in the most melodious manner.) "On
a Sunday morning, when I don't practise, I must do some-
thing. So I told papa last night I must come out. Besides,
it's the brightest time of the whole day. Don't you think so ? "

I hazarded a bold flight, and said (not without stammering)
that it was very bright to me then, though it had been very
dark to me a minute before.

" Do you mean a compliment ? " said Dora, " or that the
weather has really changed ? "

I stammered worse than before, in replying that x meant
no compliment, but the plain truth ; though I was not aware
of any change having taken place in the weather. It was in
the state of my own feelings I added bashfully : to clench the
explanation.

I never saw such curls — how could I, for there never were
such curls ! — as those she shook out to hide her blushes. As
to the straw hat and blue ribbons which was on the top of the
curls, if I could only have hung it up in my room in Bucking-
ham Street, what a priceless possession it would have been !

"You have just come home from Paris," said I.

" Yes," said she. " Have you ever been there ? "

"No."

" Oh ! I hope you'll go soon ! You would like it so much ! "

Traces of deep-seated anguish appeared in my countenance.
That she should hope I would go, that she should think it
possible I could go, was insupportable. I depreciated Paris ;
I depreciated Prance. I said I wouldn't leave England, under



428 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

existing circumstances, for any earthly consideration. Xothing
should induce me. In short, she was shaking the curls again,
when the little dog came running along the walk to our relief.
^=* He was mortally jealous of me, and persisted in barking at
me. She took him up in her arms — oh, my goodness ! — and
caressed him, but he insisted upon barking still. He wouldn't
let me touch him, when I tried; and then she beat him. It
increased my sufferings greatly to see the pats she gave
him for punishment on the bridge of his blunt nose, while he
winked his eyes, and licked her hand, and still growled within
himself like a little double-bass. At length he was quiet —
well he might be with her dimpled chin upon his head ! — and
we walked away to look at a greenhouse.

"You are not very intimate with Miss Murdstone, are
you ? " said Etora. — "My pet."

(The two last words were to the dog. Oh, if they had only
been to me !)

"Xo," I replied. "Xot at all so."

" She is a tiresome creature," said Dora, pouting. " I can't
think what papa can have been about, when he chose such a
vexatious thing to be my companion. Who wants a protector ?
I am sure I don't want a protector. Jip can protect me a
great deal better than Miss Murdstone — can't you, Jip,
dear ? "

He only winked lazily, when she kissed his ball of a head.

"Papa calls her my confidential friend, but I am sure she is
no such thing — is she, Jip ? We are not going to confide in
such cross people, Jip and I. We mean to bestow our con-
fidence where we like, and to find out our own friends, instead
of having them found out for us — don't we, Jip ? "

Jip made a comfortable noise, in answer, a little like a tea-
kettle when it sings. As for me, every word was a new heap
of fetters, rivetted above the last.

"'It is very hard, because we have not a kind Mamma, that
we are to have, instead, a sulky, gloomy old thing like Miss
Murdstone, always following us about — isn't it, Jip ? Xever
mind, Jip. "We won't be confidential, and we'll make ourselves
as happy as we can in spite of her, and we'll tease her, and
not please her — won't we, Jip ? "





If it had lasted any longer, I think I must have gone down
on my knees on the gravel, with the probability before me
of grazing them, and of being presently ejected from the prem-
ises besides. But, by good fortune the greenhouse was not far
off, and these words brought us to it.

It contained quite a show of beautiful geraniums. We
loitered along in front of them, and Dora often stopped to
admire this one or that one, -and I stopped to admire the same
one, and Dora, laughing, held the dog up childishly, to smell
the flowers ; and if we were not all three in Fairyland, cer-
tainly /was. The scent of a geranium leaf, at this day, strikes
me with a half comical half serious wonder as to what change
has come over me in a moment ; and then I see a straw hat
and blue ribbons, and a quantity of curls, and a little black
dog being held up, in two slender arms, against a bank of
blossoms and bright leaves.

Miss Murdstone had been looking for us. She found us
here ; and presented her uncongenial cheek, the little wrinkles
in it filled with hair powder, to Dora to be kissed. Then she
took Dora's arm in hers, and marched us in to breakfast as if
it were a soldier's funeral.

How many cups of tea I drank, because Dora made it, I
don't know. But, I perfectly remember that I sat swilling
tea until my whole nervous system, if I had had any in those
days, must have gone by the board. By and by we went
to church. Miss Murdstone was between Dora and me in
the pew j but I heard her sing, and the congregation vanished.
A sermon was delivered — about Dora, of course — and I
am afraid that is all I know of the service.

We had a quiet day. ISTo company, a walk, a family dinner
of four, and an evening of looking over books and pictures ;
Miss Murdstone, with a homily before her, and her eye upon
us, keeping guard vigilantly. Ah! little did Mr. Spenlow
imagine, when he sat opposite to me after dinner that day,
with his pocket-handkerchief over his head, how fervently
I was embracing him, in my fancy, as his son-in-law ! Little
did he think, when I took leave of him at night, that he had
just given his full consent to my being engaged to Dora, and
that I was invoking blessings on his head !



430 THE PERSONAL HIS TOBY AND EXPERIENCE

We departed early in the morning, for we had a* Salvage
case coming on in the Admiralty Court, requiring a rather
accurate knowledge of the whole science of navigation, in
which (as we couldn't be expected to know much about those
matters in the Commons) the judge had entreated two old
Trinity Masters, for charity's sake, to come and help him out.
Dora was at the breakfast-table to make the tea again, how-
ever ; and I had the melancholy pleasure of taking off my
hat to her in the phaeton, as she stood on the door-step with
Jip in her arms.

What the Admiralty was to me that day; what nonsense I
made of our case in my mind, as I listened to it ; how I saw
"Dora" engraved upon the blade of the silver oar which
they lay upon the table, as the emblem of that high jurisdic-
tion ; and how I felt when Mr. Spenlow went home without me
(I had had an insane hope that he might take me back again),
as if I were a mariner myself, and the ship to which I
belonged had sailed away and left me on a desert island ; I
shall make no fruitless effort to describe. If that sleepy old
court could rouse itself, and present in any visible form the
day dreams I have had in it about Dora, it would reveal my
truth.

I don't mean the dreams that I dreamed on that day alone,
but day after day, from week to week, and term to term. I
went there, not to attend to what was going on, but to think
about Dora. If ever I bestowed a thought upon the cases, as
they dragged their slow length before me, it was only to won-
der, in the matrimonial cases (remembering Dora) how it was
that married people could ever be otherwise than happy ; and
in the Prerogative cases, to consider, if the money in question
had been left to me, what were the foremost steps I should
immediately have taken in regard to Dora. Within the first
week of my passion, I bought four sumptuous waistcoats —
not for myself ; I had no pride in them ; for Dora — and took
to wearing straw-qolored kid gloves in the streets, and laid the
foundations of all the corns I have ever had. If the boots
I wore at that period could only be produced and compared
with the natural size of my feet, they would show what the
state of my heart was, in a most affecting manner.



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 431

And yet, wretched cripple as I made myself by this act of
homage to Dora, I walked miles upon miles daily in the hope
of seeing her. Not only was I soon as well known on the
Norwood Eoad as the postmen on that beat, but I pervaded
London likewise. I walked about the streets where the best
shops for ladies were, I haunted the Bazaar like an unquiet
spirit, I fagged through the Park again and again, long after
I was quite knocked up. Sometimes, at long intervals and
on rare occasions, I saw her. Perhaps I saw her glove waved
in a carriage window; perhaps I met her, walked with her
and Miss Murdstone a little way, and spoke to her. In the
latter case I was always very miserable afterwards, to think
that I had said nothing to . the purpose; or that she had no
idea of the extent of my devotion, or that she cared nothing
about me. I was always looking out, as may be supposed, for
another invitation to Mr. Spenlow's house. I was always
being disappointed, for I got none.

Mrs. Crupp must have been a woman of penetration; for
when this attachment was but a few weeks old, and I had not
had the courage to write more explicitly even to Agnes, than
that I had been to Mr. Spenlow's house, " whose family," I
added, " consists of- one daughter ; " — I say Mrs. Crupp must
have been a woman of penetration, for, even in that early
stage, she found it out. She came up to me one evening,
when I was very low, to ask (she being then afflicted with the
disorder I have mentioned) if I could oblige her with a little
tincture of cardamums mixed with rhubarb, and flavored with
seven drops of the essence of cloves, which was the best rem-
edy for her complaint ; — or, if I had not such a thing by me,
with a little brandy, which was the next best. It was not, she
remarked, so palatable to her, but it was the next best. As I
had never even heard of the first remedy and always had the
second in the closet, I gave Mrs. Crupp a glass of the second,
which (that I might have no suspicion of its being devoted to
any improper use) she began to take in my presence.

" Cheer up, sir/' said Mrs. Crupp, " I can't abear to see you
so, sir, Pm a mother myself."

I did not quite perceive the application of this fact to



432 THE PERSONAL HISTOBY AND EXPERIENCE

myself, but I smiled on Mrs. Crupp, as benignly as was in my
power.

" Come, sir/' said Mrs. Crupp. " Excuse me. I know what
it is, sir. There's a lady in the case."

" Mrs. Crupp ?.?■*! returned, reddening.

" Oh, bless you ! Keep a good heart, sir ! " said Mrs. Crupp,
nodding encouragement. " Never say die, sir ! If She don't
smile upon you, there's a many as will. You're a young gen-
tleman to be smiled on, Mr. Copperfull, and you must learn
your walue, sir."

Mrs. Crupp always called me Mr. Copperfull; firstly, no
doubt, because it was not my name; and secondly, I am
inclined to think, in some indistinct association with a wash-
ing-day.

"What makes you suppose there is any young lady in the
case, Mrs. Crupp ? " said I.

"Mr. Copperfull," said Mrs. Crupp, with a great deal of
feeling, " I'm a mother myself."

For some time Mrs. Crupp could only lay her hand upon
her nankeen bosom, and fortify herself against returning pain
with sips of her medicine. At length she spoke again.

"When the present set were took for you by your dear aunt,
Mr. Copperfull," said Mrs. Crupp, " my remark were, I had
now found summun I could care for. ' Thank Ev'in ! ' were
the expression, C I have now found summun I can care for!' —
You don't eat enough, sir, nor yet drink."

"Is that what you found your supposition on, Mrs. Crupp?"
said I.

" Sir," said Mrs. Crupp, in a tone approaching to severity,
"I've laundressed other young gentlemen besides yourself.
A young gentleman may be over-careful of himself, or he may
be under-careful of himself. He may brush his hair too reg-
ular, or too unregular. He may wear his boots much too large
for him, or much too small. That is according as the young
gentleman has his original character formed. But let him go
to which extreme he may, sir, there's a young lady in both
of 'em."

Mrs. Crupp shook her head in such a determined manner,
that I had not an inch of vantage ground left.



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 433

"It was but the gentleman which died here before your-
self/' said Mrs. Crupp, " that fell in love — with a barmaid —
and had his waistcoats took in directly, though much swelled
by drinking."

"Mrs. Crupp," said J, "I must beg you not to connect the
young lady in my case with a barmaid, or anything of that
sort, if you please."

"Mr. Copperfull," returned Mrs. Crupp, "I'm a mother
myself, and not likely. I ask your pardon, sir, if I intrude.
I should never wish to intrude where I were not welcome.
But you are a young gentleman, Mr. Copperfull, and my
adwice to you is, to cheer up, sir, to keep a good heart, and to
know your own walue. If you was to take to something,
sir," said Mrs. Crupp, " if you was to take to skittles, now,
which is healthy, you might find it divert your mind, and do
you good."

With these words, Mrs. Crupp, affecting to be very careful
of the brandy — which was all gone — thanked me with a
majestic courtesy, and retired. As her figure disappeared into
the gloom of the entry, this counsel certainly presented itself
to my mind in the light of a slight liberty on Mrs. Crupp's
part; but, at the same time, I was content to receive it, in
another point of view, as a word to the wise, and a warning in
future to keep my secret better.
vol. i—28



434 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE



CHAPTER XXVII.

TOMMY TKADDLES.

It may have been in consequence of Mrs. Crupp's advice,
and perhaps, for no better reason than because there was a
certain similarity in the sound of the words skittles and Trad-
dies, that it came into my head, next day, to go and look after
Traddles. The time he had mentioned was more than out, and
he lived in a little street near the Veterinary College at Cam-
dem Town, which was principally tenanted, as one of our
clerks who lived in that direction informed me, by gentlemen
students, who bought live donkeys, and made experiments on
those quadrupeds in their private apartments. Having ob-
tained from this clerk a direction to the academic grove in
question, I set out, the same afternoon, to visit my old school-
fellow.

I found that the street was not as desirable a one as I could
have wished it to be, for the sake of Traddles. The inhabi-
tants appeared to have a propensity to throw any little trifles
they were not in want of, into the road : which not only made
it rank and sloppy, but untidy too, on account of the cabbage-
leaves. The refuse was not wholly vegetable either, for I
myself saw a shoe, a doubled-up saucepan, a black bonnet, and
an umbrella, in various stages of decomposition, as I was look-
ing out for the number I wanted.

The general air of the place reminded me forcibly of the
days when I lived with Mr. and Mrs. Micawber. An in-
describable character of faded gentility that attached to the
house I sought, and made it unlike all the other houses in the
street — though they were all built on one monotonous pattern,
and looked like the early copies of a blundering boy who was
learning to make houses, and had not yet got out of his
cramped brick and mortar pothooks — reminded me still more
of Mr. and Mrs. Micawber. Happening to arrive at the door




OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 435

as it was opened to the afternoon milkman, I was reminded of
Mr. and Mrs. Micawber more forcibly yet.

"Now," said the milkman to a very youthful servant girl.
" Has that there little bill of mine been heard on ? "

" Oh, master says he'll attend to it immediate/' was the reply.

" Because," said the milkman, going on as if he had received
no answer, and speaking, as I judged from his tone, rather for
the edification of somebody within the house, than of the youth*
ful servant — an impression which was strengthened by his
manner of glaring down the passage — " Because that there
little bill has been running so long, that I begin to believe it's
run away altogether, and never won't be heerd of. Now, I'm
not a going to stand it, you know ! " said the milkman, still
throwing his voice into the house, and glaring down the
passage.

As to his dealing in the mild article of milk, by the by,
there never was a greater anomaly. His deportment would
have been fierce in a butcher or a brandy merchant.

The voice of the youthful servant became faint, but she
seemed to me, from the action of her lips, again to murmur
that it would be attended to immediate.

" I tell you what/' said the milkman, looking hard at her for
the first time, and taking her by the chin, " are you fond of
milk?"

" Yes, I likes it/' she replied.

"Good," said the milkman. "Then you won't have none
to-morrow. D 5 ye hear ? Not a fragment of milk you won't
have to-morrow."

I thought she seemed, upon the whole, relieved, by the
prospect of having any to-day. The milkman, after shaking
his head at her, darkly, released her chin, and with anything
rather than good will opened his can, and deposited the usual
quantity in the family jug. This done, he went away, mut-
tering, and uttered the cry of his trade next door, in a vin-
dictive shriek.

" Does Mr. Traddles live here ? " I then inquired.

A. mysterious voice from the end of the passage replied
"Yes." Upon which the youthful servant replied "Yes."
" Is he at home ? " said I.



436 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

Again the mysterious voice replied in the affirmative; and
again the servant echoed it. Upon this, I walked in, and in
pursuance of the servant's directions walked up stairs ; con-
scious, as I passed the back parlor-door, that I was surve3 T ed
by a mysterious eye, probably belonging to the mysterious
voice.

When I got to the top of the stairs — the house was only a
story high above the ground floor — Traddles was on the
landing to meet me. He was delighted to see me, and gave
me welcome, with great heartiness, to his little room. It was
in the front of the house, and extremely neat, though sparely
furnished. It was his only room, I saw; for there was a
sofa-bedstead in it, and his blacking-brushes and blacking
were among his books — on the top shelf, behind a dictionary.
His table was covered with papers, and he was hard at work
in an old coat. I looked at nothing, that I know of, but I
saw everything, even to the prospect of a church upon his
china inkstand, as I sat down — and this, too, was a faculty
confirmed in me in the old Micawber times. Various ingenious
arrangements he had made, for the disguise of his chest of
drawers, and the accommodation of his boots, his shaving-glass,
and so forth, particularly impressed themselves upon me, as
evidences of the same Traddles, who used to make models of
elephants' dens in writing paper to put flies in ; and to comfort
himself under ill-usage, with the memorable works of art I
have so often mentioned.

In a corner of the room was something neatly covered up
with a large white cloth. I could not make out what that Avas.

" Traddles/' said I, shaking hands with him again, after I
had sat down. " I am delighted to see you."

" I am delighted" to see you, Copperfield," he returned.
"I am very glad indeed to see you. It was because I was
thoroughly glad to see you when we met in Ely-place, and
was sure you were thoroughly glad to see me, that I gave jon
this address instead of my address at chambers."

" Oh ! You have chambers ? " said I.

" Why, I have the fourth of a rcom and a passage, and the
fourth of a clerk/' returned Traddles. "Three others and
myself unite to have a set of chambers — to look business-like





— and we quarter the clerk too. Half-a-crown a week he
costs me."

His old simple character and good temper, and something
of his old unlucky fortune also, I thought, smiled at me in the
smile with which he made this explanation.

« It's not because I have the least pride, Copperfield, you
understand," said Traddles, "that I don't usually give my
address here. It's only on account of those who come to me,
who might not like to come here. For myself, I am fighting
my way on in the world against difficulties, and it would be
ridiculous if I made a pretence of doing anything else."

"You are reading for the bar, Mr. Waterbrook informed
me ? " said I.

" Why, yes," said Traddles, rubbing his hands slowly over
one another, " I am reading for the bar. The fact is, I have
just begun to keep my terms, after rather a long delay. It's
some time since I was articled, but the payment of that hun-
dred pounds was a great pull. A great pull ! " said Traddles,
with a wince, as if he had had a tooth out.

"Do you know what I can't help thinking of, Traddles, as I
sit here looking at you ? " I asked him.

"No," said he.

" That sky-blue suit you used to wear."

"Lord, to be sure!" cried Traddles, laughing. "Tight in
the arms and legs, you know ? Dear me ! Well ! Those were
happy times, weren't they ? "

" I think our schoolmaster might have made them happier,
without doing any harm to any of us, I acknowledge," I
returned.

"Perhaps he might," said Traddles. "But dear me, there
was a good deal of fun going on. Do you remember the
nights in the bed-room ? When we used to have the suppers ?
And when you used to tell the. stories ? Ha, ha, ha ! And
do you remember when I got caned for crying about Mr. Mell ?
Old Creakle ! I should like to see him again, too ! "

" He was a brute to you, Traddles," said I, indignantly ;
for his good humor made me feel as if I had seen him beaten
but yesterday.

"Do you think so ? " returned Traddles. " Keally ? Per-



438 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

haps lie was, rather. But it's all over, a long while, Old
Creakle ! "

" You were brought up by an uncle, then ? " said I.

" Of course I was ! " said Traddles. " The one I was always
going to write to. And always didn't, eh ! Ha, ha, ha ! Yes,
I had an uncle then. He died soon after I left school."

"Indeed?"

"Yes. He was a retired — what do you call it! — draper
— cloth-merchant — and had made me his heir. But he didn't
like me when I grew up."

"Do you really mean that ?" said I. He was so composed
that I fancied he must have some other meaning.

"Oh, dear, yes, Copperfield! I mean it," replied Traddles.
" It was an unfortunate thing, but he didn't like me at all.
He said I wasn't at all what he expected, and so he married
his housekeeper."

" And what did you do ? " I asked.

"I didn't do anything in particular," said Traddles. "I
lived with them, waiting to be put out in the world, until his
gout unfortunately flew to his stomach — and so he died, and
so she married a young man, and so I wasn't provided for."

" Did you get nothing, Traddles, after all ? "

" Oh, dear, yes ! " said Traddles. " I got fifty pounds. I
had never been brought up to any profession, and at first I
was at a loss what to do for myself. However, I began, with
the assistance of the son of a professional man, who had been
to Salem House — Yawler, with his nose on one side. Do you
recollect him ? "

No. He had not been there with me ; all the noses were
straight in my day.

"It don't matter," said Traddles. "I began, by means of
his assistance, to copy law writings. That didn't answer very
well; and then I began to state cases for them, and make
abstracts, and d.o that sort of work. For I am a plodding
kind of fellow, Copperfield, and had learnt the way of doing
such things pithily. Well ! That put it in my head to enter
myself as a law student ; and that ran away with all that was
left of the fifty pounds. Yawler recommended me to one or
two other offices, however — M*. Waterbrook's for one — and



OF DAVID G0PPE11FIELD. 439

I got a good many jobs. I was fortunate enough, too, to
become acquainted with a person in the publishing way, who
was getting up an Encyclopaedia, and he set me to work; and,
indeed' 5 (glancing at his table), "I am at work for him at
this minute. I am not a bad compiler, Copperfield," said
Traddles, preserving the same air of cheerful confidence in all
he said, " But I have no invention at all ; not a particle. I
suppose there never was a young man with less originality
than I have."

As Traddles seemed to expect that I should assent to this
as a matter of course, I nodded ; and he went on, with the
same sprightly patience — I can find no better expression —
as before.

" So, by little and little, and not living high, I managed to
scrape up the hundred pounds at last," said Traddles ; " and
thank Heaven that's paid — though it was — though it cer-
tainly was," said Traddles, wincing again as if he had had
another tooth out, " a pull. I am living by the sort of work
I have mentioned, still, and I hope, one of these days, to get
connected with some newspaper, which would almost be the
making of my fortune. Now, Copperfield, you are so exactly
what you used to be, with that agreeable face, and it's so
pleasant to see you, that I shan't conceal anything. There-
fore you must know that I am engaged."

Engaged ! Oh, Dora !

"She is a curate's daughter," said Traddles; "one of ten,
down in Devonshire. Yes ! " For he saw me glance, in-
voluntarily, at the prospect on the inkstand. "That's the
church ! You come round here, to the left, out of this gate,"
tracing his finger along the inkstand, " and exactly where I
hold this pen, there stands the house — facing, you understand,
towards the church."

The delight with which he entered into these particulars,
did not fully present itself to me until afterwards; for my
selfish thoughts were making a ground-plan of Mr. Spenlow's
house and garden at the same moment.

" She is such a dear girl ! " said Traddles ; " A little older
than me, but the dearest girl ! I told you I was going out of
town ? I have been down there. I walked there, and I



440 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

walked back, and I had the most delightful time ! I dare say
ours is likely to be a rather long engagement, but our motto
is c Wait and hope ! * We always say that. ( Wait and hope/
we always say. And she would wait, Copperfield, till she was
sixty — any age you can mention — for me ! "

Traddles rose from his chair, and, with a triumphant smile,
put his hand upon the white cloth I had observed.

" However," he said, "it's not that we haven't made a
beginning towards housekeeping, Jfo, no ; we have begun.
We must get on by degrees, but we have begun. Here,"
drawing the cloth off with great pride and care, "are two
pieces of furniture to commence with. This flower-pot and
stand, she bought herself. You put that in a parlor-window,"
said Traddles, falling a little back from it to survey it with
the greater admiration, "with a plant in it, and — and there
you are ! This little round table with the marble top (it's
two feet ten in circumference), i* bought. You want to lay a
book down, you know, or somebody comes to see you or your
wife, and wants a place to stand a cup of tea upon, and — and
there you are again ! " said Traddles. " It's an admirable
piece of workmanship — firm as a rock ! "

I praised them both, highly, and Traddles replaced the
covering as carefully as he had removed it.

"It's not a great deal towards the furnishing," said Trad-
dles, "but it's something. The table-cloths, and pillow-cases,
and articles of that kind, are what discourage me most, Cop-
perfield. So does the ironmongery — candle-boxes, and grid-
irons, and that sort of necessaries — because those things tell,
and mount up. However, ( wait and hope ! ' And I assure
you she's the dearest girl ! "

" I am quite certain of it," said I.

"In the mean time," said Traddles, coming back to his
chair ; "and this is the end of my prosing about myself, I get
on as well as I can. I don't make much, but I don't spend
much. In general, I board with the people down stairs, who
are very agreeable people indeed. Both Mr. and Mrs. Micaw-
ber have seen a good deal of life, and are excellent company."

" My dear Traddles ! " I quickly exclaimed. " What are
you talking about ! "



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 441

Traddles looked at me, as if he wondered what I was talking

about.

"Mr. and Mrs. Micawber!" I repeated. "Why, I am
intimately acquainted with them ! "

An opportune double knock at the door, which I knew well
from old experience in Windsor-terrace, and which nobody but
Mr. Micawber could ever have knocked at that door, resolved
any doubt in my mind as to their being my old friends. I
begged Traddles to ask his landlord to walk up. Traddles
accordingly did so, over the bannister ; and Mr. Micawber, not
a bit changed — his tights, his stick, his shirt-collar, and his
eye-glass, all the same as ever — came into the room with a
genteel and youthful air.

"I beg your pardon, Mr. Traddles," said Mr. Micawber, with
the old roll in his voice, as he checked himself in humming a
soft tune. "I was not aware that there was any individual,
alien to this tenement, in your sanctum."

Mr. Micawber slightly bowed to me, and pulled up his shirt-
collar.

"How do you do, Mr. Micawber ? " saidT.

"Sir," said Mr. Micawber, "you are exceedingly obliging.
I am in statu quo."

"And Mrs. Micawber ?" I pursued.

" Sir," said Mr. Micawber, " she is also, thank God, in statu

quo."

" And the children, Mr. Micawber ? "

" Sir," said Mr. Micawber, " I rejoice to reply that they are,
likewise, in the enjoyment of salubrity."

All this time, Mr. Micawber had not known me in the least,
though he had stood face to face with me. But now, seeing
me smile, he examined my features with more attention, fell
back, cried, " Is it possible ! Have I the pleasure of again
beholding Copperfield ! " and shook me by both hands with
the utmost fervor.

"Good Heaven, Mr. Traddles!" said Mr. Micawber, "to
think that I should find you acquainted with the friend of my
youth, the companion of earlier days ! My dear ! " calling
over the bannisters to Mrs. Micawber, while Traddles looked
(with reason) not a little amazed at this description of me.



442 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" Here is a gentleman in Mr. Traddles's apartment, whom he
wishes to have the pleasure of presenting to you, my love ! "

Mr. Micawber immediately reappeared, and shook hands
with me again.

" And how is our good friend the Doctor, Copperfield ? "
said Mr. Micawber, " and all the circle at Canterbury ? "

" I have none but good accounts of them," said I.

" I am most delighted to hear it," said Mr. Micawber. " It
was at Canterbury where we last met. Within the shadow, I
may figuratively say, of that religious edifice immortalized by
Chaucer, which was anciently the resort of Pilgrims from the
remotest corners of — in short," said Mr. Micawber, "in the
immediate neighborhood of the Cathedral."

I replied that it was. Mr. Micawber continued talking as
volubly as he could ; but not, I thought, without showing, by
some marks of concern in his countenance, that he was sensi-
ble of sounds in the next room, as of Mrs. Micawber washing
her hands, and hurriedly opening and shutting drawers that
were uneasy in their action.

" You find us, Copperfield," said Mr. Micawber, with one eye
on Traddles, " at present established, on what may be desig-
nated as a small and unassuming scale ; but, you are aware
that I have, in the course of my career, surmounted difficulties,
and conquered obstacles. You are no stranger to the fact,
that there have been periods of my life, when it has been
requisite that I should pause, until certain expected events
should turn up ; when it has been necessary that I should fall
back, before making what I trust I shall not be accused of
presumption in terming — a ^spring. The present is one of
those momentous stages in the life of man. You find me,
fallen back, for a spring ; and I have every reason to believe
that a vigorous leap will shortly be the result."

I was expressing my satisfaction, when Mrs. Micawber came
in; a little more slatternly than she used to be, or so she
seemed now, to my unaccustomed eyes, but still with some
preparation of herself for company, and with a pair of brown
gloves on.

" My dear," said Mr. Micawber, leading her towards me.





"Here is a gentleman of the name of Copperfield, who wishes
to renew his acquaintance with you."

It would have been better, as it turned out, to have led
gently up to his announcement, for Mrs. Micawber, being in a
delicate state of health, was overcome by it, and was taken so
unwell, that Mr. Micawber was obliged, in great trepidation,
to run down to the water-butt in the back-yard, and draw a
basinful to lave her brow with. She presently revived, how-
ever, and was really pleased to see me. We had half-an-hour's
talk, altogether ; and I asked her about the twins, who, she
said, were "grown great creatures;" and after Master and
Miss Micawber, whom she described as " absolute giants," but
they were not produced on that occasion.

Mr. Micawber was very anxious that I should stay to dinner.
I should not have been averse to do so, but that I imagined
I detected trouble, and calculation relative to the extent of
the cold meat, in Mrs. Micawber' s eye.. I therefore pleaded
another engagement; and observing that Mrs. Micawber's
spirits were immediately lightened, I resisted all persuasion
to forego it.

But I told Traddles, and Mr. and Mrs. Micawber, that before
I could think of leaving, they must appoint a day when they
would come and dine with me. The occupations to which
Traddles stood pledged, rendered it necessary to fix a some-
what distant one; but an appointment was made for the pur-
pose, that suited us all, and then I took my leave.

Mr. Micawber, under pretence of showing me a nearer way
than that by which I had come, accompanied me to the corner
of the street ; being anxious (he explained to me) to say a few
words to an old friend, in confidence.

"My dear Copperfield," said Mr. Micawber, "I need hardly
tell you that to have beneath our roof, under existing cir-
cumstances, a mind like that which gleams — if I may be
allowed the expression— which gleams —in your friend Trad-
dles, is an unspeakable comfort. With a washerwoman, who
exposes hard-bake for sale in her parlor-window, dwelling next
door, and a Bow-street officer residing over the way, you may
imagine that his society is a source of consolation to myself
and to Mrs. Micawber. I am at present, my dear Copperfield,



444 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

engaged in the sale of corn upon commission. It is not an
avocation of a remunerative description — in other words, it
does not pay — and some temporary embarrassments of a
pecuniary nature have been the consequence. I am, however,
delighted to add that I have now an immediate prospect of
something turning up (I am not at liberty to say in what
direction), which I trust will enable me to provide, perma-
nently, both for myself and for your friend Traddles, in whom
I have an unaffected interest. You may, perhaps, be prepared
to hear that Mrs. Micawber is in a state of health which ren-
ders it not wholly improbable that an addition may be ulti-
mately made to those pledges of affection which — in short,
to the infantine group. Mrs. Micawber's family have been so
good as to express their dissatisfaction at this state of things.
I have merely to observe that I am not aware it is any business
of theirs, and that I repel that exhibition of feeling with
scorn, and with defiance ! "

Mr. Micawber then shook hands with me again, and left me.



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 445



CHAPTER XXVIII.

MR. MICAWBER ? S GAUNTLET.

Until the day arrived on which I was to entertain my
newly found old friends, I lived principally on Dora and
coffee. In my love-lorn condition, my appetite languished;
and I was glad of it, for I felt as though it would have been
an act of perfidy towards Dora to have a natural relish for my
dinner. The quantity of walking exercise I took, was not in
this respect attended with its usual consequence, as the disap-
pointment counteracted the fresh air. I have my doubts, too,
founded on the acute experience acquired at this period of my
life, whether a sound enjoyment of animal food can develop
itself freely in any human subject who is always in torment
from tight boots. I think the extremities require to be at
peace before the stomach will conduct itself with vigor.

On the occasion of this domestic little party, I did not re-
peat my former extensive preparations. I merely provided a
pair of soles, a small leg of mutton, and a pigeon-pie. Mrs.
Crupp broke out into rebellion on my first bashful hint in
reference to the cooking of the fish and joint, and said, with a
dignified sense of injury, " No ! No, sir ! You will not ask
me sich a thing, for you are better acquainted with me than
to suppose me capable of doing what I cannot do with ampial
satisfaction to my own feelings ! " But, in the end, a compro-
mise was effected ; and Mrs. Crupp consented to achieve this
feat, on condition that I dined from home for a fortnight
afterwards.

And here I may remark, that what I underwent from Mrs.
Crupp, in consequence of the tyranny she established over me,
was dreadful. I never was so much afraid of any one. We
made a compromise of everything. If I hesitated, she was
taken with that wonderful disorder which was always lying
in ambush in her system, ready, at the shortest notice, to prey



446 THE PEE SON AL HISTOBY AND EXPERIENCE.

upon her vitals. If I rang the bell impatiently, after half-a-
dozen unavailing modest pulls, and she appeared at last — •
which was not by any means to be relied upon — she would
appear with a reproachful aspect, sink breathless on a chair
near the door, lay her hand upon her nankeen bosom, and be-
come so ill, that I was glad, at any sacrifice of brandy or any-
thing else, to get rid of her. If I objected to having my bed
made at five o'clock in the afternoon — which I do still think an
uncomfortable arrangement — one motion of her hand towards
the same nankeen region of wounded sensibility was enough
to make me falter an apology. In short, I would have done
anything in an honorable way rather than give Mrs. Crupp
offence ; and she was the terror of my life.

I bought a second-hand dumb-waiter for this dinner-party,
in preference to re-engaging the handy young man; against
whom I had conceived a prejudice, in consequence of meeting
him in the Strand, one Sunday morning, in a waistcoat remark-
ably like one of mine, which had been missing since the for-
mer occasion. The " young gal " was re-engaged ; but on the
stipulation that she should only bring in the dishes, and then
withdraw to the landing-place, beyond the outer door ; where
a habit of sniffing she had contracted would be lost upon the
guests, and where her retiring on the plates would be a physi-
cal impossibility.

Having laid in the materials for a bowl of punch, to be
compounded by Mr. Micawber; having provided a bottle of
lavender-water, two wax candles, a paper of mixed pins/ and a
pincushion, to assist Mrs. Micawber in her toilette, at my dress-
ing-table; having also caused the fire in my bed-room to be
lighted for Mrs. Micawber's convenience; and having laid
the cloth with my own hands, I awaited the result with com-
posure.

At the appointed time, my three visitors arrived together.
Mr. Micawber with more shirt-collar than usual, and a new
ribbon to his eye-glass; Mrs. Micawber with her cap in a
whitey -brown paper parcel ; Traddles carrying the parcel, and
supporting Mrs. Micawber on his arm. They were all delighted
with my residence. When I conducted Mrs. Micawber to my
dressing-table, and she saw the scale on which it was prepared





for her, she was in such raptures, that she called Mr. Micawber
to come in and look.

"My dear Copperfield," said Mr. Micawber, "this is luxuri-
ous. This is a way of life which reminds me of the period
when I was myself in a state of celibacy, and Mrs. Micawber
had not yet been solicited to plight her faith at the Hymeneal
altar."

" He means, solicited by him, Mr. Copperfield," said Mrs.
Micawber archly. " He cannot answer for others."

" My dear," returned Mr. Micawber with sudden seriousness,
u I have no desire to answer for others. I am too well aware
that when, in the inscrutable decrees of Tate, you were
reserved for me, it is possible you may have been reserved' for
one, destined, after a protracted struggle, at length to fall a
victim to pecuniary involvements of a complicated nature. I
understand your allusion, my love. I regret it, but I can bear
it."

" Micawber ! " exclaimed Mrs. Micawber, in tears. " Have
I deserved this ! I, who never have deserted you ; who never
will desert you, Micawber ! "

"My love," said Mr. Micawber, much affected, "you will
forgive, and our old and tried friend Copperfield will, I am
sure, forgive, the momentary laceration of a wounded spirit,
made sensitive by a recent collision with the Minion of Power
— in other words, with a ribald Turncock attached to the
water-works — and will pity, not condemn, its excesses."

Mr. Micawber then embraced Mrs. Micawber, and pressed
my hand ; leaving me to infer from this broken allusion that
his domestic supply of water had been cut off that afternoon,
in consequence of default in the payment of the company's
rates.

To divert his thoughts from this melancholy subject, I
informed Mr. Micawber that I relied upon him for a bowl of
punch, and led him to the lemons. His recent despondency,
not to say despair, was gone in a moment. I never saw a man
so thoroughly enjoy himself amid the fragrance of lemon-peel
and sugar, the odor of burning rum, and the steam of boiling
water, as Mr. Micawber did that afternoon. It was wonderful
to see his face shining at us out of a thin cloud of these deli-



448 THE PEBSONAL HISTOBY AND EXPEBIENGE

cate fumes, as he stirred, and mixed, and tasted, and looked
as if he were making, instead of punch, a fortune for his
family down to the latest posterity. As to Mrs. Micawber, I
don't know whether it was the effect of the cap, or the lav-
ender-water, or the pins, or the fire, or the wax candles, but
she came out of my room, comparatively speaking, lovely.
And the lark was never gayer than that excellent woman.

I suppose — I never ventured to inquire, but I suppose —
that Mrs. Crupp, after frying the soles, was taken ill. Because
we broke down at that point. The leg of mutton came up
very red within, and very pale without : besides having a
foreign substance of a gritty nature sprinkled over it, as if it
had had a fall into the ashes of that remarkable kitchen fire-
place. But we were not in a condition to judge of this fact
from the appearance of the gravy, forasmuch as the "young
gal " had dropped it all upon the stairs — where it remained,
by the by, in a long train, until it was worn out. The pigeon-
pie was not bad, but it was a delusive pie : the crust being like
a disappointing head, phrenologically speaking : full of lumps
and bumps, with nothing particular underneath. In short,
the banquet was such a failure that I should have been quite
unhappy — about the failure, I mean, for I was always un-
happy about Dora — if I had not been relieved by the great
good-humor of my company, and by a bright suggestion from
Mr. Micawber.

"My dear friend Copperfield," said Mr. Micawber, "acci-
dents will occur in the best-regulated families ; and in families
not regulated by that pervading influence which sanctifies
while it enhances the — a — I would say, in short, by the
influence of Woman, in the lofty character of Wife, they may
be expected with confidence, and must be borne with phil-
osophy. If you will allow me to take the liberty of remarking
that there are few comestibles better, in their way, than a
Devil, and that I believe, with a little division of labor, we
could accomplish a good one if the young person in attendance
could produce a gridiron, I would put it to you, that this little
misfortune may be easily repaired."

There was a gridiron in the pantry, on which my morning
rasher of bacon was cooked. We had it in, in a twinkling,





and immediately applied ourselves to carrying Mr. Micawber's
idea into effect. The division of labor to which, he had re-
ferred was this : — Traddles cut the mutton into slices ; Mr.
Micawber (who could do anything of this sort to perfection)
covered them with pepper, mustard, salt, and cayenne ; I put
them on the gridiron, turned them with a fork, and took them
off, under Mr. Micawber's direction ; and Mrs. Micawber
heated, and continually stirred, some mushroom ketchup in a
little saucepan. When we had slices enough done to begin
upon, we fell-to, with our sleeves still tucked up at the wrists,
more slices sputtering and blazing on the fire, and our atten-
tion divided between the mutton on our plates, and the mutton
then preparing.

"What with the novelty of this cookery, the excellence of it,
the bustle of it, the frequent starting up to look after it, the
frequent sitting down to dispose of it as the crisp slices came
off the gridiron hot and hot, the being so busy, so flushed
with the fire, so amused, and in the midst of such a tempting
noise and savor, we reduced the leg of mutton to the bone.
My own appetite came back miraculously. I am ashamed to
record it, but I really believe I forgot Dora for a little while.
I am satisfied that Mr. and Mrs. Micawber could not have
enjoyed the feast more if they had sold a bed to provide it
Traddles laughed as heartily, almost the whole time, as he
ate and worked. Indeed we all did, all at once ; and I dare
say there never was a greater success.

We were at the height of our enjoyment, and were all
busily engaged, in our several departments, endeavoring to
bring the last batch of slices to a state of perfection that
should crown the feast, when I was* aware of a strange pres-
ence in the room, and my eyes encountered those of the staid
Littimer, standing hat in hand before me.

" What's the matter ? n I involuntarily asked.

" I beg your pardon, sir, I was directed to come in. Is my
master not here, sir ? "

"No."

" Have you not seen him, sir ? "

" No ; don't you come from him ? "

"Not immediately so, sir."
vol. i—29



450 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" Did he tell you you would find him here ? "

" Not exactly so, sir. But I should think he might be here
to-morrow, as* he has not been here to-day."

" Is he coming up from Oxford ? "

"I beg, sir," he returned respectfully, "that you will be
seated, and allow me to do this." With which he took the
fork from my unresisting hand, and bent over the gridiron, as
if his whole attention were concentrated, on it.

We should not have been much discomposed, I dare say,
by the appearance of Steerforth himself, but we became in a
moment the meekest of the meek before his respectable serving-
man. Mr. Micawber, humming a tune, to show that he was
quite at ease, subsided into his chair, with the handle of a
hastily concealed fork sticking out of the bosom of his coat, as
if he had stabbed himself. Mrs. Micawber put on her brown
gloves, and assumed a genteel languor. Traddles ran his
greasy hands through his hair, and stood it bolt upright, and
stared in confusion on thQ table-cloth. As for me, I was
a mere infant at the head of my own table ; and hardly
ventured to glance at the respectable phenomenon, who had
come from Heaven knows where, to put my establishment to
rights.

Meanwhile he took the mutton off the gridiron, and gravely
handed it round. We all took some, but our appreciation of
it was gone, and we merely made a show of eating it. As
we severally pushed away our plates, he noiselessly removed
them, and set on the cheese. He took that off, too, when it
was done with ; cleared the table ; piled everything on the
dumb-waiter ; gave us our wine-glasses ; and, of his own
accord, wheeled the dumb-waiter into the pantry. All this
was done in a perfect manner, and he never raised his eyes
from what he was about. Yet, his very elbows, when he had
his back towards me, seemed to teem with the expression of
his fixed opinion that I was extremely young.

u Can I do anything more, sir ? "

I thanked him and said No ; but would he take no dinner
himself ?

" None, I am obliged to you, sir."

" Is Mr. Steerforth coming from Oxford ? "



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 451 •

" I beg your pardon, sir ? "
" Is Mr. Steerforth coming from Oxford ? "
"I should imagine that he might be here to-morrow, sir.
I rather thought he might have been here to-day, sir. The
mistake is mine, no doubt, sir."

" If you should see him first — " said I.
" If you'll excuse me, sir, I don't think I shall see him first."
"In case you do," said I, " pray say that I am sorry he was
not here to-day, as an old schoolfellow of his was here."

"Indeed, sir!" and he divided a bow between me and
Traddles, with a glance at the latter.

He was moving softly to the door, when, in a forlorn hope
of saying something naturally — which I never could, to this
man — I said :
"Oh! Littimer!"
" Sir ! "

" Did you remain long at Yarmouth, that time ? "
• " ISTot particularly so, sir."
" You saw the boat completed ? "
" Yes, sir. I remained behind on purpose to see the boat

completed."

"I know !" he raised his eyes to mine respectfully. "Mr.
Steerforth has not seen it yet, I suppose ? "

"I really can't say, sir. I think — but I really can't say,
sir. I wish you good night, sir."
**f He comprehended everybody present, in the respectful bow
with which he followed these words, and disappeared. My
visitors seemed to breathe more freely when he was gone ; but
my own relief was very great, for besides the constraint,
arising from that extraordinary sense of being at a disadvan-
tage which I always had in this man's presence, my conscience
had embarrassed me with whispers that I had mistrusted
his master, and I could not repress a vague uneasy dread that
he might find it out. How was it, having so little in reality
to conceal, that I always did feel as if this man were finding

me out ?

Mr. Micawber roused me from this reflection, which was
blended with a certain remorseful apprehension of seeing
Steerforth himself, by bestowing many encomiums 03 the



452 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

absent Littimer as a most respectable fellow, and a thoroughly
admirable servant. Mr. Micawber, I may remark, had taken
his full share of the general bow, and had received it with
infinite condescension.

"But punch, my dear Copperfield," said Mr. Micawber,
tasting it, "like time and tide, waits for no man. Ah! it is
at the present moment in high flavor. My love, will you give
me your opinion ? "

Mrs. Micawber pronounced it excellent.

"Then I will drink," said Mr. Micawber, "if my friend
Copperfield will permit me to take that social liberty, to the
days when my friend Copperfield and myself were younger,
and fought our way in the world side by side. I may say, of
myself and Copperfield, in words we have sung together before
now, that

We twa' hae run about the braes
And pu'd the gowans fine

— in a figurative point of view — on several occasions. I am
not exactly aware," said Mr. Micawber, with the old roll in
his voice, and the old indescribable air of saying something
genteel, "what gowans may be, but I have no doubt that
Copperfield and myself would frequently have taken a pull at
them, if it had been feasible."

Mr. Micawber, at the then present moment, took a pull at
his punch. So we all did : Traddles evidently lost in wonder-
ing at what distant time Mr. Micawber and I could have been
comrades in the battle of the world.

" Ahem ! " said Mr. Micawber, clearing his throat, and
warming with the punch and with the fire. " My dear, another
glass ? "

Mrs. Micawber said it must be very little, but we couldn't
allow that, so it was a glassful.

" As we are quite confidential here, Mr. Copperfield," said
Mrs. Micawber, sipping her punch, "Mr. Traddles being a part
of our domesticity, I should much like to have your opinion
on Mr. Micawber's prospects. For corn," said Mrs. Micawber
argumentatively, " as I have repeatedly said to Mr. Micawber,
may be gentlemanly, but it is not remunerative. Commission





to the extent of two and ninepence in a fortnight cannot, how-
ever limited our ideas, be considered remunerative."

We were all agreed upon that.

" Then/' said Mrs. Micawber, who prided herself on taking
a clear view of things, and keeping Mr. Micawber straight by
her woman's wisdom, when he might otherwise go a little
crooked, "then I ask myself this question. If corn is not to
be relied upon, what is ? Are coals to be relied upon ? Not
at all. We have turned our attention to that experiment, on
the suggestion of my family, and we find it fallacious."

Mr. Micawber, leaning back in his chair with his hands in
his pockets, eyed us aside, and nodded his head, as much as to
say that the case was very clearly put.

"The articles of corn and coals," said Mrs. Micawber, still
more argumentatively, "being equally out of the question, Mr.
Copperfield, I naturally look round the world, and say, < What
is there in which a person of Mr. Micawber' s talent is likely to
succeed ? ' And I exclude the doing anything on commission,
because commission is not a certainty. What is best suited
to a person of Mr. Micawber's peculiar temperament is, I am
convinced, a certainty."

Traddles and I both expressed, by a feeling murmur, that this
great discovery was no doubt true of Mr. Micawber, and that
it did him much credit.

" I will not conceal from you, my dear Mr. Copperfield,"
said Mrs. Micawber, "that J have long felt the Brewing busi-
ness to be particularly adapted to Mr. Micawber. Look at
Barclay and Perkins ! Look at Truman, Hanbury, and Bux-
ton! It is on that extensive footing that Mr. Micawber, I
know from my own knowledge of him, is calculated to shine :
and the profits, I am told, are e-NOR — mous ! But if Mr.
Micawber cannot get into those firms — which decline to
answer his letters, when he offers his services even in an
inferior capacity — what is the use of dwelling upon that
idea ? None. I may have a conviction that Mr. Micawber's
manners — "

"Hem ! Keally, my dear," interposed Mr. Micawber.

" My love, be silent," said Mrs. Micawber, laying her brown
glove on his hand. " I may have a conviction, Mr. Copper-



454 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

field, that Mr. Micawber's manners peculiarly qualify him for
the Banking business. I may argue within myself, that if i"
had a deposit at a banking-house, the manners of Mr. Micaw-
ber, as representing that banking-house, would inspire confi-
dence, and must extend the connection. But if the various
banking-houses refuse to avail themselves of Mr. Micawber's
abilities, or receive the offer of them with contumely, what is
the use of dwelling upon that idea ? None. As to originating
a banking-business, I may know that there are members of my
family who, if they chose to place their money in Mr. Micaw-
ber*s hands, might found an establishment of that description.
But if they do not choose to place their money in Mr. Micaw-
ber's hands — which they don't — what is the use of that ?
Again I contend that we are no farther advanced than we
were before."

I shook my head, and said, "Not a bit." Traddles also
shook his head, and said, "Not a bit."

" What do I deduce from this ? " Mrs. Micawber went on to
say, still with the same air of putting a case lucidly. "What
is the conclusion, my dear Mr. Copperfield, to which I am
irresistibly brought ? Am I wrong in saying, it is clear that
we must live ? u

I answered, "Not at all !" and Traddles answered, "Not at
all S " and I found myself afterwards sagely adding, alone,
that a person must either live or die.

" Just so," returned Mrs. Micawber. " It is precisely that.
And the fact is, my dear Mr. Copperfield, that we can not live
without something widely different from existing circum-
stances shortly turning up. Now I am convinced, myself,
and this I have pointed out to Mr. Micawber several times of
late, that things cannot be expected to turn up of themselves.
We must, in a measure, assist to turn them up. I may be
wrong, but I have formed that opinion."

Both Traddles and I applauded it highly.

"Very well," said Mrs. Micawber. "Then what do I re-
commend ? Here is Mr. Micawber with a variety of qualifi-
cations — with great talent — "

" Really, my love," said Mr. Micawber.

"Pray, my dear, allow me to conclude. Here is Mr. Mi-






OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 455

cawber, with a variety of qualifications, with great talent — 1
should say, with genius, but that may be the partiality of a
wife — "

Traddles and I both murmured " No."

" And here is Mr. Micawber without any suitable position
or employment. Where does that responsibility rest ? Clearly
on society. Then I would make a fact so disgraceful known,
and boldly challenge society to set it right. It appears to me,
my dear Mr. Copperfield," said Mrs. Micawber, forcibly, " that
what Mr. Micawber has to do, is to throw down the gauntlet
to society, and say, in effect, ' Show me who will take that up.
Let the party immediately step forward. ; "

I ventured to ask Mrs. Micawber how this was to be done.

" By advertising/' said Mrs. Micawber — " in all the papers.
It appears to me, that what Mr. Micawber has to do, in justice
to himself, in justice to his family, and I will even go so far
as to say in justice to Society, by which he has been hitherto
overlooked, is to advertise in all the papers ; to describe him-
self plainly as so and so, with such and such qualifications,
and to put it thus: 'Now employ me, on remunerative
terms, and address, post-paid, to W. M., Post Office, Camden
Town.' *

" This idea of Mrs. Micawber's, my dear Copperfield," said
Mr. Micawber, making his shirt-collar meet in front of his
chin, and glancing at me sideways, u is, in fact, the Leap to
which I alluded, when I last had the pleasure of seeing you."

" Advertising is rather expensive," I remarked, dubiously.

" Exactly so ! M said Mrs. Micawber, preserving the same
logical air. " Quite true, my dear Mr. Copperfield ! I have
made the identical observation to Mr. Micawber. It is for
that reason especially, that I think Mr. Micawber ought (as I
have already said, in justice to himself, in justice to his fam-
ily, and in justice to society) to raise a certain sum of money
— on a. bill."

Mr. Micawber, leaning back in his chair, trifled with his eye-
glass, and cast his eyes up at the ceiling ; but I thought him
observant of Traddles, too, who was looking at the fire.

"If no member of my family," said Mrs. Micawber, "is
possessed of sufficient natural feeling to negotiate that bill — *



456 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

I believe there is a better business-term to express what 1
mean — "

Mr. Micawber, with his eyes still cast up at the ceiling,
suggested "Discount."

"To discount that bill," said Mrs. Micawber, "then my
opinion is, that Mr. Micawber should go into the City, should
take that bill into the Money Market, and should dispose of it*
for what he can get. If the individuals in the Money Market
oblige Mr. Micawber to sustain a great sacrifice, that is be-
tween themselves and their consciences. I view it, steadily,
as an investment. I recommend Mr. Micawber, my dear Mr.
Copperfield, to do the same ; to regard it as an investment
which is sure of return, and to make up his mind to any sacri-
fice."

I felt, but I am sure I don't know why, that this was self-
denying and devoted in Mrs. Micawber, and I uttered a mur-
mur to that effect. Traddles, who took his tone from me, did
likewise, still looking at the fire.

" I will not," said Mrs. Micawber, finishing her punch, and
gathering her scarf about her shoulders, preparatory to her
withdrawal to my bed-room ; " I will not protract these re-
marks on the subject of Mr. Micawber' s pecuniary affairs. At
your fireside, my dear Mr. Copperfield, and in the presence of
Mr. Traddles, who, though not so old a friend, is quite one of
ourselves, I could not refrain from making you acquainted
with the course I advise Mr. Micawber to take. I feel that
the time is arrived when Mr. Micawber should exert himself
and — I will add — assert himself, and it appears to me that .
these are the means. I am aware that I am merely a female,
and that a masculine judgment is usually considered more
competent to the discussion of such questions ; still I must not
forget that, when I lived at home with my papa and mamma,
my papa was in the habit of saying, ' Emma's form is fragile,
but her grasp of a subject is inferior to none.' That my papa
was too partial, I well know ; but that he was an observer of
character in some degree, my duty and my reason equally for-
bid me to doubt."

With these words, and resisting our entreaties that she
would grace the remaining circulation of the punch with her






OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 457

presence, Mrs. Micawber retired to my bed-room. And really
I felt that she was a noble woman — the sort of woman who
might have been a Roman matron, and done all manner of
heroic things, in times of public trouble.

In the fervor of this impression, I congratulated Mr.
Micawber on the treasure he possessed. So did Traddles.
Mr. Micawber extended his hand to each of us in succession,
and then covered his face with his pocket-handkerchief, which
I think had more snuff upon it than he was aware of. He
then returned to the punch, in the highest state of exhil-
aration.

He was full of eloquence. He gave us to understand that
in our children ~ lived again, and that, under the pressure of
pecuniary difficulties, any accession to their number was
doubly welcome. He said that Mrs. Micawber had latterly had
her doubts on this oint, but that he had dispelled them, and
reassured her. As to her family, they were totally umvorthy
of her, and their sentiments were utterly indifferent to him,
and they might — I quote his own expression — go to the
Devil.

Mr. Micawber then delivered a warm eulogy on Traddles.
He said Traddles's was a character, to the steady virtues of ,
which he (Mr. Micawber) could lay no claim, but which, he
thanked Heaven, he could admire. He feelingly alluded to
the young lady, unknown, whom Traddles had honored with
his affection, and who had reciprocated that affection by honor-
ing and blessing Traddles with her affection. Mr. Micawber
pledged her. So did I. Traddles thanked us both, by saying,
with a simplicity and honesty I had sense enough to be quite
charmed with, " I am very much obliged to you indsed. And
I do assure you, she's the dearest girl ! — "

Mr. Micawber took an early opportunity, after that, of
hinting, with the utmost delicacy and ceremony, at the state
of my affections. Nothing but the serious assurance of his
friend Copperfield to the contrary, he observed, could deprive
him of the impression that his friend Copperfield loved and
was beloved. After feeling very hot and uncomfortable for
some time, and after a good deal of blushing, stammering, and
denying, I said, having my glass in my hand, " Well ! I would



458 THE PEBSONAL HISTOBY AND EXPEBTENCE

give them D. ! " which so excited and gratified Mr. Micawber,
that he ran with a glass of punch into my bed-room, in ordei
that Mrs. Micawber might drink D., who drank it with enthu-
siasm, crying from within, in a shrill voice, " Hear, hear !
My dear Mr. Copperfield, I am delighted. Hear ! " and tapping
at the wall, by way of applause.

Our onversation, afterwards, took a more worldly turn;
Mr. Micawber lling us that he found Camden Town incon-
venient, and that ne first thing he contemplated doing, when
the advertisement should have been the cause of something
satisfactory turning up, was to move. He mentioned a terrace
at the western end of Oxford-street, fronting Hyde Park, on
which he had always had his eye, but which he did not expect
to attain immediately, as it would require a large establish-
ment. There would probably be an interval, he explained,
in which he should content himself with the upper part of a
house, over some respectable place of business, — say in Pic-
cadilly, — which would be a cheerful situation for Mrs. Micaw-
ber ; and where, by throwing out a bow window, or carrying
up the roof another story, or making some little alteration of
that sort, they might live, comfortably and reputably, for a
few years. Whatever was reserved for him, he expressly said,
or wherever his abode might be, we might rely on this — there
would always be a room for Traddles, and a knifs and fork for
me. We acknowledged his kindness; and he begged us to
forgive his having launched into these practical and business-
like details, and to excuse it as natural in one who was making
entirely new arrangements in life.

Mrs. Micawber tapping at the wall again, to know if tea
were ready, broke up this particular phase of our friendly con-
versation. She made tea for us in a most agreeable manner ;
and, whenever I went near her, in handing about the tea cups
and bread-and-butter, asked me, in a whisper, whether D. was
fair, or dark, or whether she was short, or tall : or something
of that kind ; Avhich I think I liked. After tea, we discussed
a variety of topics before the fire; and Mrs. Micawber was
good enough to sing us (in a small, thin, flat voice, which
I remembered to have considered, when I first knew her, the
very table-beer of acoustics) the favorite ballads of "The





Dashing White Sergeant," and " Little Tafflin." For both of
these songs Mrs. Micawber had been famous when she lived
at home with her papa and mamma. Mr. Micawber told us,
that when he heard her sing the first one, on the first occasion
of his seeing her beneath the parental roof, she had attracted
his attention in an extraordinary degree ; but that when it
came to Little Tafflin, he had resolved to win that woman or
perish in the attempt.

It was between ten and eleven o'clock when Mrs. Micawber
rose to replace her cap in the whitey-brown paper parcel, and
to put on her bonnet. Mr. Micawber took the opportunity of
Traddles putting on his great coat, to slip a letter into my
hand, with a whispered request that I would read it at my
leisure. I also took the opportunity of my holding a candle
over the banisters to light them down, when Mr. Micawber
was going first, leading Mrs. Micawber, and Traddles was fol-
lowing with the cap, to detain Traddles for a moment on the
top of the stairs.

"Traddles," said I, "Mr. Micawber don't mean any harm,
poor fellow: but, if I were you, I wouldn't lend him any-
thing."

"My dear Copperfield," returned Traddles, smiling, "I
haven't got anything to lend."

"You have got a name, you know," said I.

" Oh ! You call that something to lend ? " returned Trad-
dles with a thoughtful look.

"Certainly."

" Oh ! " said Traddles. " Yes, to be sure ! I am very much
obliged to you, Copperfield ; but — I am afraid I have lent him
that already."

"For the bill that is to be a certain investment ? " I inquired.

"]STo," said Traddles. "Not for that one. This is the first
I have heard of that one. I have been thinking that he will
most likely propose that one, on the way home. Mine's
another."

" I hope there will be nothing wrong about it," said I.

"I hope not," said Traddles. " I should think not, though,
because he told me only the other day, that it was provided
for. That was Mr. Micawber' s expression, ' Provided for.' "



460 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

Mr. Micawber looking up at this juncture to where we were
standing, I had only time to repeat my caution. Traddles
thanked me, and descended. But I was much afraid, when I
observed the good-natured manner in which he went down
with the cap in his hand, and gave Mrs. Micawber his arm,
that he would be carried into the Money Market neck and heels.

I returned to my fireside, and was musing, half gravely and
half laughing, on the character of Mr. Micawber and the old
relations between us, when I heard a quick step ascending the
stairs. At first, I thought it was Traddles coming back for
something Mrs. Micawber had left behind ; but as the step
approached, I knew it, and felt my heart beat high, and the
blood rush to my face, for it was Steerforth's.

I was never unmindful of Agnes, and she never left that
sanctuary in my thoughts — if I may call it so — where I had
placed her from the first. But when he entered, and stood
before me with his hand out, the darkness that had fallen on
him changed to light, and I felt confounded and ashamed of
having doubted one I loved so heartily. I loved her none the
less ; I thought of her as the same benignant, gentle angel in
my life ; I reproached myself, not her, with having done him
an injury ; and I would have made him any atonement if I
had known what to make, and how to make it.

"Why, Daisy, old boy, dumb-foundered ! " laughed Steer-
forth, shaking my hand heartily, and throwing it gaily away.
" Have I detected you in another feast, you Sybarite ! These
Doctors' Commons fellows are the gayest men in town, I believe,
and beat us sober Oxford people all to nothing ! " His bright
glance went merrily round the room, as he took the seat on
the sofa opposite to me, which Mrs. Micawber had recently
vacated, and stirred the fire into a blaze.

" I was so surprised at first," said I, giving him welcome
with all the cordiality I felt, " that I had hardly breath to
greet you with, Steerforth."

" Well, the sight of me is good for sore eyes, as the Scotch
say," replied Steerf orth, " and so is the sight of you, Daisy, in
full bloom. How are you, my Bacchanal ? "

"I am very well," said I; "and not at all Bacchanalian
to-night, though I confess to another party of three."



OF DAVID C0PPEBF1ELD. 461

" All of whom I met in the street, talking loud in your praise/'
returned Steerforth. " Who's our friend in the tights ? "

I gave him the best idea I could, in a few words, of Mr.
Micawber. He laughed heartily at my feeble portrait of that gen-
tleman, and said he was a man to know, and he must know him.

" But who do you suppose our other friend is ? " said I, in
my turn.

" Heaven knows," said Steerf orth. " Not a bore, I hope ?
I thought he looked a little like one."

" Traddles ! " I replied, triumphantly.

" Who's he ? " asked Steerf orth, in his careless way.

" Don't you remember Traddles ? Traddles in our room at
Salem House?"

" Oh ! That fellow ! " said Steerforth, beating a lump of
coal on the top of the fire, with the poker. " Is he as soft
as ever ? And where the deuce did you pick him up ? "

I extolled Traddles in reply, as highly as I could ; for I folt
that Steerforth rather slighted him. Steerforth, dismissing
the subject with a light nod, and a smile, and the remark that
he would be glad to see the old fellow too, for he had always
been an odd fish, inquired if I could give hip anything to eat ?
During most of this short dialogue, when he had not been
speaking in a wild vivacious manner, he had sat idly beating
on the lump of coal with the poker. I observed that he did
the same thing while I was getting out the remains of the
pigeon-pie, and so forth.

" Why, Daisy, here's a supper for a king ! " he exclaimed,
starting out of his silence with a burst, and taking his seat at
the table. "I shall do it justice, for I have come from
Yarmouth."

" I thought you came from Oxford ? " I returned.

"Not I," said Steerforth. "I have been seafaring — better
employed."

" Littimer was here to-day, to inquire for you," I remarked,
"and I understood him that you were at Oxford; though,
now I think of it, he certainly did not say so."

" Littimer is a greater fool than I thought him, to have been
inquiring for me at all," said Steerforth, jovially pouring out
a glass of wine, and drinking to me. " As to understanding



462 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

him, you are a cleverer fellow than most of us, Daisy, if you
can do that."

" That's true, indeed," said I, moving my chair to the table.
" So you have been at Yarmouth, Steerf orth ! P interested to
know all about it. " Have you been there long ? "

"No," he returned. "An escapade of a week or so."

"And how are they all? Of course, little Emily is not
married yet ? "

"Not yet. Going to be, I believe — in so many weeks, or
months, or something or other. I have not seen much of 'em.
By the by ; " he laid down his knife and fork, which he had
been using with great diligence, and began feeling in his
pockets; "I have a letter for you."

" From whom ? "

"Why, from your old nurse," he returned, taking some
papers out of his breast pocket. "' J. Steerf orth, Esquire,
debtor, to the Willing Mind ; ' that's not it. Patience, and
we'll find it presently. Old what's-his-name's in a bad way,
and it's about that, I believe."

" Barkis, do you mean ? "

" Yes ! " still feeling in his pockets, and looking over their
contents : " it's all over with poor Barkis, I am afraid. I
saw a little apothecary there — surgeon, or whatever he is —
who brought your worship into the world. He was mighty
learned about the case, to me ; but the upshot of his opinion
was, that the carrier was making his last journey rather fast.
— Put your hand into the breast pocket of my great-coat on the
chair yonder, and I think you'll find the letter. Is it there ? "

" Here it is ! " said I.

"That's right!"

It was from Peggotty ; something less legible than usual,
and brief. It informed me of her husband's hopeless state,
and hinted at his being " a little nearer " than heretofore, and
consequently more difficult- to manage for his own comfort.
It said nothing of her weariness and watching, and praised
him highly. It was written with a plain, unaffected, homely
piety that I knew to be genuine, and ended with " my duty to
my ever darling " — meaning myself.

While I deciphered it, Steerforth continued to eat and drink.





"It's a bad job," he said, when I had done; "but the sun
sets every day, and people die every minute, and we mustn't
be scared by the common lot. If we failed to hold our own,
because that equal foot at all men's doors was heard knocking
somewhere, every object in this world would slip from us.
No ! Ride on ! Eough-shod if need be, smooth-shod if that will
do, but ride on ! Eide on over all obstacles, and win the race ! "

"And win what race ? " said I.

" The race that one has started in," said he. " Eide on ! "

I noticed, I remember, as he paused, looking at me with
his handsome head a little thrown back, and his glass raised
in his hand, that, though the freshness of the sea-wind was on
his face, and it was ruddy, there were traces in it, made since
I last saw it, as if he had applied himself to some habitual
strain of the fervent energy which, when roused, was so pas-
sionately roused within him. I had it in my thoughts to
remonstrate with him upon his desperate way of pursuing
any fancy that he took — such as this buffeting of rough seas,
and braving of hard weather, for example — when my mind
glanced off to the immediate subject of our conversation again,
and pursued that instead.

"I tell you what, Steerforth," said I, "if your high spirits
will listen to me — "

" They are potent spirits, and will do whatever you like,"
he answered, moving from the table to the fireside again.

"-Then I tell you what, Steerforth, I think I will go down
and see my old nurse. It is not that I can do her any good,
or render her any real service ; but she is so attached to me
that my visit will have as much effect on her, as if I could
do both. She will take it so kindly that it will be a comfort
and support to her. It is no great effort to make, I am sure,
for such a friend as she has been to me. Wouldn't you go
a day's journey, if you were in my place ? "

His face was thoughtful, and he sat considering a ^little
before he answered, in a low voice, " Well ! Go. You can do
no harm."

"You have just come back," said I, "and it would be in
vain to ask you to go with me ? "

"Quite," he returned. "I am for Highgate to-night. I



464 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

have not seen my mother this long time, and it lies upon my
conscience, for it's something to be loved as she loves her
prodigal son. — Bah ! Xonsense ! — Yon mean to go to-morrow,
I suppose?" he said, holding me out, at arm's length, with a
hand on each of my shoulders.
- "Yes, I think so."

" Well, then, don't go till next day. I wanted you to come
and stay a few days with us. Here I am, on purpose to bid
you, and you fly off to Yarmouth ! "

" You are a nice fellow to talk of flying off, Steerf orth, who are
always running wild on some unknown expedition or other ! "

He looked at me for a moment without speaking, and then
rejoined, still holding me as before, and giving me a shake :

u Come ! Say the next day, and pass as much of to-morrow
as you can * with us ! Who knows when we may meet again,
else ? Come ! Say the next day ! I want you to stand
between Rosa Dartle and me, and keep us asunder."

"Would you love each other too much, without me ? "

" Yes ; or hate," laughed Steerforth ; " no matter which.
Come ! Say the next day ! "

I said the next day ; and he put on his great-coat and
lighted his cigar, and set off to walk home. Finding him in
this intention, I put on my own great-coat (but did not light
my own (^igar, having had enough of that for one while) and
walked with him as far as the open road ; a dull road, then,
at night. He was in great spirits all the way ; and when we
parted, and I looked after him going so gallantly and airily
homeward, I thought of his saying, " Ride on over all obstacles,
and win the race ! " and wished, for the first time, that he had
some worthy race to run.

I was. undressing in my own room, when Mr. Micawber's
letter tumbled on the floor. Thus reminded of it, I broke
the seal and read as follows. It was dated an hour and a
half before dinner. I am not sure whether I have mentioned
that, when Mr. Micawber was at any particularly desperate
crisis, he used a sort of legal phraseology : which he seemed
to think equivalent to winding up his affairs.

" Sir — for I dare not say my dear Copperfield,

" It is expedient that I should inform you that the under-



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 465

signed is Crushed. Some flickering efforts to spare you the
premature knowledge of his calamitous position, you may
observe in him this day; but hope has sunk beneath the
horizon, and the undersigned is Crushed.

"The present communication is penned within the per-
sonal range (I cannot call it the society) of an individual, in a
state closely bordering on intoxication, employed by a broker.
That individual is in legal possession of the premises, under a
distress for rent. His inventory includes, not only the chattels
and effects of every description belonging to the undersigned,
as yearly tenant of this habitation, but also those appertaining
to Mr. Thomas Traddles, lodger, a member of the Honorable
Society of the Inner Temple.

"If any drop of gloom were wanting in the overflowing cup,
which is now i commended ' (in the language of an immortal
Writer) to the lips of the undersigned, it would be found in
the fact, that a friendly acceptance granted to the undersigned,
by the before-mentioned Mr. Thomas Traddles, for the sum
of £23 4s. 9^- d. is over due, and is not provided for. Also,
in the fact, that the living responsibilities clinging to the
undersigned, will, in the course of nature, be increased by the
sum of one more helpless victim ; whose miserable appearance
may be looked for — in round numbers — at the expiration of
a period not exceeding six lunar months from the present date.

"After pi^mising thus much, it would be a work of
supererogation to add, that dust and ashes are for ever
scattered

"On
"The
"Head
"Of

"WlLKINS MlCAWBER."

Poor Traddles ! I knew enough of Mr. Micawber by this
time, to foresee that he might be expected to recover the
blow ; but my night's rest was sorely distressed by thoughts
of Traddles, and of the curate's daughter, who was one of ten,
down in Devonshire, and who was such a dear girl, and who
would wait for Traddles (ominous praise !) until she was sixty,
or any age that could be mentioned.
vol. i-30



466 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE



CHAPTER XXIX.

I VISIT STEERFORTH AT HIS HOME ; AGAIN.

I mentioned to Mr. Spenlow in the morning, thatfl wanted
leave of absence for a short time ; and as I was not in the
receipt of any salary, and consequently was not obnoxious to
the implacable Jofkins, there was no difficulty about it. I
took that opportunity, with my voice sticking in my throat,
and my sight failing as I uttered the words, to express my
hope that Miss Spenlow was quite well ; to which Mr. Spen-
low replied, with no more emotion than if he had been speak-
ing of an ordinary human being, that he was much obliged to
me, and she was very well.

We articled clerks, as germs of the patrician order of
proctors,- were treated with so much consideration, that I was
almost my own master at all times. As I did not care, how-
ever, to get to Highgate before one or two o'clock in the day,
and as we had another little excommunication case in court
that morning, which was called The office of th6 Judge pro-
moted by Tipkins against Bull6ck for his soulV correction, I
passed an hour or two in attendance' on it with Mr. Spenlow
very agreeably. It arose out of a scuffle between two church-
wardens, one of whom was alleged to have pushed the other
against a pump ; the handle of which pump projecting into a
schoolhouse, which schoolhouse was under a gable of the
church-roof, made the push an ecclesiastical offence. It was
an amusiiVg case ; and sent me up to Highgate, on the box of
the stage-coach, thinking about the Commons, and what Mr.
Spenlow had said about touching the Commons and bringing
down the country.

Mrs. Steerforth was pleased to see me, and so was Rosa
Dartle. I was agreeably surprised to find that Littimer was
not there, and that we were attended by a modest little parlor-
maid, with blue ribbons in her cap, whose eye it was much



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 467

more pleasant, and much less disconcerting, to catch by acci-
dent, than the eye of that respectable man. But what I
particularly observed, before I had been half-an-hour in the
house, was the close and attentive watch Miss Dartle kept
upon me; and the lurking manner in which she seemed to
compare my face with Steerforth/s, and Steerforth's with
mine, and to lie in wait for something to come out between
the two. So surely as I looked towards her, did I see that
eager visage, with its gaunt black eyes and searching brow,
intent on mine; or passing suddenly from mine to Steerforth/s ;
or comprehending both of us at once. In this lynx-like scru-
tiny she was so far from faltering when she saw I observed
it, that at such a time she only fixed her piercing look upon
me with a more intent expression still. Blameless as I was,
and knew that I was, in reference to any wrong she could poi-
sibly suspect me of, I shrunk before her strange eyes, quite
unable to endure their hungry lustre.

All day, she seemed to pervade the whole house. If I
talked to Steerforth in his room, I heard her dress rustle in
the little gallery outside. When he and I engaged in some
of our old exercises on the lawn behind the house, I saw her
face pass from window to window, like a wandering light,
until it fixed itself in one, and watched us. When we all
four went out walking in the afternoon, she closed ' her thin
hand on my arm like a spring, to keep me back, while Steer-
forth and his mother went on out of hearing : and then spoke
to me.

" You have been a long time," she said, " without coming
here. Is your profession really so engaging and interesting
sis to absorb your whole attention ? I ask because I always
want to be informed, when I am ignorant. Is it really,
though ? "

I replied that I liked it well enough, but that I certainly
could not claim so much for it.

" Oh ! I am glad to know that, because I always like to be
put right when I am wrong," said Eosa Dartle. ¥ You mean
it is a little dry, perhaps ? "

"Well," I replied ; "perhaps it tvas a little dry."

" Oh ! and that's a reason why you want relief and change



468 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

— excitement, and all tliat ? " said she. " Ah ! very true !
But isn't it a little — Eh ? — for him ; I don't mean you ? "

A quick glance of her eye towards the spot where Steerforth
was walking, with his mother leaning on his arm, showed me
whom she meant ; but beyond that, I was quite lost. And I
looked so, I have no doubt.

" Don't it — I don't say that it does, mind I want to know —
doxi't it rather engross him ? Don't it make him, perhaps, a
little more remiss than usual in his visits to his blindly doting

— eh ? " With another quick glance at them, and such a
glance at me as seemed to look into my innermost thoughts.

"Miss Dartle," I returned, "pray do not think — "

" I don't ! " she said. " Oh, dear me, don't suppose that I
think anything ! I am not suspicious. I only ask a question.
I don't state any opinion. I want to found an opinion on
what you tell me. Then, it's not so ? Well ! I am very
glad to know it."

" It certainly is not the fact," said I, perplexed, " that I am
accountable for Steerforth's having been away from home
longer than usual — if he has been : which I really don't know
at this moment, unless I understand it from you. I have not
seen him this long while, until last night."

"So?"

" Indeed, Miss Dartle, no ! "

As she looked full at me, I saw her face grow sharper and
paler, and the marks of the old wound lengthen out until it
cut through the disfigured lip, and deep into the nether lip,
and slanted down the face. There was something positively
awful to me in this, and in the brightness of her eyes, as she
said, looking fixedly at me :

"What is he doing?"

I repeated the words, more to myself than her, being so
amazed.

" What is he doing ? " she said, with an eagerness that
seemed enough to consume her like a fire. "In what is that
man assisting him, who never looks at me without an
inscrutable falsehood in his eyes ? If you are honorable and
faithful, I don't ask you to betray your friend. I ask you
only to tell me, is it anger, is it hatred, is it pride, is it rest-





lessness, is it some wild fancy, is it love, what is it, that is
leading him ? "

"Miss Dartle," I returned, "how shall I tell you, so that
you will believe me, that I know of nothing in Steerforth
different from what there was when I first came here. I can
think of nothing. I firmly believe there is nothing. I hardly
understand even what you mean."

As she still stood looking fixedly at me, a twitching or
throbbing, from which I could not dissociate the idea of pain,
came into that cruel mark; and lifted up the corner of her
lip as if with scorn, or with a pity that despised its object.
She put her hand upon it hurriedly — a hand so thin and
delicate, that when I had seen her hold it up before the fire
to shade her face, I had compared it in my thoughts to fine
porcelain — and saying, in a quick, fierce, passionate way,
"I swear you to secrecy about this ! " said not a word more.

Mrs. Steerforth was particularly happy in her son's society,
and Steerforth was, on this occasion, particularly attentive and
respectful to her. It was very interesting to me to see them
together, not only on account of their mutual affection, but
because of the strong personal resemblance between them, and
the manner in which what was haughty or impetuous in him
was softened by age and sex, in her, to a gracious dignity.
I thought, more than once, that it was well no serious cause
of division had ever come between them ; or two such natures
— I ought rather to express it, two such shades of the same
nature — might have been harder to reconcile than the two
extremest opposites in creation. The idea did not originate
in my own discernment, I am bound to confess, but in a speech
of Rosa Dartle's.

She said at dinner :

"Oh, but do tell me, though, somebody, because I have
been thinking about it all day, and I want to know."

" You want to know what, Eosa ? " returned Mrs. Steerforth.
" Pray, pray, Eosa, do not be mysterious."

"Mysterious!" she cried. "Oh! really? Do you con-
sider me so ? "

"Do I constantly entreat you," said Mrs. Steerforth, "to
speak plainly, in your own natural manner ? "



470 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" Oh ! then this is not my natural manner ? " she rejoined.
"Now you must really bear with me, because I ask for
information. We never know ourselves."

"It has become a second nature," said Mrs. Steerforth,
without any displeasure ; " but I remember, — and so must
you, I think, — when your manner was different, Rosa ; when
it was not so guarded, and was more trustful."

"I am sure you are right," she returned; "and so it is
that bad habits grow upon one ! Really ? Less guarded and
more trustful ? How can L imperceptibly, have changed, I
wonder ! Well, that's very odd ! I must study to regain my
former self."

" I wish you would," said Mrs. Steerf orth, with a smile.

" Oh ! I really will, you know ! " she answered. " I will
learn frankness from — let me see — from James."

"You cannot learn frankness, Rosa," said Mrs. Steerforth
quickly — for there was always some effect of sarcasm in
what Rosa Dartle said, though it was said, as this was, in
the most unconscious manner in the world — "in a better
school."

" That I am sure of," she answered, with uncommon fervor.
" If I am sure of anything, of course, you know, I am sure
of that."

Mrs. Steerforth appeared to me to regret having been a
little nettled ; for she presently said, in a kind tone :

" Well, my dear Rosa, we have not heard what it is that you
want to be satisfied about ? "

" That I want to be satisfied about ? " she replied, with
provoking coldness. " Oh ! It was only whether people, who
are like each other in their moral constitution — is that the
phrase ? "

" It's as good a phrase as another," said Steerforth.

"Thank you: — whether people, who are like each other
in their moral constitution, are in greater danger than peo-
ple not so circumstanced, supposing any serious cause of va-
riance to arise between them, of being divided angrily and
deeply ? "

" I should say yes," said Steerforth.

" Should you ? " she retorted. " Dear nie ! Supposing then



L en,





for instance — any unlikely thing will' do for a supposition —
that you and your mother were to have a serious quarrel."

"My dear Kosa," interposed Mrs. Steerforth, laughing good-
naturedly, "suggest some other supposition! James and I
know our duty to each other better, I pray Heaven ! "

" Oh ! " said Miss Dartle, nodding her head thoughtfully. "To
be sure. That jvould prevent it ? Why, of course it would.
Ex-actly. Now, I am glad I have been so foolish as to put
the case, for it is so very good to know that your duty to
each other would prevent it ! Thank you very much."

One other little circumstance connected with Miss Dartle I
must not omit ; for I had reason to remember it thereafter,
when all the irremediable past was rendered plain. During
the whole of this day, but especially from this period of it,
Steerforth exerted himself with his utmost skill, and that was
with his utmost ease, to charm this singular creature into a
pleasant and pleased companion. That he should succeed,
was no matter of surprise to me. That she should struggle
against the fascinating influence of his delightful art —
delightful nature I thought it then — did not surprise me
either; for I knew that she was sometimes jaundiced and
perverse. I saw her features and her manner slowly change ;
I saw her look at him with growing admiration ; I saw her
try, more and more faintly, but always angrily, as if she con-
demned a weakness in herself, to resist the captivating power
that he possessed j and finally I saw her sharp glance soften,
and her smile become quite gentle, and I ceased to be afraid
of her as I had really been all day, and we all sat about the
fire, talking and laughing together, with as little reserve as if
we had been children.

Whether it was because we had sat there so long, or because
Steerforth was resolved not to lose the advantage he had
gained, I do not know ; but we did not remain in the dining-
room more than five minutes after her departure. "She is
playing her harp," said Steerforth, softly, at the drawing-
room door, " and nobody but my mother has heard her do that,
I believe, these three years." He said it with a curious smile,
which was gone directly ; and we went into the room and
found her alone.



472 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

"Don't get up," said Steerforth (which she had already
done) ; " my dear Eosa, don't ! Be kind for once, and sing
us an Irish song."

" What do you care for an Irish song ? " she returned.

"Much!" said Steerforth. "Much more than for any
other. Here is Daisy, too, loves music from his soul. Sing
us an Irish song, Eosa ! and let me sit and listen as I used
to do."

He did not touch her, or the chair from which she had
risen, but sat himself near the harp. She stood beside it for
some little while, in a curious way, going through the motion
of playing it with her right hand, but not sounding it. At
length she sat down, and drew it to her with one sudden
action, and played and sang.

I don't know what it was, in her touch or voice, that made
that song the most unearthly I have ever heard in my life, or
can imagine. There was something fearful in the reality of
it. It was as if it had never been written, or set to music,
but sprung out of the passion within her ; which found imper-
fect utterance in the low sounds of her voice, and crouched
again when all was still. I was dumb when she leaned beside
the harp again, playing it, but not sounding it, with her right
hand.

A minute more, and this had roused me from my trance ; —
Steerforth had left his seat, and gone to her, and had put his
arm laughingly about her, and had said, " Come, Rosa, for the
future we will love each other very much ! " And she had
struck him, and had thrown him off with the fury of a wild
cat, and had burst out of the room.

"What is the matter with Rosa?" said Mrs. Steerforth,
coming in.

" She has been an angel, mother," returned Steerforth, " for
a little while ; and has run into the opposite extreme, since,
by way of compensation."

"You should be careful not to irritate her, James. Her
temper has been soured, remember, and ought not to be
tried."

Rosa did not come back ; and no other mention was made
of her, until I went with Steerforth into his room to say good



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 473

night. Then he laughed about her, and asked me if I had
ever seen such a fierce little piece of incomprehensibility.

I expressed as much of my astonishment as was then ca-
pable of expression, and asked if he could guess what it was
that she had taken so much amiss, so suddenly.

" Oh, Heaven knows," said Steerf orth. u Anything you like
— or nothing ! I told you she took everything, herself included,
to a grindstone, and sharpened it. She is an edge-tool, and
requires great care in dealing with. She is always dangerous.
Good night ! "

"Good night!" said I, "my dear Steerf orth ! I shall be
gone before you wake in the morning. Good night ! "

He was unwilling to let me go ; and stood, holding me out,
with a hand on each of my shoulders, as he had done in my
own room.

"Daisy," he said with a smile — "for though that's not the
name your Godfathers and Godmothers gave you, it's the name
I like best to call you by — and I wish, I wish, I wish, you
could give it to me ! "

" Why so I can, if I choose," said I.

"Daisy, if anything should ever separate us, you must
think of me at my best, old boy. Come ! let us make that
bargain. Think of me at my best if circumstances should
ever part us ! "

" You have no best to me, Steerf orth," said I, " and no worst.
You are always equally loved, and cherished in my heart."

So much compunction for having ever wronged him, even
by a shapeless thought, did I feel within me, that the confes-
sion of having done so was rising to my lips. But for the
reluctance I had, to betray the confidence of Agnes, but for
my uncertainty how to approach the subject with no risk of
doing so, it would have reached them before he said, "God
bless you, Daisy, and good night ! " In my doubt, it did not
reach them ; and we shook hands, and we parted.

I was up with the dull dawn, and, having dressed as quietly
as I could, looked into his room. He was fast asleep ; lying,
easily, with his head upon his arm, as I had often seen him lie
at school.

The time came in its season, and that was very soon, when



474 DAVID GOPFEBFIELD.

I almost wondered that nothing troubled his repose, as I looked
at him. But he slept — let me think of him so again — as I
had often seen him sleep, at school; and thus, in this silent
hour, I left him.

— Never more, Oh God forgive you, Steerf orth ! to touch
that passive hand in love and friendship. Never, never, more ! ,



END OF VOL. I.



CONTENTS OF VOL. II.



CHAPTER PAGE

I. A Loss 1

II. A GREATER LOSS . 10

III. The Beginning of a long Journey .... 20

IV. Blissful 40

V. My Aunt astonishes me 58

VI. Depression 68

VII. Enthusiasm 90

VIII. A little Cold Water • 109

IX. A Dissolution of Partnership 118

X. WlCKFIELD AND HEEP 136

XI. The Wanderer 157

XII. Dora's Aunts 166

XIII. Mischief 184

XIV. Another Retrospect . 206

XV. Our Housekeeping 215

XVI. Mr. Dick fulfils my Aunt's Predictions . . . 232

XVII. Intelligence 249

XVIII. Martha 264

XIX. Domestic 276

XX. I AM INVOLVED IN MYSTERY 288

XXI. Mr Peggotty's Dream comes true • 302

XXII. The Beginning of a longer Journey .... 313

XXIII. I ASSIST AT AN EXPLOSION . . . . . . • 332

XXIV. Another Retrospect . . 358

m



IV CONTENTS.

CHAPTER PAGE

XXV. Mr. Micawber's Transactions 364

XXVI. Tempest 381

XXVII. The New AVound, and the Old 394

XXVIII. The Emigrants 401

XXIX. Absence 413

XXX. Return 420

XXXI. Agnes 438

XXXII. I am shown two interesting Penitents , . . 448

XXXITT. A Light shines on my way 461

XXXIV. A Visitor 470

XXXV. A last Retrospect 479






THE PERSONAL HISTORY OF







CHAPTER I.

A LOSS.



I got down to Yarmouth in the evening, and went to the
inn. I knew that Peggotty's spare room — my room — was
likely to have occupation enough in a little while, if that great
Visitor, before whose presence all the living must give place,
were not already in the house ; so I betook myself to the inn,
and dined there, and engaged my bed.

It was ten o'clock when I went out. Many of the shops
were shut, and the town was dull. When I came to Omer
and Joram's, I found the shutters up, but the shop door stand-
ing open. As I could obtain a perspective view of Mr. Omer
inside, smoking his pipe by the parlor-door, I entered, and
asked him how he was.

" Why, bless my life and soul ! " said Mr. Omer, " how do you
find yourself ? Take a seat. — Smoke not disagreeable, I hope ? "

"By no means," said I. "I like it — in somebody else's
pipe."

" What, not in your own, eh ? " Mr. Omer returned, laugh-
ing. " All the better, sir. Bad habit for a young man. Take
a seat. I smoke, myself, for the asthma."

Mr. Omer had made room for me, and placed a chair. He
now sat down again very much out of breath, gasping at his
pipe as if it contained a supply of that necessary, without
which he must perish.
VOL ii ~ 1



2 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

"I am sorry to have heard bad news of Mr. Barkis," said I.

Mr. Oilier looked at me with a steady countenance, and
shook his head.

" Do you know how he is to-night ? " I asked.

" The very question I should have put to you, sir," returned
Mr. Omer, " but on account of delicacy. It's one of the draw-
backs of our line of business. When a party's ill, we can't
ask how the party is."

The difficulty had not occurred to me ; though I had had
my apprehensions too, when I went in, of hearing the old
tune. On its being mentioned, I recognized it, however, and
said as much.

"Yes, yes, you understand," said Mr. Omer, nodding his
head. "We dursn't do it. Bless you, it would be a shock
that the generality of parties mightn't recover, to say ( Omer
and Joram's compliments, and how do you find yourself this
morning ? ' — or this afternoon — as it may be."

Mr. Omer and I nodded at each other, and Mr. Omer re-
cruited his wind by the aid of his pipe.

"It's one of the things that cut the trade off from atten-
tions they could often wish to show," said Mr. Omer. " Take
myself. If I have known Barkis a year, to move to as he
went by, I have known him forty year. But I can't go and
say, r how is he ? ' "

I felt it was rather hard on Mr. Omer, and I told him so.

"I'm not more self-interested, I hope, than another man,"
said Mr. Omer. " Look at me ! My wind may fail me at any
moment, and it ain't likely that, to my own knowledge, I'd be
self-interested under such circumstances. I say it ain't likely,
in a man who knows his wind will go, when it does go, as if a
pair of bellows was cut open ; and that man a grandfather,"
said Mr. Omer.

I said, "!Nbt at all."

" It ain't that I complain of my line of business," said Mr.
Omer. "It ain't that. Some good and some bad goes, no
doubt, to all callings. What I wish is, that parties were
brought up stronger-minded."

Mr. Omer, with a very complacent and amiable face, took sev-
eral puffs in silence ; and then said, resuming his first point



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 3

" Accordingly we're obleeged, in ascertaining how Barkis
goes on, to limit ourselves to Em'ly. She knows what our
real objects are, and she don't have any more alarms or sus-
picions about us, than if we was so many lambs. Minnie
and Joram have just stepped down to the house, in fact (she's
there, after hours, helping her aunt a bit), to ask her how he
is to-night ; and if you was to please to wait till they come
back, they'd give you full partic'lers. Will you take some-
thing ? A glass of srub and water, now ? I smoke on srub
and water, myself," said Mr. Omer, taking up his glass, " be-
cause it's considered softening to .the passages, by which this
troublesome breath of mine gets into action. But, Lord bless
you/' said Mr. Omer, huskily, " it ain't the passages that's out
of order ! i Give me breath enough,' says I to my daughter
Minnie, 'and J'll find passages, my dear.'"

He really had no breath to spare, and it was alarming to
see him laugh. When he was again in a condition to be
talked to, I thanked him for the proffered refreshment, which
I declined, as I had just had dinner ; and, observing that I
would wait, since he was so good as to invite me, until his
daughter and his son-in-law came back, I inquired how little
Emily was ?

" Well, sir," said Mr. Omer, removing his pipe, that he
might rub his chin ; " I tell you truly, I shall be glad when
her marriage has taken place."

" Why so ? " I inquired.

"Well, she's unsettled at present," said Mr. Omer. "It
ain't that she's not as pretty as ever, for she's prettier — I do
assure you, she is prettier. It ain't that she don't work as
well as ever, for she does. She was worth any six, and she
is worth any six. But somehow she wants heart. If you
understand," said Mr. Omer, after rubbing his chin again,
and smoking a little, " what I mean in a general way by the
expression, ' A long pull, and a strong pull, and a pull alto-
gether, my hearties, hurrah ! ' I should say to you, that that
was — in a general way — what I miss in Em'ly.' "

Mr. Omer's face and manner went for so much, that I could con-
scientiously nod my head, as divining his meaning. My quick-
ness of apprehension seemed to please him, and he went on :



4 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" Now, I consider this is principally on account of her being
in an unsettled state, you see. We have talked it over a good
deal, her uncle and myself, and her sweetheart and myself,
after business ; and I consider it is principally on account of
her being unsettled. v You must always recollect of Em'ly,"
said Mr. Omer, shaking his head gently, " that she's a most
extraordinary affectionate little thing. The proverb says,
'You can't make a silk purse out of a sow's ear.' Well, I
don't know about that. I rather think you may, if you begin
early in life. She has made a home out of that old boat, sir,
that stone and marble couldn't beat."

" I am sure she has ! " said L

"To see the clinging of that pretty little thing to her
uncle," said Mr. Omer ; " to see the way she holds on to him,
tighter and tighter, and closer and closer, every day. is to see
a sight. Now, you know, there's a struggle going on when
that's the case. Why should it be made a longer one than is
needful ? "

I listened attentively to the good old fellow, and acquiesced,
with all my heart, in what he said.

" Therefore, I mentioned to them," said Mr. Omer, in a
comfortable, easy-going tone, "this. I said, f Now 3 don't con-
sider Em'ly nailed down in point of time, at all. Make it
your own time. Her services have been more valuable than
was supposed ; her learning has been quicker than was sup-
posed; Omer and Joram can run their pen through what
remains ; and she's free when you wish. If she likes to
make any little arrangement, afterwards, in the way of doing
any little thing for us at home, very well. If she don't, very
well still. We're no losers, anyhow.' For — don't you see,"
said Mr. Omer, touching me with his pipe, "it ain't likely
that a man so short of breath as myself, and a grandfather
too, would go and strain points with a little bit of a blue-eyed
blossom, like/ier?"

"Not at all, I am certain," said I.

"Not at all! You're right!" said Mr. Omer. "Well,
sir, her cousin — you know it's a cousin she's going to be
married to ? "

" Oh yes," I replied. " I know him well."





" Of course you do," said Mr. Omer. "• Well, sir ! Her
cousin being, as it appears, in good work, and well to do,
thanked me in a very manly sort of manner for this (conducting
himself altogether, I must say, in a way that gives me a high
opinion of him), and went and took as comfortable a little house
as you or I could wish to clap eyes on. That little house is
now furnished right through, as neat and complete as a doll's
parlor; and but for Barkis's illness having taken this bad
turn, poor fellow, they would have been man and wife — I dare
say, by this time. As it is, there's a postponement."

"And Emily, Mr. Omer? " I inquired. "Has she become
more settled ? "

" Why that you know," he returned, rubbing his double
chin again, " can't naturally be expected. The prospect of the
change and separation, and all that is, as one may say, close
to her and far away from her, both at once. Barkis's death
needn't put it off much, but his Lingering might. Anyway, it's
an uncertain state of matters, you see."

" I see," said I.

" Consequently," pursued Mr. Omer, " Em'ly's still a little
down and a little fluttered ; perhaps, upon the whole, she's
more so than she was. Every day she seems to get fonder
and fonder of her uncle, and more loth to part from all of us.
A kind word from me brings the tears into her eyes ; and if
you was to see her with my daughter Minnie's little girl,
you'd never forget it. Bless my heart alive ! " said Mr. Omer,
pondering, " how she loves that child ! "

Having so favorable an opportunity, it occurred to me to
ask Mr. Omer, before our conversation should be interrupted
by the return of his daughter and her husband, whether he
knew anything of Martha.

" Ah ! " he rejoined, shaking his head, and looking very
much dejected. "No good. A sad story, sir, however you
come to know it. I never thought there was harm in the girl.
I wouldn't wish to mention it before my daughter Minnie —
for she'd take me up directly — but I never did. None of us
ever did."

Mr. Omer, hearing his daughter's footstep before I heard



-^6 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

it, touched me with his pipe, and shut up one eye, as a caution.
She and her husband came in immediately afterwards.

Their report was, that Mr. Barkis was " as bad as bad could
be ; " that he was quite unconscious ; and that Mr. Chillip had
mournfully said in the kitchen, on going away just now, that
the College of Physicians, the College of Surgeons, and Apoth-
ecaries' Hall, if they w^ere all called in together, couldn't
help him. He was past both Colleges, Mr. Chillip said, and
the Hall could only poison him.

Hearing this, and learning that Mr. Peggotty was there, I
determined to go to the house at once. I bade good night to
Mr. Omer, and to Mr. and Mrs. Joram 3 and directed my steps
thither, with a solemn feeling, which made Mr. Barkis quite a
new and different creature.

My low tap at the door was answered by Mr. Peggotty. He
was not so much surprised to see me as I had expected. I
remarked this in Peggotty, too, when she came down ; and I
have seen it since ; and I think, in the expectation of that
dread surprise, all other changes and surprises dwindle into
nothing.

I shook hands with Mr. Peggotty, and passed into the
kitchen, while he softly closed the door. Little Emily was
sitting by the fire, with her hands before her face. Ham was
standing near her.

We spoke in whispers ; listening between whiles, for any
sound in the room above. I had not thought of it on the
occasion of my last visit, but how strange it was to me now,
to miss Mr. Barkis out of the kitchen !

"This is very kind of you, Mas'r Davy/' said Mr. Peggotty.

"It is oncommon kind," said Ham.

"Em'ly, my dear/' cried Mr. Peggotty. "See here! Here's
Mas'r Davy come ! What, cheer up, pretty ! 3STot a wured to
Mas'r Davy ? "

There was a trembling upon her, that I can see now. The
coldness of her hand when I touched it, I can feel yet. Its
only sign of animation was to shrink from mine ; and then
she glided from the chair, and, creeping to the other side of
her uncle, bowed herself, silently and trembling still, upon his
breast.








" It's such a loving art," said Mr. Peggotty, smoothing her
rich hair with his great hard hand, " that it can't abear the
sorrer of this. It's nat'ral in young folk, Mas'r Davy, when
they're new to these here trials, and timid, like my little bird
— it's nat'ral."

She clung the closer to him, but neither lifted up her face,
nor spoke a word.

" It's getting late, my dear," said Mr. Peggotty, " and here's
Ham come fur to take you home. Theer! Go along with
'tother loving art ! What, Em'ly ? Eh, my pretty ? "

The sound of her voice had not reached me, but he bent his
head as if he listened to her, and then said :

" Let you stay with your uncle ? Why, you doen't mean to
ask me that ! Stay with your uncle, Moppet ? When your
husband that'll be so soon, is here fur to take you home ?
Now a person wouldn't think it, fur to see this little thing
alongside a rough-weather chap like me," said Mr. Peggotty,
looking round at both of us, with infinite pride ; " but the sea
ain't more salt in it than she has fondness in her for her
uncle — a foolish little Em'ly ! "

" Em'ly' s in the right in that, Mas'r Davy!" said Ham.
" Lookee here ! As Em'ly wishes of it, and as she's hurried
and frightened, like, besides, I'll leave her till morning. Let
me stay too ! "

"No, no," said Mr. Peggotty. "You doen't ought — a
married man like you — or what's as good — to take and hull
away a day's work. And you doen't ought to watch and work
both. That won't do. You go home and turn in. You ain't
afeered of Em'ly not being took good care on, J know."

Ham yielded to this persuasion, and took his hat to go.
Even when he kissed her, — and I never saw him approach
her, but I felt that nature had given him the soul of a gentle-
man, — she seemed to cling closer to her uncle, even to the
avoidance of her chosen husband. I shut the door after him,
that it might cause no disturbance of the quiet that prevailed ;
and when I turned back, I found Mr. Peggotty still talking
to her.

"Now, I'm a going up stairs to tell your aunt as Mas'r
Davy's here, and that'll cheer her up a bit," he said. "Sit



8 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

ye down by the fire, the while, my dear, and warm these
mortal cold hands. You doen't need to be so fearsome, and
take on so much. What ? You'll go along with me ? — Well !
come along with me — come ! If her uncle was turned out of
house and home, and forced to lay down in a dyke, Mas'r
Davy," said Mr. Peggotty, with no less pride than before,
u it's my belief she'd go along with him, now ! But there'll
be some one else, soon, — some one else, soon, Em'ly ! "

Afterwards, when I went up stairs, as I passed the door of
my little chamber, which was dark, I had an indistinct
impression of her being within it, cast down upon the floor.
But, whether it was really she, or whether it was a confusion
of the shadows in the room, I don't know now.

I had leisure to think, before the kitchen-fire, of pretty
little Em'ly's dread of death — which, added to what Mr. Omer
had told me, I took to be the cause of her being so unlike
herself — and I had leisure, before Peggotty came down, even
to think more leniently of the weakness of it : as I sat counting
the ticking of the clock, and deepening my sense of the solemn
hush around me. Peggotty took me in her arms, and blessed
and thanked me over and over again for being such a comfort
to her (that was what she said) in her distress. She then
entreated me to come up stairs, sobbing that Mr. Barkis had
always liked me and admired me ; that he had often talked of
me, before he fell into a stupor ; and that she believed, in case
of his coming to himself again, he would brighten up at sight
of me, if he could brighten up at any earthly thing.

The probability of his ever doing so, appeared to me, when
I saw him, to be very small. He was lying with his head and
shoulders out of bed, in an uncomfortable attitude, half resting
on the box which had cost him so much pain and trouble. I
learned that, when he was past creeping out of bed to open it,
and past assuring himself of its safety by means of the divin-
ing rod I had seen him use, he had required to have it placed on
the chair at the bedside, where he had ever since embraced it,
night and day. His arm lay on it now. Time and the world
were slipping from beneath him, but the box was there ; and
the last words he had uttered were (in an explanatory tone)
"Old clothes!"





" Barkis, my dear ! " said Peggotty, almost cheerfully :
bending over him, while her brother and I stood at the bed's
foot. " Here's my dear boy — my dear boy, Master Davy,
who brought us together, Barkis ! That you sent messages
by, you know ! Won't you speak to Master Davy ? "

He was as mute and senseless as the box, from which his
form derived the only expression it had.

"He's a going out with the tide," said Mr. Peggotty to me,
behind his hand.

My eyes were dim, and so were Mr. Peggotty's ; but I
repeated in a whisper, "With the tide?"

"People can't die, along the coast," said Mr. Peggotty,
"except when the tide's pretty nigh out. They can't be
born, unless it's pretty nigh in — not properly born, till flood.
He's a going out with the tide. It's ebb at half arter three,
slack water half -an-h our. If he lives 'till it turns, he'll hold
his own till past the flood, and go out with the next tide."

We remained there, watching him, a long time — hours.
What mysterious influence my presence had upon him in that
state of his senses, I shall not pretend to say ; but when he
at last began to wander feebly, it is certain he was muttering
about driving me to school.

" He's coming to himself," said Peggotty.

Mr. Peggotty touched* me, and whispered with much awe
and reverence, " They are both a going out fast."

"Barkis, my dear ! " said Peggotty.

"C. P. Barkis," he cried, faintly. "Eo better woman any-
where ! "

" Look ! Here's Master Davy ! " said Peggotty. For he
now opened his eyes.

I was on the point of asking him if he knew me, when he
tried to stretch out his arm, and said to me, distinctly, with a
pleasant smile :

" Barkis is willin' ! "

And, it being low water, he went out with the tide.



\0 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE



CHAPTER II.

A GREATER LOSS.

It was not difficult for nie, on Peggotty's solicitation, to
resolve to stay where I was, until after the remains of the
poor carrier should have made their last journey to Blunder-
stone. She had long ago bought, out of her own savings, a
little piece of ground in our old churchyard near the grave
" of her sweet girl/' as she always called my mother ; and
there they were to rest.

In keeping Peggotty company, and doing all I could for her
(little enough at the utmost), I was as grateful, I rejoice to
think, as even now I could wish myself to have been. But I
am afraid I had a supreme satisfaction, of a personal and pro-
fessional nature, in taking charge of Mr. Barkis's will, and
expounding its contents.

I may claim the merit of having originated the suggestion
that the will should be looked for in the box. After some
search, it was found in the box, at the bottom of a horse's
nose-bag ; wherein (beside* hay) there was discovered an old
gold watch, with chain and seals, which Mr. Barkis had worn
on his wedding-day, and which had never been seen before or
since ; a silver tobacco-stopper, in the form of a leg ; an imita-
tion lemon, full of minute cups and saucers, which I have
some idea Mr. Barkis must have purchased to present to me
when I was a child, and afterwards found himself unable to
part with; eighty-seven guineas and a half, in guineas and
half guineas ; two hundred and ten pounds, in perfectly clean
Bank notes ; certain receipts for Bank of England stock ; an
old horse-shoe, a bad shilling, a piece of camphor, and an oys-
ter-shell. Prom the circumstance of the latter article having
been much polished, and displaying prismatic colors on the
inside, I conclude that Mr. Barkis had some general ideas





About pearls, which never resolved themselves into anything
definite.

For years and years ; Mr. Barkis had carried this box, on all
his journeys, every day. That it might the better escape
notice, he had invented a fiction that it belonged to "Mr.
Blackboy," and was " to be left with Barkis till called for ; "
a fable he had elaborately written on the lid, in characters
now scarcely legible.

He had hoarded, all these years, I found, to good purpose.
His property in money amounted to nearly three thousand
pounds.* Of this he bequeathed the interest of one thousand
to Mr. Peggotty for his life; on his decease, the principal to
be equally divided between Peggotty, little Emily, and me, or
the survivor or survivors of us, share and share alike. All
the rest he died possessed of, he bequeathed to Peggotty ;
whom he left residuary legatee, and sole executrix of that
his last will and testament.

I felt myself quite a proctor when I read this document
aloud with all possible ceremony, and set forth its provisions,
any number of times, to those whom they concerned. I began
to think there was more in the Commons than I had supposed.
I examined the will with the deepest attention, pronounced it
perfectly formal in all respects, made a pencil-mark or so in
the margin, and thought it rather extraordinary that I knew
so much.

In this abstruse pursuit; in making an account for Peg-
gotty, of all the property into which she had come ; in arrang'-
ing all the affairs in an orderly manner; and in being her
referee and adviser on every point, to our joint delight ; I
passed the week before the funeral. I did not see little Emily
in that interval, but they told me she was to be quietly mar-
ried in a fortnight.

I did not attend the funeral in character, if I may venture
to say so. I mean I was not dressed up in a black cloak and
a streamer, to frighten the birds; but I walked over to
Blunder stone early in the morning, and was in the church-
yard when it came, attended only by Peggotty and her
brother. The mad gentleman looked on, out of my little
window ; Mr. Chillip's baby wagged its heavy head, and rolled



12 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

its goggle eyes, at the clergyman, over its nurse's shoulder ;
Mr. Omer breathed short in the background ; no one else was
there ; and it was very quiet. We walked about the church-
yard for an hour, after all was over ; and pulled some young
leaves from the tree above my mother's grave.

A dread falls on me here. A cloud is lowering on the dis-
tant town, towards which I retraced my solitary steps. I fear
to approach it. I cannot bear to think of what did come, upon
that memorable night ; of what must come again if I go on.

It is no worse, because I write of it. It would be no better,
if I stopped my most unwilling hand. It is done. jSfothing
can undo it ; nothing can make it otherwise than as it was.

My old nurse was to go to London with me next day, on
the business of the will. Little Emily was passing that day
at Mr. Omer's. We were all to meet in the old boathouse
that night. Ham would bring Emily at the usual hour. I
would walk back at my leisure. The brother and sister would
return as they had come, and be expecting us, when the day
closed in, at the fireside.

I parted from them at the wicket-gate, where visionary
Straps had rested with Roderick Random's knapsack in the
days of yore; and, instead of going straight back, walked a
little distance on the road to Lowestoft. Then I turned, and
walked back towards Yarmouth. I stayed to dine at a decent
alehouse, some mile or two from the Eerry I have mentioned
before; and thus the day wore away, and it was evening
when I reached it. Rain was falling heavily by that time,
and it was a wild night ; but there was a moon behind the
clouds, and it was not dark.

I was soon within sight of Mr. Peggotty's house, and of the
light within it shining through the window. A little floun-
dering across the sand, which was heavy, brought me to the
door, and I went in.

It looked very comfortable, indeed. Mr. Peggotty had
smoked his evening pipe, and there were preparations for
some supper by and by. The fire was bright, the ashes were
thrown up, the locker was ready for little Emily in her old
place. In her own old place sat Peggotty, once more, looking
(but for her dress) as if she had never left it. She had fallen



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 13

back, already, on the society of the work-box with Saint Paul's
upon the lid, the yard-measure in the cottage, and the bit of
wax candle : and there they all were, just as if they had never
been disturbed. Mrs. Gummidge appeared to be fretting a lit-
tle, in her old corner ; and consequently looked quite natural,
too.

" You're first of the lot, Mas'r Davy ! " said Mr. Peggotty,
with a happy face. "Doen't keep in that coat, sir, if it's wet."

" Thank you, Mr. Peggotty/' said I, giving him my outer
coat to hang up. " It's quite dry."

"So 'tis!" said Mr. Peggotty, feeling my shoulders. "As
a chip ! Sit ye down, sir. It ain't o' no use saying welcome
to you, but you're welcome, kind and hearty."

" Thank you, Mr. Peggotty, I am sure of that. Well, Peg-
gotty ! " said I, giving her a kiss. " And how are you, old
woman ? "

" Ha, ha ! " laughed Mr. Peggotty, sitting down beside us,
and rubbing his hands in his sense of relief from recent trouble,
and in the genuine heartiness of his nature ; u there's not a
woman in the wureld, sir — as I tell her — that need to feel
more easy in her mind than her ! She done her dooty by the
departed, and the departed know'd it ; and the departed done
what was right by her, as she done what was right by the
departed ; — and — and — and it's all right ! "

Mrs. Gummidge groaned.

" Cheer up, my pretty mawther ! " said Mr. Peggotty. (But
he shook his head aside at us, evidently sensible of the ten-
dency of the late occurrences to recall the memory of the old
one.) " Doen't be down ! Cheer up, for your own self, on'y a
little bit, and see if a good deal more doen't come nat'ral ! "

"JSTot to me, Dan'l," returned Mrs. Gummidge. "Nothink's
nat'ral to me but to be lone and lorn."

" No, no," said Mr. Peggotty, soothing her sorrows.

" Yes, yes, Dan'l ! " said Mrs. Gummidge. " I ain't a person
to live with them as has had money left. Thinks go too con-
trary with me. I had better be a riddance."

"Why, how should I ever spend it without you ? " said Mr.
Peggotty, with an air of serious remonstrance. " What are you
a talking on ? Doen't I want you more now, than ever I did ? "



14 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" I know'd I was never wanted before ! " cried Mrs. Gum-
midge, with a pitiable whimper, " and now I'm told so ! How
could I expect to be wanted, being so lone and lorn, and so
contrairy ! "

Mr. Peggotty seemed very much shocked at himself for hav-
ing made a speech capable of this unfeeling construction, but
was prevented from replying, by Peggotty's pulling his sleeve,
and shaking her head. After looking at Mrs. Gummidge for
some moments, in sore distress of mind, he glanced at the
Dutch clock, rose, snuffed the candle, and put it in the window.

"Theer ! " said Mr. Peggotty, cheerily. u Theer we are, Misses
Gummidge ! " Mrs. Gummidge slightly groaned. " Lighted
up, accordin' to custom ! You're a wonderin' what that's fur,
sir ! Well, it's fur our little Em'ly. You see, the path ain't
over light or cheerful arter dark ; and when I'm here at the
hour as she's a comin' home, I puts the light in the winder.
That, you see," said Mr. Peggotty, bending over me with great
glee, "meets two objects. She says, says Em'ly, { Theer's home ! '
she says. And likewise, says Em'ly, ' My uncle's theer ! ' Fur
if I ain't theer, I never have no light showed."

" You're a baby ! " said Peggotty ; very fond of him for it,
if she thought so.

" Well," returned Mr. Peggotty, standing with his legs pretty
wide apart, and rubbing his hands up and down them in his
comfortable satisfaction, as he looked alternately at us and at
the fire, " I doen't know but I am. Not you see, to look at."

" Not azackly," observed Peggotty.

" No," laughed Mr. Peggotty, " not to look at, but to — to
consider on, you know. I doen't care, bless you.! Now I tell
you. When I go a looking and looking about that theer pritty
house of our Em'ly's, Fm — I'm Gormed," said Mr. Peggotty,
with sudden emphasis — "theer! I can't say more — if I
doen't feel as if the littlest things was her, a'most. I takes 'em
up and I puts 'em down, and I touches of 'em as delicate as if
they was our Em'ly. So 'tis with her little bonnets and that.
I couldn't see one on 'em rough used a purpose — not fur the
whole wureld. There's a babby for you, in the form of a great
Sea Porkypine ! " said Mr. Peggotty, relieving his earnestness
with a roar of laughter.



OF DAVH> COPPEBFIELh. 15

Peggotty and I both laughed, but not so loud.

"It's my opinion, you see," said Mr. Peggotty, with a
delighted face, after some further rubbing of his legs, "as
this is along of my havin' played with her so much, and
made believe as we was Turks, and French, and sharks, and
every wariety of forinners — bless you, yes; and lions and
whales, and I don't know what all! — when she warn't no
higher than my knee. Fve got into the way on it, you know.
Why, this here candle, now," said Mr. Peggotty, gleefully
holding out his hand towards it, " 1 know wery well that arter
she's married and gone, I shall put that candle theer, just that
same as now. I know wery well that when Fm here o' nights
(and where else should I live, bless your arts, whatever f ortun
I come into !) and she ain't here, or I ain't theer, I shall put
the candle in the winder, and sit afore the fire, pretending Fm
expecting of her, like I'm a doing now. There's a babby for
you," said Mr. Peggotty, with another roar, " in the form of a
Sea Porkypine ! Why, at the present minute, when I see the
candle sparkle up, I says to myself, ' She's a looking at it !
Em'ly's a coming i ' There's a babby for you, in the form of
a Sea Porkypine ! Eight for all that," said Mr. Peggotty,
stopping in his roar, and smiting his hands together; "fur
here she is ! "

It was only Ham. The night should have turned more wet
since I came in, for he had a large sou'wester hat on, slouched
over his face.

"Where's Em'ly ?" said Mr. Peggotty.

Ham made a motion with his head, as if she were outside.
Mr. Peggotty took the light from the window, trimmed it, put
it on the table, and was busily stirring the fire, when Ham,
who had not moved, said :

"Mas'r Davy, will you come out a minute, and see what
Em'ly and me has got to show you ? "

We went out. As I passed him at the door, I saw, to my
astonishment and fright, that he was deadly pale/ He pushed
me hastily into the open air, and closed the door upon us.
Only upon us two.

" Ham ! what's the matter ? "



16 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" Mas'r Davy ! — " Oh, for his broken heart, how dread-
fully he wept !

I was paralyzed by the sight of such grief. I don't know
what I thought, or what I dreaded. I could only look at
him.

" Ham ! Poor good fellow ! For Heaven's sake tell me
what's the matter ! "

" My love, Mas'r Davy — the pride and hope of my art —
her that Fd have died for, and would die for now — she's
gone ! "

« Gone ? "

"Em'ly's run away! Oh, Mas'r Davy, think how she's run
away, when I pray my good and gracious God to kill her (her
that is so dear above all things) sooner than let her come to
ruin and disgrace ! "

The face he turned up to the troubled sky, the quivering of
his clasped hands, the agony of his figure, remain associated
with that lonely waste, in my remembrance, to this hour. It
is always night there, and he is the only object in the scene.

" You're a scholar," he said, hurriedly, " and know what's
right and best. What am I to say, indoors ? How am I ever
to break it to him, Mas'r Davy ? "

I saw the door move, and instinctively tried to hold the
latch on the outside, to gain a moment's time. It was too
late. Mr. Feggotty thrust forth his face ; and never could I
forget the change that came upon it when he saw us, if I
were to live five hundred years.

I remember a great wail and cry, and the women hanging
about him, and we all standing in the room ; I with a paper in
my hand, which Ham had given me ; Mr. Peggotty, with his
vest torn open, his hair wild, his face and lips quite white,
and blood trickling down his bosom (it had sprung from his
mouth, I think), looking fixedly at me.

" Read it, sir," he said, in a low shivering voice. " Slow,
please, I doen't know as I can understand."

In the midst of the silence of death, I read thus, from a
blotted letter.

" ' When you, who love me so much better than I ever have deserved,
even when my mind was innocent, see this, I shall be far away.' "





" I shall be fur away," he repeated slowly. " Stop ! Em'ly
fur away. Well ! "

" ' When I leave my dear home — my dear home — oh, my dear home !
— in the morning — ' "

the letter bore date on the previous night :

" '— it will be never to come back, unless he brings me back a lady.
This will be found at night, many hours after, instead of me. Oh, if you
knew how my heart is torn. If even you, that I have wronged so much,
that never can forgive me, could only know what I suffer ! I am too
wicked to write about myself. Oh, take comfort in thinking that I am so
bad. Oh, for mercy's sake, tell uncle that I never loved him half so dear
as now. Oh, don't remember how affectionate and kind you have all
been to me — don't remember we were ever to be married — but try to
think as if I died when I was little, and was buried somewhere. Pray
Heaven that I am going away from, have compassion on my uncle ! Tell
him that I never loved him half so dear. Be his comfort. Love some
good girl, that will be what I was once to uncle, and be true to you, and
worthy of you, and know no shame but me. God bless all! I'll pray for
all, often, on my knees. If he don't bring me back a lady, and I don't
pray for my own self, I'll pray for all. My parting love to uncle. My
last tears, and my last thanks, for uncle ! '"

That was all.

He stood, long after I had ceased to read, still looking at
me. At length I ventured to take his hand, and to entreat
him, as well as I could, to endeavor to get some command of
himself. He replied, " I thankee, sir, I thankee ! " without
moving.

Ham spoke to him. Mr. Peggotty was so far sensible of
his affliction, that he wrung his hand ; but, otherwise, he
remained in the same state, and no one dared to disturb him.

Slowly, at last, he moved his eyes from my face, as if he
were waking from a vision, and cast them round the room.
Then he said, in a low voice :

" Who's the man ? I want to know his name."

Ham glanced at me, and suddenly I felt a shock that struck
me back.

"There's a man suspected," said Mr. Peggotty. "Who
is it ? "

" Mas'r Davy ! " implored Ham. " Go out a bit, and let
me tell him what I must. You doen't ought to hear it, sir."

VOL. II — 2



18 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

I felt the shock again. I sank down in a chair, and tried
to utter some reply; but my tongue was fettered, and my
sight was weak.

" I want to know his name ! " I heard said, once more.

"For some time past," Ham faltered, "there's been a ser-
vant about here, at odd times. There's been a gen'lm'n too.
Both of 'em belonged to one another."

Mr. Peggotty stood fixed as before, but now looking at
him.

"The servant," pursued Ham, "was seen along with — our
poor girl — last night. He's been in hiding about here, this
week or over. He was thought to have gone, but he was
hiding. Doen't stay, Mas'r Davy, doen't ! "

I felt Peggotty's arm round my neck, but I could not have
moved if the house had been about to fall upon me.

"A strange chay and horses was outside town, this morning,
on the jSTorwich road, a'most afore the day broke," Ham went
on. " The servant went to it, and come from it, and went to
it again. When he went to it again, Em'ly was nigh him.
The t'other w r as inside. He's the man."

" Por the Lord's love," said Mr. Peggotty, falling back, and
putting out his hand, as if to keep off what he dreaded.
" Doen't tell me his name's Steerforth ! "

" Mas'r Davy,'' exclaimed Ham, in a broken voice, " it ain't
no fault of yourn — and I am far from laying of it to you —
but his name is Steerforth, and he's a damned villain ! "

Mr. Peggotty uttered no cry, and shed no tear, and moved
no more, until he seemed to wake again, all at once, and pulled
down his rough coat from its peg in a corner.

"Bear a hand with this ! Pm struck of a heap, and can't
do it," he said, impatiently. "Bear a hand and help me.
Well!" when somebody had done so. "Now give me that
theer hat ! "

Ham asked him whither he was going.

" Pm a going to seek my niece. Pm a going to seek my
Em'ly. Pm a going, first, to stave in that theer boat, and
sink it where I would have drownded him y as I'm a livin' soul,
if I had had one thought of what was in him ! As he sat
afore me," he said, wildly, holding out his clenched right hand,



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 19

" as lie sat afore me, face to face, strike me down dead, but
I'd have drownded him, and thought it right !— I'm a going
to seek my niece."

" Where ? " cried Ham, interposing himself before the door.

"Anywhere! Fm a going to seek my niece through the
wureld. I'm a going to find my poor niece in her shame, and
bring her back. No one stop me ! I tell you Pm a going to
seek my niece I "

"No, no!" cried Mrs. Gummidge, coming between them,
in a fit of crying. "No, no, Dan'l, not as you are now. Seek
her in a little while, my lone lorn Dan'l, and that'll be but
right ! but not as you are now. Sit ye down, and give me
your forgiveness for having ever been a worrit to you, Dan'l
— what have my contrairies ever been to this ! — and let us
speak a word about them times when she was first an orphan,
and when Ham was too, and when I was a poor widder
woman, and you took me in. It'll soften your poor heart,
Dan'l," laying her head upon his shoulder, " and you'll bear
your sorrow better ; for you know the promise, Dan'l, ' As you
have done it unto one of the least of these, you have done it
unto me ' ; and that can never fail under this roof, that's been
our shelter for so many, many year ! "

He was quite passive now ; and when I heard him crying,
the impulse that had been upon me to go down upon my
knees, and ask their pardon for the desolation I had caused,
and curse Steerforth, yielded to a better feeling. My over-
charged heart found the same relief, and I cried too.



20 TEE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE



CHAPTER III.

THE BEGINNING OF A LONG JOURNEY.

What is natural in me, is natural in many other men, I
infer, and so I am not afraid to write that I never had loved
Steerforth better than when the ties that bound me to him
were broken. In the keen distress of the discovery of his
unworthiness, I thought more of all that was brilliant in him,
I softened more towards all that was good in him, I did more
justice to the qualities that might have made him a man of
a noble nature and a great name, than ever I had done in the
height of my devotion to him. Deeply as I felt my own un-
conscious part in his pollution of an honest home, I believed
that if I had been brought face to face with him, I could not
have uttered one reproach. I should have loved him so well
still — though he fascinated me no longer — I should have held
in so much tenderness the niemory of my affection for him,
that I think I should have been as weak as a spirit-wounded
child, in all but the entertainment of a thought that we could
ever be re-united. That thought I never had. I felt, as he
had felt, that all was at an end between us. What his
remembrances of me were, I have never known — they were
light enough, perhaps, and easily dismissed — but mine of him
were as the remembrances of a cherished friend, who was
dead.

Yes, Steerforth, long removed from the scenes of this poor
history ! My sorrow may bear involuntary witness against
you at the Judgment Throne ; but my angry thoughts or my
reproaches never will, I know !

The news of what had happened soon spread through the
town ; insomuch that as I passed along the streets next
morning, I overheard the people speaking of it at their doors.
Many were hard upon her, some few were hard upon him,
but towards her second father and her lover there was but



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 21

one sentiment. Among all kinds of people a respect for
them in their distress prevailed, which was full of gentleness
and delicacy. The seafaring men kept apart, when those two
were seen early, walking with slow steps on the beach ; and
stood in knots, talking compassionately among themselves.

It was on the beach, close down by the sea, that I found
them. It would have been easy to perceive that they had not
slept all last night, even if Peggotty had failed to tell me
of their still sitting just as I left them, when it was broad
day. They looked worn ; and I thought Mr. Peggotty' s head
was bowed in one night more than in all the years I had
known him. But they were both as grave and steady as* the
sea itself: then lying beneath a dark sky, waveless — yet
with a heavy roll upon it, as if it breathed in its rest — and
touched, on the horizon, with a strip of silvery light from the
unseen sun.

"We have had a mort of talk, sir," said Mr. Peggotty
to me, when we had all three walked a little while in silence,
"of what we ought and doen't ought to do. But we see
our course now."

I happened to glance at Ham, then looking out to sea
upon the distant light, and a frightful thought came into
my mind — not that his face was angry, for it was not; I
recall nothing but an expression of stern determination in it
— that if ever he encountered Steerforth he would kill him.

"My dooty here, sir," said Mr. Peggotty, "is done. Pm
a going to seek my — " he stopped, and went on in a firmer
voice : " Pm a going to seek her. That's my dooty evermore."

He shook his head when I asked him where he would seek
her, and inquired if I were going to London to-morrow ? I
told him I had not gone to-day, fearing to lose the chance of
being of any service to him; but that I was ready to go
when he would.

"Pll go along with you, sir," he rejoined, "if you're
agreeable, to-morrow."

We walked again, for a while, in silence.

"Ham," he presently resumed, "he'll hold to his present
work, and go and live along with my sister. The old boat
yonder — "



22 THE PERSONAL HISTOBY AND EXPERIENCE

" Will you desert the old boat, Mr. Peggotty ? " I gently
interposed.

"My station, Mas'r Davy/' he returned, "ain't there no
longer ; and if ever a boat foundered, since there was dark-
ness on the face of the deep, that one's gone down. But no,
sir, no; I doen't mean as it should be deserted. Fur from
that." '

We walked again for a while, as before, until he explained :

"My wishes is, sir, as it shall look, day and night, winter
and summer, as it has always looked, since she first know'd
it. If ever she should come a wandering back, I wouldn't
have the old place seem to cast her off, you understand, but
seem to tempt her to draw nigher to 't, and to peep in, maybe,
like a ghost, out of the wind and rain, through the old
winder, at the old seat by the fire. Then, maybe, Mas'r
Davy, seem' none but Missis Gummidge there, she might take
heart to creep in, trembling; and might come to be laid down
in her old bed, and rest her weary head where it was once so
gay."

I could not speak to him in reply, though I tried.

" Every night," said Mr. Peggotty, " as reg'lar as the night
comes, the candle must be stood in its old pane of glass, that
if ever she should see it, it may seem to say -Come back, my
child, come back ! ' If ever there's a knock, Ham (partic'ler
a soft knock) arter dark, at your aunt's door, doen't you go
nigh it. Let it be her — not you — that sees my fallen
child!"

He walked a little in front of us, and kept before us for
some minutes. During this interval, I glanced at Ham
again, and observing the same expression on his face, and
his eyes still directed to the distant light, I touched his arm.

Twice I called him by his name, in the tone in which I
might have tried to rouse a sleeper, before he heeded me.
When I at last inquired on what his thoughts were so
bent, he replied:

" On what's afore me, Mas'r Davy ; and over yon."

" On the life before you, do you mean ? " He had pointed
confusedly out to sea.

" Ay, Mas'r Davy. I doen't rightly know how 'tis, but



OF DAVID COPTEBFIELD. 23

from over yon there seemed to me to come — the end of it
like ; " looking at me as if he were waking, but witt the
same determined face.

" What end ? " I asked, possessed by my former fear.
• " I doen't know," he said thoughtfully ; " I was calling to
mind that the beginning of it all did take place here — and
then the end come. But it's gone ! Mas'r.Davy," he added;
answering, as I think, my look; "you han't no .call to be
af eerd of me ; but Fm kiender muddled ; I don't fare to feel
no matters," — which was as much as to say that he was not
himself, and quite confounded.

Mr. Peggotty stopping for us to join him : we did so, and
said no more. The remembrance of this, in .connection with
my former thought, however, haunted me at intervals, even
until the inexorable end came at its appointed time.

We insensibly approached the old boat, and entered. Mrs.
Gummidge, no longer moping in her especial corner, was
busy, preparing breakfast. She took Mr. Peggotty's hat,
and placed his seat for him, and spoke" so comfortably and
softly, that I hardly knew her.

"Dan'l, my good man," said she, "you must eat and
drink, and keep up your strength, for without it you'll do
nowt. Try, that's a dear soul ! And if I disturb you with
my clicketen," she meant her chattering, "tell me so, Dan'l,
and I won't."

When she had served us all, she withdrew to the window,
where she sedulously employed herself in repairing some
shirts and other clothes belonging to Mr. Peggotty, and
neatly folding and packing them in an old oilskin bag, such
as sailors carry. Meanwhile, she continued talking, in the same
quiet manner :

"All times and seasons, you ktiow, Dan'l," said Mrs. Gfum-
midge, "I shall be alius here, and every think will look
accordin' to your wishes. Pm a poor scholar, but I shall
write to you, odd times, Avhen you're away, and send my
letters to Mas'r Davy. Maybe you'll write to me too, Dan'l>
odd times, and tell me how you fare to feel upon your lone
lorn journeys."



24 THE PEE SON AL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" You'll be a solitary woman here, Fm af eerd ! " said Mr.
Peggotty.

u No, no, Dan'l," she returned, u I shan't be that. Doen't
you mind me. I shall have enough to do to keep a Beein for
you " (Mrs. Gummidge meant a home) " again you come back
— to keep a Beein here for any that may hap to come back,
Dan'l. In the fine, time, I shall set outside the door as I used
to do. If any should come nigh, they shall see the old widder
woman true to ; em, a long way off."

What a change in Mrs. Gummidge in a little time ! She
was another woman. She was so devoted, she had such a
quick perception of what it would be well to say, and what it
would be well to leave unsaid, she was so forgetful of herself,
and so regardful of the sorrow about her, that I held her in
a sort of veneration. The work she did that day ! There
were many things to be brought up from the beach and stored
in the outhouse — as oars, nets, sails, cordage, spars, lobster-
pots, bags of ballast, and the like; and though there was
abundance of assistance rendered, there being not a pair of
working hands on all that shore but would have labored hard
for Mr. Peggotty, and been well paid in being asked to do it,
yet she persisted, all day long, in toiling under weights that
she was quite unequal to, and fagging to and fro on all sorts
of unnecessary errands. As to deploring her misfortune, she
appeared to have entirely lost the recollection of ever having
had any. She preserved an equable cheerfulness in the midst of
her sympathy, which was not the least astonishing part of the
change that had come over her. Querulousness was out of the
question. I did not even observe her voice to falter, or a tear
to escape from her eyes, the whole day through, until
twilight ; when she and I and Mr. Peggotty being alone
together, and he having fallen asleep in perfect exhaustion, she
broke into a half-suppressed fit of sobbing and crying, and
taking me to the door, said, "Ever bless you, Mas'r Davy, be
a friend to him, poor dear ! " Then, she . immediately .ran out
of the house to wash her face, in order that she might sit
quietly beside him, and be found at work there, when he should
awake. In short I left her, when I went away at night, the
prop and staff of Mr. Peggotty's affliction : and I could not



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 25

meditate enough upon the lesson that I read in Mrs. Gum-
midge, and the new experience she unfolded to me.

It was between nine and ten o'clock when, strolling in a
melancholy manner through the town, I stopped at Mr Omer's
door. Mr. Omer had taken it so much to heart, his daughter
told me, that he had been very low and poorly all day, and
had gone to bed without his pipe.

"A deceitful, bad-hearted girl," said Mrs. Joram. " There
was no good in her, ever ! "

" Don't say so," I returned. " You don't think so."
" Yes, I do ! " cried Mrs. Joram, angrily.
" No, no," said I.

Mrs. Joram tossed her head, endeavoring to be very stern
and cross ; but she could not command her softer self, and
began to cry. I was young, to be sure ; but I thought much
the better of her for this sympathy, and, fancied it became
her, as a virtuous wife and mother, very well indeed.

" What will she ever do ! " sobbed Minnie. " Where will
she go ! What will become of her ! Oh, how could she be so
cruel, to herself and him ! "

I remembered the time when Minnie was a young and pretty
girl ; and I was glad that she remembered it too, so feelingly.
" My little Minnie," said Mrs. Joram, " has only just now
been got to sleep. Even in her sleep she is sobbing for Em'ly.
All day long, little Minnie has cried for her, and asked me,
over and over again, whether Em'ly was wicked ? What can
I say to her, when Em'ly tied a ribbon off her own neck round
little Minnie's the last night she was here, and laid her head
down on the pillow beside her till she was fast asleep ! The
ribbon's round my little Minnie's neck now. It ought not to
be, perhaps, but what can I do ? Em'ly is very bad, but they
were fond of one another. And the child knows nothing ! "

Mrs. Joram was so unhappy, that her husband came out to
take care of her. Leaving them together, I went home to
Peggotty's ; more melancholy myself, if possible, than I had
been yet.

That good creature — I mean Peggotty — all untired by her
late anxieties and sleepless nights, was at her brother's, where
she meant to stay till morning. An old woman, who had been



26 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

employed about the house for some weeks past, while Peggotty
had been unable to attend to it,. was the house's only other
occupant besides myself. As I had no occasion for her ser-
vices, I sent her to bed, by no means against her will ; and sat
down before the kitchen fire a little while, to think about all
this.

cr-I was blending it with the deathbed of the late Mr. Barkis,
and was driving out with the tide towards the distance at
which Ham had looked so singularly in the morning, when I
was recalled from my wanderings by a knock at the door.
There was a knocker upon the door, but it was not that which
made the sound. The tap was from a hand, and low down
upon the door, as if it were given by a child.

It made me start as much as if it had been the knock of a
footman to a person of distinction. I opened the door ; and at
first looked down, to my amazement, on nothing but a great
umbrella that appeared to be walking about of itself. But
presently I discovered underneath it, Miss Mowcher.

I might not have been prepared to give the little creature a
very kind reception, if, on her removing the umbrella, which
her utmost efforts were unable to shut up, she had shown me
the " volatile " expression of face which had made so great an
impression on me at our first and last meeting. But her face,
as she turned it up to mine, was so earnest ; and when I re-
lieved her of the umbrella (which would have been an incon-
venient one for the Irish Giant), she wrung her little hands
in such an afflicted manner ; that I rather inclined towards
her.

V Miss Mowcher ! " said I, after glancing up and down the
empty street, without distinctly knowing what I expected to
see besides ; " how do you come here ? "What is the matter ? ;;

She motioned to me, with her short right arm, to shut
the umbrella for her ; and passing me hurriedly, went into the
kitchen. When I had closed the door, and followed, with the
umbrella in my hand, I found her sitting on the corner of
the fender — it was a low iron one, with two flat bars at top
to stand plates upon — in the shadow of the boiler, swaying
herself backwards and forwards, and chafing her hands upon
her knees like a person in pain.



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 27

Quite alarmed at being the only recipient of this untimely
visit, and the only spectator of this portentous behavior, I
exclaimed again, "Pray tell me, Miss Mowcher, what is the
matter ! are you ill ? "

u My dear young soul," returned Miss Mowcher, squeezing
her hands upon her heart one over the other. "I am ill
here, I am very ill. To think that it should come to this,
when I might have known it and perhaps prevented it, if I
hadn't been a thoughtless fool ! "

Again her large bonnet (very disproportionate to her figure)
went backwards and forwards, in her swaying of her little
body to and fro ; while a most gigantic bonnet rocked, in
unison with it, upon the wall.

" I am surprised," I began, " to see you so distressed and
serious " — when she interrupted me.

"Yes, it's always so ! " she said. "They are all surprised,
these inconsiderate young people, fairly and full grown, to see
any natural feeling in a little thing like me ! They make a
plaything of me, use me for their amusement, throw me away
when they are tired, and wonder that I feel more than a toy
horse or a wooden soldier ! Yes, yes, that's the way. The
old way ! "

" It may be, with others," I returned, " but I do assure you
it is not with me. Perhaps I ought not to be at all surprised
to see you as you are now : I know so little of you, I said,
.without consideration, what I thought."

" What can I do ? " returned the little woman, "standing up,
and holding out her arms to show herself. V See ! What I
am, my father was ; and my sister is ; and my brother is.
I have worked for sister and brother these many years —
hard, Mr. Copperfield — all day. I must live. I do no harm.
If thBre are people so unreflecting or so cruel, as to make a
jest of me, what is left for me to do but to make a jest of my-
self, them, and everything ? If I do so, for the time, whose
fault is that ? Mine ? "

jNo. Not Miss Mowcher's, I perceived.

"If I had shown myself a sensitive dwarf to your false
friend," pursued the little woman, shaking her head at me,
with reproachful earnestness, " how much of his help or good



28 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

will do you think I should ever have had ? If little Mowcher
(who had no hand, young gentleman, in the making of herself)
addressed herself to him, or the like of him, because of her
misfortunes, when do you suppose her small voice would have
been heard ? Little Mowcher would have as much need to
live, if she was the bitterest and dullest of pigmies ; but she
couldn't do it. No. She might whistle for her bread and
butter till she died of Air."

Miss Mowcher sat down on the fender again, and took out
her handkerchief, and wiped her eyes.

" Be thankful for me, if you have a kind heart, as I think
you have," she said, " that while I know well what I am, I can
be cheerful and endure it all. I am thankful for myself, at
any rate, that I can find my tiny way through the world, with-
out being beholden to any one ; and that in return for all that
is thrown at me, in folly or vanity, as I go along, I can throw
bubbles back. If I don't brood over all. I want, it is the better
for me, and not the worse for any one. If I am a plaything
for you giants, be gentle with me."

Miss Mowcher replaced her handkerchief in her pocket,
looking at me with very intent expression all the while, and
pursued :

"I saw you in the street just now. You may suppose I am
not able to walk as fast as you, with my short legs and short
breath, and I couldn't overtake you ; but I guessed where you
came, and came after you. I have been here before, to-day,
but the good woman wasn't at home."

" Do you know her ? " I demanded.

" I know of her, and about her," she replied, " from Omer
and Joram. I was there at seven o'clock this morning. Do
you remember what Steerforth said to me about this unfortu-
nate girl, that time when I saw you both at the inn ? "

The great bonnet on Miss Mowcher's head, and the greater
bonnet on the wall, began to go backwards and forwards again
when she asked this question.

I remembered very well what she referred to, having had it
in my thoughts many times that day. I told her so.

" May the Father of all Evil confound him," said the little
woman, holding up her forefinger between me and her spark-



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 29

ling eyes ; " and ten times more confound that wicked ser-
vant ; but I believed it was you who had a boyish passion for
her ! "

"I?" I repeated.

" Child ; child ! In the name of blind ill-fortune," cried Miss
Mowcher, wringing her hands impatiently, as she went to and
fro again upon the fender, u why did you praise her so, and
blush, and look disturbed ? "

I could not conceal from myself that I had done this, though
for a reason very different from her supposition.

" What did I know ? " said Miss Mowcher, taking out her
handkerchief again, and giving one little stamp on the ground
whenever, at short intervals, she applied it to her eyes with
both hands at once. "He was crossing you and wheedling
you, I saw; and you were soft wax in his hands, I saw.
Had I left the room a minute, when his man told me that
6 Young Innocence ' (so he called you, and you may call him
' Old Guilt ? all the days of your life) had set his heart upon
her, and she was giddy and liked him, but his master was
resolved that no harm should come of it — more for your sake
than for hers — and that that was their business here ? How
could I but believe him ? I saw Steerforth soothe and please
you by his praise of her ! You were the first to mention her
name. You owned to an old admiration of her. You were
hot and cold, and red and white, all at once when I spoke to
you of her. What could I think — what did I think — but
that you were a young libertine in everything but experience,
and had fallen into hands that had experience enough, and
could manage you (having the fancy) for your own good?
Oh ! oh ! oh ! They were afraid of my finding out the truth,"
exclaimed Miss Mowcher, getting off the fender, and trotting
up and down the kitchen with her two short arms distress-
fully lifted up, " because I am a sharp little thing — I need be,
to get through the world at all ! — and they deceived me alto-
gether, and I gave the poor unfortunate girl a letter, which I
fully believe was the beginning of her ever speaking to Litti-
mer, who was left behind on purpose ! "

I stood amazed at the revelation of all this perfidy, looking
at Miss Mowcher as she walked up and down the kitchen until



30 THE PEE SON AL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

she was out of breath : when she sat upon the fender again,
and, drying her face with her handkerchief, shook her head
for a long time, without otherwise moving, and without break-
ing silence.

"My country rounds," she added at length, " brought me to
Norwich, Mr. Copperfield, the night before last. "What I hap-
pened to find out there, about their secret way of coming and
going, without you — which was strange — led to my suspect-
ing something wrong. I got into the coach from London last
night, as it came through Norwich, and was here this morning.
Oh, oh, oh ! too late ! "

Poor little Mowcher turned so chilly after all her crying
and fretting, that she turned round on the fender, putting her
poor little wet feet in among the ashes to warm them, and sat
looking at the fire, like a large doll. I sat in a chair on the
other side of the hearth, lost in unhappy reflections, and look-
ing at the fire too, and sometimes at her.

"I must go," she said at last, rising as she spoke. "It's
late. You don't mistrust me ? "

Meeting her sharp glance, which was as sharp as ever when
she asked me, I could not on that short challenge answer no,
quite frankly.

" Come ! " said she, accepting the offer of my hand to help
her over the fender, and looking wistfully up into my face,
"you know you wouldn't mistrust me, if I was a full-sized
woman ! "

I felt that there was much truth in this ; and I felt rather
ashamed of myself.

" You are a young man," she said, nodding. " Take a word
of advice, even from three foot nothing. Try not to associate
bodily defects with mental, my good friend, except for a solid
reason."

She had got over the fender now, and I had got over my
suspicion. I told her that I believed she had given me a
faithful account of herself, and that we had both been hapless
instruments in designing hands. She thanked me, and said I
was a good fellow.

"Now, mind!" she exclaimed, turning back on her way to
the door, and looking shrewdly at me, with her forefinger up



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 31

again. "I have some reason to suspect, from what I have
heard — my ears are always open ; I can't afford to spare what
powers I have — that they are gone abroad. But if ever they
return, if ever any one of them returns, while I am alive, I am
more likely than another, going about as I do, to find it out
soon. Whatever I know, you shall know. If ever I can do
anything to serve the poor betrayed girl, I will do it faithfully,
please Heaven ! And Littimer had better have a bloodhound
at his back, than little Mowcher ! "

I placed implicit faith in this last statement, when I marked
the look with which it was accompanied.

u Trust me no more, but trust me no less, than you would
trust a full-sized woman," said the little creature, touching me
appealingly on the wrist. "If ever you see me again, unlike
what I am now, and like what I was when you first saw me,
observe what company I am in. Call to mind that I am a
very helpless and defenceless little thing. Think of me at
home with my brother lik^ myself and sister like myself,
when my day's work is done. Perhaps you won't, then, be
very hard upon me, or surprised if I can be distressed and
serious. Good night ! "

I gave Miss Mowcher my hand, with a very different opinion
of her from that which I had hitherto entertained, and opened
the door to let her out. It was not a trifling business to get
the great umbrella up, and properly balanced in her grasp;
but at last I successfully accomplished this, and saw it go
bobbing down the street through the rain, without the least
appearance of having anybody underneath it, except when a
heavier fall than usual from some overcharged waterspout
sent it toppling over, an one side, and discovered Miss Mow-
cher struggling violently to get it right. After making one
or two sallies to her relief, which were rendered futile by the
umbrella's hopping on again, like an immense bird, before I
could reach it, I came in, went to bed, and slept till morning.

In the morning I was joined by Mr. Peggotty and by my
old nurse, and we went at an early hour to the coach office,
where Mrs. Gummidge and Ham were waiting to take leave
of us.

"Mas'r Davy/' Ham whispered, drawing me aside, while



32 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

Mr. Peggotty was stowing his bag among the luggage, "his
life is quite broke up. He doen't know wheer he's going;
he doen't know what's afore him ; he's bound upon a voyage
that'll last, on and off, all the rest of his days, take my wured
for't, unless he finds what he's a seeking of. I am sure you'll
be a friend to him, Mas'r Davy ? "

" Trust me, I will indeed," said I, shaking hands with Ham
earnestly.

" Thankee. Thankee, very kind, sir. One thing furder.
I'm in good employ, you know, Mas'r Davy, and I han't no
way now of spending what I gets. Money's of no use to me
no more, except to live. If you can lay it out for him, I shall
do my work with a better art. Though as to that, sir," and
he spoke very steadily and mildly, " you're not to think but I
shall work at all times, like a man, and act the best that lays
in my power ! "

I told him I was well convinced of it ; and I hinted that I
hoped the time might even come, when he would cease to lead
the lonely life he naturally contemplated now.

"No, sir," he said, shaking his head, "all that's past and
over with me, sir. No one can never fill the place that's
empty. But you'll bear in mind about the money, as theer's
at all times some laying by for him ? "

Reminding him of the fact, that Mr. Peggotty derived a
steady, though certainly a very moderate income from the
bequest of his late brother-in-law, I promised to do so. We
then took leave of each other. I cannot leave him even now,
without remembering, with a pang, at once his modest forti-
tude and his great sorrow.

As to Mrs. Gummidge, if I were to endeavor to describe
how she ran down the street by the side of the coach, seeing
nothing but Mr. Peggotty on the roof, through the tears she
tried to repress, and dashing herself against the people who
were coming in the opposite direction, I should enter on a
task of some difficulty. Therefore I had better leave her sit-
ting on a baker's door-step, out of breath, with no shape at all
remaining in her bonnet, and one of her shoes off, lying on the
pavement at a considerable distance.

When we got to our journey's end, our first pursuit was to



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 33

look about for a little lodging for Peggotty, where her brother
could have a bed. We were so fortunate as to find one, of a
very clean and cheap description, over a chandler's shop, only
two streets removed from me. When we had engaged this
domicile, I bought some cold meat at an eating-house, and
took my fellow-travellers home to tea ; a proceeding, I regret
to state, which did not meet with Mrs. Crupp's approval, but
quite the contrary. I ought to observe, however, in explana-
tion of that lady's state of mind, that she was much offended
by Peggotty's tucking up her widow's gown before she had
been ten minutes in the place, and setting to work to dust my
bed-room. This Mrs. Crupp regarded in the light of a liberty,
and a liberty, she said, was a thing she never allowed.

Mr. Peggotty had made a communication to me on the way
to London for which I was not unprepared. It was, that he
purposed first seeing Mrs. Steerforth. As I felt bound to
assist him in this, and also to mediate between them ; with
the view of sparing the mother's feelings as much as possible,
I wrote to her that night. I told her as mildly as I could
what his wrong was, and what my own share in his injury.
I said he was a man in very common life, but of a most gentle
and upright character ; and that I ventured to express a hope
that she would not refuse to see him in his heavy trouble. I
mentioned .two o'clock in the afternoon as the hour of our
coming, and I sent the letter myself by the first coach in the
morning.

At the appointed time, we stood at the door — the door of
that house where I had been, a few days since, so happy :
where my youthful confidence and warmth of heart had been
yielded up so freely : which was closed against me henceforth :
which was now a waste, a ruin.

No Littimer appeared. The pleasanter face which had
replaced his, on the occasion of my last visit, answered to our
summons, and went before us to the drawing-room. Mrs.
Steerforth was sitting there. Eosa Dartle glided, as we went
in, from another part of the room, and stood behind her chair.

I saw, directly, in his mother's face, that she knew from
himself what he had done. It was very pale, and bore the
traces of deeper emotion than my letter alone, weakened by

VOL. II — 3



34 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

the doubts her fondness would have raised upon it, would have
been likely to create. I thought her more like him than ever
I had thought her; and I felt, rather than saw, that the resem-
blance was not lost on my companion.

She sat upright in her arm-chair, with a stately, immovable,
passionless air, that it seemed as if nothing could disturb.
She looked very steadfastly at Mr. Peggotty when he stood
before her ; and he looked, quite as steadfastly, at her. Eosa
Dartle's keen glance comprehended all of us. For some mo-
ments not a word was spoken. She motioned to Mr. Peggotty
to be seated. He said, in a low voice, "I shouldn't feel it
natural, ma'am, to sit down in this house. I'd sooner stand."
And this was succeeded by another silence, which she broke
thus :

"I know, with deep regret, what has brought you here.
What do you want of me ? What do you ask me to do ? "

He put his hat under his arm, and feeling in his breast for
Emily's letter, took it out, unfolded it, and gave it to her.

"Please to read that, ma'am. That's my niece's hand ! "

She read it, in the same stately and impassive way, —
untouched by its contents, as far as I could see, — and re-
turned it to him.

" ' Unless he brings me back a lady,' " said Mr. Peggotty,
tracing out that part with his finger. "I come to know,
ma'am, whether he will keep his wured ? "

"No," she returned.

"Why not ? " said Mr. Peggotty.

" It is impossible. He would disgrace himself. You cannot
fail to. know that she is far below him."

"Raise her up ! " said Mr. Peggotty.

" She^ is uneducated and ignorant."

" Maybe she's not ; maybe she is," said Mr. Peggotty. " 1
think not, ma'am ; but Fm no judge of <them things. Teach
her better ! "

" Since you oblige me to speak more plainly, which I am
very unwilling to do, her humble connections would render
such a thing impossible, if nothing else did."

"Hark to this, ma'am," he returned, slowly and quietly.
"You know what it is to love your child. So do I. If she





was a hundred times my child, I couldn't love her more. You
doen't know what it is to lose your child. I do. All the
heaps of riches in the wureld would be nowt to me (if they
was mine) to buy her back ! But save her from this disgrace,
and she shall never be disgraced by us. Not one of us that
she's growed up among, not one of us that's lived along with
her, and had her for their all in all, these many year, will ever
look upon her pritty face again. We'll be content to let her
be; we'll be content to think of her, far off, as if she was
underneath another sun and sky ; we'll be content to trust her
to her husband, — to her little children, p'raps, — and bide
the time when all of us shall be alike in quality afore our
God ! "

The rugged eloquence with which he spoke, was not devoid
of all effect. She still preserved her proud manner, but there
was a touch of softness in her voice, as she answered :

"I justify nothing. I make no counter-accusations. But
I am sorry to repeat, it is impossible. Such a marriage would
irretrievably blight my son's career, and ruin his prospects.
Nothing is more certain than that it never- can take place, and
never will. If there is any other compensation — "

" I am looking at the likeness of the face," interrupted Mr.
Peggotty, with a steady but a kindling eye, "that has looked
at me, in my home, at my fireside, in my boat — wheer not.?
— smiling and friendly when it was so treacherous, that I go
half wild when I think of it. If the likeness of that face
don't turn to burning fire, at the thought of offering money to
me for my child's blight and ruin, it's as bad. I doen't know,
being a lady's, but what it's worse."

She changed now, in a moment. An angry flush overspread
her features ; and she said, in an intolerant manner, grasping
the arm-chair tightly with her hands :

" What compensation can you make to me for opening such
a pit between me and my son ? What is your love to mine ?
What is your separation to ours ? "

Miss Dartle softly touched her, and bent down her head to
whisper, but she would not hear a word.

" No, Eosa, not a word ! Let the man listen to what I say !
My son, who has been the object of my life, to whom its every



36 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

thought has been devoted, whom I have gratified from a child
in every wish, from whom I have had no separate existence
since his birth, — to take up in a moment with a miserable
girl, and avoid me ! To repay my confidence with systematic
deception, for her sake, and quit me for her ! To set this
wretched fancy, against his mother's claims upon his duty,
love, respect, gratitude — claims that every day and hour of
his life should have strengthened into ties that nothing could
be proof against ! Is this no injury ? "

Again Eosa Dartle tried to soothe her ; again ineffectually.

" I say, Eosa, not a word ! If he can stake his all upon
the lightest object, I can stake my all upon a greater purpose.
Let him go where he will, with the means that my love has
secured to him ! Does he think to reduce me by long absence ?
He knows his mother very little if he does. Let him put
away his whim now, and he is welcome back. Let him not
put her away now, and he never shall come near me, living or
dying, while I can raise my hand to make a sign against it,
unless, being rid of her for ever, he comes humbly to me and
begs for my forgiveness. This is my right. This is the
acknowledgment I wiU have. This is the separation that there
is between us ! And is this," she added, looking at her visitor
with the proud intolerant air with which she had begun, u no
injury ? "

While I heard and saw the mother as she said these words,
I seemed to hear and see the son, defying them. All that I
had ever seen in him of an unyielding, wilful spirit, I saw in
her. All the understanding that I had now of his misdirected
energy, became an understanding of her character too, and a
perception that it was, in its strongest springs, the same.

She ,-iow observed to me, aloud, resuming her former re-
straint, that it was useless to hear more, or to say more, and
that she begged to put an end to the interview. She rose
with an air of dignity to leave the room, when Mr. Peggotty
signified that it was needless.

"Doen't fear me being any hindrance to you, I have no
more to say, ma'am," he remarked as he moved towards the
door. "I come heer with no hope, and I take away no hope.
I have done what I thowt should be done, but I never looked



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 37

fur any good to come of my stan'ning where I do. This has
been too evil a house fur me and mine, fur me to be in my
right senses and expect it."

With this, we departed; leaving her standing by her
elbow-chair, a picture of a noble presence and a handsome
face.

We had, on our way out, to cross a paved hall, with glass
sides and roof, over which a vine was trained. Its leaves and
shoots were green then, and, the day being sunny, a pair of
glass doors leading to the garden were thrown open. Eosa
Dartle, entering this way with a noiseless step, when we were
close to them, addressed herself to me :

"You do well," she said, "indeed, to bring this fellow
here ! "

Such a concentration of rage and scorn as darkened her
face, and flashed in her jet-black eyes, I could not have
thought compressible even into that face. The scar made by
the hammer was, as usual in this excited state of her features,
strongly marked. When the throbbing I had seen before,
came into it as I looked at her, she absolutely lifted up her
hand and struck it.

" This is a fellow," she said, " to champion and bring here,
is he riot ? You are a true man ! "

"Miss Dartle," I returned, "you are surely not so unjust
as to condemn me ! "

" Why do you bring division between these two mad crea-
tures ? " she returned. " Don't you know that they are both
mad with their own self-will and pride ? "

" Is it my doing ? " I returned.

" Is it your doing ! " she retorted. " Why do you bring
this man here ? "

"He is a deeply injured man, Miss Dartle," I replied.
" You may not know it."

" I know that James Steerforth," she said, with her hand
on her bosom, as if to prevent the storm that was raging
there, from being loud, " has a false, corrupt heart, and is a
traitor. But what need I know or care about this fellow, and
his common niece ? "

"Miss Dartle," I returned, "you deepen the injury. It is



38 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

sufficient already. I will only say, at parting, that you do
him a great wrong."

" I do him no wrong," she returned. "They are a depraved
worthless set. I would have her whipped ! "

Mr. Peggotty passed on, without a word, and went out at
the door.

" Oh, shame, Miss Dartle ! shame ! " I said indignantly.
"How can you bear to trample on his undeserved affliction ! "

u I would trample on them all," she answered. " I would
have his house pulled down. I would have her branded on
the face, drest in rags, and cast out in the streets to starve.
If I had the power to sit in judgment on her, I would see it
done. See it done ? I would do it ! I detest her. If I ever
could reproach her with her infamous condition, I would go
anywhere to do so. If I could hunt her to her grave, I would.
If there was any word of comfort that would be a solace to
her in her dying hour, and only I possessed it, I wouldn't part
with it for Life itself."

The mere vehemence of her words can convey, I am sensible,
but a weak impression of the passion by which she was pos-
sessed, and which made itself articulate in her whole figure,
though her voice, instead of being raised, was lower than
usual. No description I could give of her would do justice to
my recollection of her, or to her entire deliverance of herself
to her anger. I have seen passion in many forms, but I have
never seen it in such a form as that.

When I joined Mr. Peggotty, he was walking slowly and
thoughtfully down the hill. He told me, as soon as I came
up with him, that having now discharged his mind of what he
had purposed doing in London, he meant " to set out on his
travels," that night. I asked him where he meant to go ?
He only answered, " Fm a going, sir, to seek my niece."

We went back to the little lodging over the chandler's shop,
and there I found an opportunity of repeating to Peggotty
what he had said to me. She informed me, in return, that
he had said the same to her that morning. She knew no more
than I did, where he was going, but she thought he had some
project shaped out in his mind.

I did not like to leave him, under such circumstances, and



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 39

we all three dined together off a beefsteak pie — which was
one of the many good things for which Peggotty was famous
— and which was curiously flavored on this occasion, I recol-
lect well, by a miscellaneous taste of tea, coffee, butter, bacon,
cheese, new loaves, firewood, candles, and walnut ketchup,
continually ascending from the shop. After dinner we sat for
an hour or so near the window, without talking much ; and
then Mr. Peggotty got up, and brought his oilskin bag and
his stout stick, and laid them on the table.

He accepted, from his sister's stock of ready money, a small
sum on account of his legacy; barely enough, I should have
thought, to keep him for a month. He promised to communi-
cate with me, when anything befell him ; and he slung his bag
about him, took his hat and stick, and bade us both "Good by ! "

" All good attend you, dear old woman," he said, embracing
Peggotty, " and you too, Mas'r Davy ! " shaking hands with
me. " Pm a going to seek her, fur and wide. If she should
come home while Pm away, — but ah, that ain't like to be ! —
or if I should bring her back, my meaning is, that she and
me shall live and die where no one can't reproach her. If
any hurt should come to me, remember that the last words I
left for her was, c My unchanged love is with my darling child,
and I forgive her ! ' "

He said this solemnly, bare-headed ; then, putting on his
hat, he went down the stairs, and away. We 'followed to the
door. It was a warm, dusty evening, just the time when, in
the great main thoroughfare out of which that by-way turned,
there was a temporary lull in the eternal tread of feet upon
the pavement, and a strong red sunshine. He turned alone,
at the corner of our shady street, into a glow of light, in which
we lost him.

Karely did that hour of the evening come, rarely did I
wake at night, rarely did I look up at the moon, or stars, or
watch the falling rain, or hear the wind, but I thought of his
solitary figure toiling on, poor pilgrim, and recalled the words :

"Pm a going to seek her, fur and wide. If any hurt should
come to me, remember that the last words I left for her was,
f My unchanged love is with my darling child, and I forgive
her!'"



40 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE



CHAPTER IV.

BLISSFUL.

All this time, I had gone on loving Dora, harder than ever.
Her idea was my refuge in disappointment and distress, and
made some amends to me, even for the loss of my friend. The
more I pitied myself, or pitied others, the more I sought for
consolation in the image of Dora. The greater the accumula-
tion of deceit and trouble in the world, the brighter and the
purer shone the star of Dora high above the world. I don't
think I had any definite idea where Dora came from, or in
what degree she was related to a higher order of beings ; but
I am quite sure I should have scouted the notion of her being
simply human, like any other young lady, with indignation and
contempt.

If I may so express it, I was steeped in Dora. I was not
merely over head and ears in love with her, but I was saturated
through and through. Enough love might have been wrung
out of me, metaphorically speaking, to drown anybody in ; and
yet there would have remained enough within me, and all
over me, to pervade my entire existence.

The first thing I did, on my own account, when I came back,
was to take a night-walk to Norwood, and, like the subject of
a venerable riddle of my childhood, to go " round and round
the house, without ever touching the house," thinking about
Dora. I believe the theme of this incomprehensible conun-
drum was the moon. No matter what it was, I } the moon-
struck slave of Dora, perambulated round and round the
house and garden for two hours, looking through crevices in
the palings, getting my chin by dint of violent exertion above
the rusty nails on the top, blowing kisses at the lights in th^
windows, and romantically calling on the night, at intervals,
to shield my Dora — I don't exactly know what from, I sup-



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 41

pose from fire. Perhaps from mice, to which she had a great
objection.

My love was so much on my mind, and it was so natural to
me to confide in Peggotty, when I found her again by my
side of an evening with the old set of industrial implements,
busily making the tour of my wardrobe, that I imparted to
her, in a sufficiently roundabout way, my great secret. Peg-
gotty was strongly interested, but I could not get her into my
view f the case at all. She was audaciously prejudiced in my
favor, and quite unable to understand why I should have any
misgivings, or be low-spirited about it. " The young lady might
hink herself well off," she observed, " to have such a beau.
And as to her Pa," she said, " what did the gentleman expect,
for gracious sake ! V

I observed, however, that Mr. Spenlow's Proctorial gown
and stiff cravat took Peggotty down a little, and inspired her
with a greater reverence for the man who was gradually be-
coming more and more etherealized in my eyes every day, and
about vhom a reflected radiance seemed to me to beam wnen
he sat erect in Court among his papers, like a little lighthous
in a sea f stationery. And by the by, it used to be uncom-
monly strange to me to consider, I remember, as I sat in Court
too, how those dim jld judges and doctors wouldn't have cared
for ">ora if they had known her ; how they wouldn't have gone
out of their senses with rapture, if marriage with Dora had
been proposed to thei ; how Dora might have sung and played
upon that glorified guitar, until she led me to the verge of mad-
ness, yet not have tempted one of those slow-goers an inch out
of his road !

I despised them, to a man. Prozen-out old gardeners in the
flower-beds of the heart, I took a personal offence against them
all. The Bench was nothing to me but an insensible blunderer.
The Bar had no more tenderness or poetry in it, than the Bar
of a public-house.

Taking the management of Peggotty's affairs into my own
hands, with no little pride, I proved the will, and came to a
settlement with the Legacy Duty-office, and took her to the
Bank, and soon got everything into an orderly train. We
varied the legal character of these proceedings by going to see



42 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

some perspiring Wax-work, in Fleet Street (melted, I should
hope, these twenty years) ; and by visiting Miss Lin wood's
Exhibition, which I remember as a Mausoleum of needlework,
favorable to self-examination and repentance ; and by inspect-
ing the Tower of London ; and going to the top of St. Paul's.
All these wonders afforded Peggotty as much pleasure as she
was able to enjoy, under existing circumstances : except, I
think, St. Paul's, which, from her long attachment to her
workbox, became a rival of the picture on the lid, and was, in
some particulars, vanquished, she considered, by that work of
art.

Peggotty's business, which was what we used to call " com-
mon-form business v in the Commons (and very light and
lucrative the common-form business was), being settled, I
took her down to the office one morning to pay her bill. Mr.
Spenlow had stepped out, old Tiffey said, to get a gentleman
sworn for a marriage license; but as I knew he would be
back directly, our place lying close to the Surrogate's, and to
the Vicar-General's office too, I told Peggotty to wait.

We were a little like undertakers, in the Commons, as
regarded Probate transactions ; generally making it a rule to
look more or less cut up, when we had to deal with clients in
mourning. In a similar feeling of delicacy, we were always
blithe and light-hearted with the license clients. Therefore
I hinted to Peggotty that she would find Mr. Spenlow much
recovered from the shock of Mr. Barkis's decease ; and indeed
he came in like a bridegroom.

But neither Peggotty nor I had eyes for him, when we saw,
in company with him, Mr. Murdstone. He was very little
changed. His hair looked as thick, and was certainly as
black, as ever ; and his glance was as little to be trusted, as
of old.

" Ah, Copperfield ? " said Mr. Spenlow. " You know this
gentleman, I believe ? "

I made my gentleman a distant bow, and Peggotty barely
recognized him. He was, at first, somewhat disconcerted to
meet us two together; but quickly decided what to do and
came up to me.

" I hope," he said, " that you are doing well ? "





" It can hardly be interesting to you/' said I. u Yes, if you
wish to know."

We looked at each other, and he addressed himself to
Peggotty.

" And you/' said he. " I am sorry to observe that you have
lost your husband."

" It's not the first loss I have had in my lif e, Mr. Murd-
stone/' replied Peggotty, trembling from head to foot. "I
am glad to hope that there is nobody to blame for this one, —
nobody to answer for it."

" Ha ! " said he ; " that's a comfortable reflection. You
have done your duty ? "

"I have not worn anybody's life away/' said Peggotty,
" I am thankful to think ! No, Mr. Murdstone, I have not
worrited and frightened any sweet creetur to an early grave ! "

He eyed her gloomily — remorsefully I thought — for an
instant ; and said, turning his head towards me, but looking
at my feet instead of my face :

" We are not likely to encounter soon again ; — a source of
satisfaction to us both, no doubt, for such meetings as this
can never be agreeable. I do not expect that you,, who always
rebelled against my just authority, exerted for your benefit
and reformation, should owe me any good will now. There is
an antipathy between us — "

"An old one, I believe ? " said I, interrupting him.

He smiled, and shot as evil a glance at me as could come
from his dark eyes.

" It rankled in your baby breast/' he said. " It embittered
the life of your poor mother. You are right. I hope you
may do better, yet ; I hope you may correct yourself."

Here he ended the dialogue, which had been carried on in
a low voice, in a corner of the outer office, by passing into Mr.
Spenlow's room, and saying aloud, in his smoothest manner :

" Gentlemen of Mr. Spenlow's profession are accustomed to
family differences, and know how complicated and difficult
they always are ! " With that, he paid the money for his
license ; and, receiying it neatly folded from Mr. Spenlow,
together with a shake of the hand, and a polite wish for his
happiness and the lady's, went out of the office.



44 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE^

I might have had more difficulty in constraining myself to
be silent under his words, if I had had less difficulty in im-
pressing upon Peggotty (who was only angry on my account;
good creature !) that we were not in a place for recrimination,
and that I besought her to hold her peace. She was so unu-
sually roused, that I was glad to compound for an affectionate
hug, elicited by this revival in her mind of our old injuries,
and to make the best I could of it, before Mr. Spenlow and
the clerks.

Mr. Spenlow did not appear to know what the connection
between Mr. Murdstone and myself was ; which I was glad of,
for I could not bear to acknowledge him, even in my own
breast, remembering what I did of the history of my poor
mother. Mr. Spenlow seemed to think, if he thought anything
about the matter, that my aunt was the leader of the state
party in our family, and that there was a rebel party com-
manded by somebody else — so I gathered at least from what
he said, while we were waiting for Mr. Tiffey to make out'
Peggotty's bill of costs.

" Miss Trotwood," he remarked, " is very firm, no doubt, and
not likely to give way to opposition. I have an admiration
for her character, and I may congratulate you, Copperfield, on
being on the right side. Differences between relations are
much to be "deplored — but they are extremely general — and
the great thing is, to be on the right side : " meaning, I take
it, on the side of the moneyed interest.

" Rather a good marriage this, I believe ? " said Mr. Spen-
low.

I explained that I knew nothing about it.

"Indeed!" he said. "Speaking from the few words Mr.
Murdstone dropped ■ — as a man frequently does on these occa-
sions — and from what Miss Murdstone let fall, I should say
it was rather a good marriage."

"Do you mean that there is money, sir ? " I asked.

"Yes," said Mr. Spenlow; "I understand there's money.
Beauty too, I am told."

" Indeed ? Is his new wife young ? "

" Just of age," said Mr. Spenlow. " So lately, that I should
think they had been waiting for that."





" Lord deliver her ! " said Peggotty. So very emphatically
and unexpectedly, that we were all three discomposed ; until
Tiffey came in with the bill.

Old Tiffey soon appeared, however, and handed it to Mr.
Spenlow, to look over. Mr. Spenlow, settling his chin in his
cravat and rubbing it softly, went over the items with a depre-
catory air — as if it were all Jorkins's doing — and handed it
back to Tiffey with a bland sigh.

"Yes," he said. "That's right. Quite right. I should
have been extremely happy, Copperfield, to have limited these
charges to the actual expenditure out of pocket, but it is an
irksome incident in my professional life, that I am not at
liberty to consult my own wishes. I have a partner — Mr.
Jorkins."

As he said this with a gentle melancholy, which was the
next thing to making no charge at all, I expressed my acknowl-
edgments on Peggotty's behalf, and paid Tiffey in bank notes.
Peggotty then retired to her lodging, and Mr. Spenlow and I
went into Court, where we had a divorce-suit coming on, under
an ingenious little statute (repealed now, I believe, but in
virtue of which I have seen several marriages annulled), of
which the merits were these. The husband, whose name was
Thomas Benjamin, had taken out his marriage license as
Thomas only; suppressing the Benjamin, in case he should not
find himself as comfortable as he expected. ' Not finding him-
self as comfortable as he expected, or being a little fatigued
with his wife, poor fellow, he now came forward, by a friend,
after being married a year or two, and declared that his name
was Thomas Benjamin, and therefore he was not married at all.
Which the Court confirmed, to his great satisfaction.

I must say that I had my doubts about the strict justice of
this, and was not even frightened out of them by the bushel of
wheat which reconciles all anomalies.

But Mr. Spenlow argued the matter with me. He said,
Look at the world, there was good and evil in that ; look at
the ecclesiastical law, there was good and evil in that. It was
all part of a system. Very good. There you were !

I had not the hardihood to suggest to Dora's father that
possibly we might even improve the world a little, if we got



46 THE PERSONAL HISTOBY AND EXPERIENCE

up early in the morning, and took off our coats to the work ;
but I confessed that I thought we might improve the Com-
mons. Mr. Spenlow replied that he would particularly advise
me to dismiss that idea from my mind, as not being worthy of
my gentlemanly character ; but that he would be glad to hear
from me of what improvement I thought the Commons sus-
ceptible ?

Taking that part of the Commons which happened to be
nearest to us — for our man was unmarried by this time, and
we were out of Court, and strolling past the Prerogative
Office — I submitted that I thought the Prerogative Office
rather a queerly managed institution. Mr. Spenlow inquired
in what respect ? I replied, with all due deference to his
experience (but with more deference, I am afraid, to his being
Dora's father), that perhaps* it was a little nonsensical that
the Eegistry of that Court, containing the original wills of all
persons leaving effects within the immense province of Canter-
bury, for three whole centuries, should be an accidental build-
ing, never designed for the purpose, leased by the registrars
for their own private emolument, unsafe, not even ascertained
to be fire-proof, choked with the important documents it held,
and positively, from*the roof to the basement, a mercenary
speculation of the registrars, who took great fees from the
public, and crammed the public's wills away anyhow and any-
where, having no other object than to get rid of them cheaply.
That, perhaps, it was a little unreasonable that these registrars
in the receipt of profits amounting to eight or nine thousand
pounds a year (to say nothing of the profits of the deputy
registrars, and clerks of seats), should not be obliged to spend
a little of that money, in finding a reasonably safe place for
the important documents which all classes of people were com-
pelled to hand over to them, whether they would or no. That,
perhaps, it was a little unjust that all the great offices in this
great office, should be magnificent sinecures, while the unfor-
tunate working-clerks in the cold dark room up stairs were
the worst rewarded, and the least considered men, doing
important services, in London. That perhaps it Was a little
indecent that the principal registrar of all, whose duty it was
to find the public, constantly resorting to this place, all need-





ful accommodation, should bean enormous sinecurist in virtue
of that post (and might be, besides, a clergyman, a pluralist,
the holder of a stall in a cathedral, and what not), — while the
public was put to the inconvenience of which we had a speci-
men every afternoon when- the office was busy, and which we
knew to be quite monstrous. That, perhaps, in short, this
Prerogative Office of the diocese of Canterbury was altogether
such a pestilent job, and such a pernicious absurdity, that but
for its being squeezed away, in a corner of Saint PauPs Church-
yard, which few people knew, it must have been turned com-
pletely inside out, and upside down, long ago.

Mr. Spenlow smiled as I became modestly warm on the sub-
ject, and then argued this question with me as he had argued
the other. He said, what was it after all ? It was a question
of feeling. If the public felt that their wills were in safe
keeping, and took it for granted that the office was not to be
made better, who was the worse for it ? Nobody. Who was
the better for it ? All the sinecurists. Very well. Then the
good predominated. It might not be a perfect system ; noth-
ing was perfect ; but what he objected to, was, the insertion
of the wedge. Under the Prerogative Office, the country had
been glorious. Insert the wedge into the Prerogative Office,
and the country would cease to be glorious. He considered it
the principle of a gentleman to take things as he found them ;
and he had no doubt the Prerogative Office would last our
time. I deferred to his opinion, though I had great doubts of it
myself. I find he was right, however ; for it has not only lasted
to the present moment, but has done so in the teeth of a great
parliamentary report made (not too willingly) eighteen years
ago, when all these objections of mine were set forth in detail,
and when the existing stowage for wills was described as equal
to the accumulation of only two years and a half more. What
they have done with them since ; whether they have lost many,
or whether they sell any, now and then, to the butter shops ;
I don't know. I am glad mine is not there, and I hope it may
not go there, yet awhile.

I have set all this down, in my present blissful chapter,
because here it comes into its natural place. Mr. Spenlow and
I falling into this conversation; prolonged it and our saunter



48 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

to and fro, until we diverged into general topics. And so it
came about, in the end, that Mr. Spenlow told me this day
week was Dora's birthday, and he would be glad if I would
come down and join a little picnic on the occasion. I went
out of my senses immediately ; became a mere driveller next
day, on receipt of a little lace-edged sheet of note paper,
" Favored by papa. To remind ; n and passed the intervening
period in a state of dotage.

I think I committed every possible absurdity, in the way of
preparation for this blessed event. I turn hot when I remem-
ber the cravat I bought. My boots might be placed in any
collection of instruments of torture. I provided, and sent
down by the Norwood coach the night before, a delicate little
hamper, amounting in itself, I thought, almost to a declaration.

There were crackers in it with the tenderest mottoes that
could be got for money. At six in the morning, I was in
Covent Garden Market, buying a bouquet for Dora. At ten I
was on horseback (I hired a gallant gray, for the occasion),
with the bouquet in my hat, to keep it fresh, trotting down, to
Norwood.

I suppose that when I saw Dora in the garden and pretended
not to see her, and rode past the house pretending to be
anxiously looking for it, I committed two small fooleries which
other young gentlemen in my circumstances might have
committed — because they came so very natural to me. But
oh ! when I did find the house, and did dismount at the
garden gate, and drag those stony-hearted boots across the
lawn to Dora sitting on a garden seat under a lilac tree, what
a spectacle she was, upon that beautiful morning, among the
butterflies, in a white chip bonnet and a dress of celestial
blue!

There was a young lady with her — comparatively stricken
in years — almost twenty, I should say. Her name was Miss
Mills, and Dora called her Julia. She was the bosom friend
of Dora, Happy Miss Mills !

Jip was there, and Jip would bark at me again. When I
presented my bouquet, he gnashed his teeth with jealousy.
Well he might. If he had the least idea how I adored his
mistress, well he might !





" Oh, thank you, Mr. Copperfield ! What dear flowers ! "
said Dora.

I had had an intention of saying (and had been studying
the best form of words for three miles) that I thought them
beautiful before I saw them so near her. But I couldn't
manage it. She was too bewildering. To see her lay the
flowers against her little dimpled chin, was to lose all presence
of mind and power of language in a feeble ecstasy. I wonder
I didn't say, "Kill me, if you have a heart, Miss Mills. Let
me die here ! "

Then Dora held my flowers to Jip to smell. Then Jip
growled, and wouldn't smell them. Then Dora laughed, and
held them a little closer to Jip, to make him. Then Jip laid
hold of a bit of geranium with his teeth, and worried imagin-
ary cats in it. Then Dora beat him, and pouted, and said,
" My poor beautiful flowers ! " as compassionately, I thought,
as if Jip had laid hold of me. I wished he had !

" You'll be so glad to hear, Mr. Copperfield/' said Dora,
" that that cross Miss Murdstone is not here. She has gone
to her brother's marriage, and will be away at least three
weeks. Isn't that delightful ? " *

I said I was sure it must be delightful to her, and all that
was delightful to her was delightful to me. Miss Mills, with
an air of superior wisdom and benevolence, smiled upon us.

" She is the most disagreeable thing I ever saw," said Dora.
"You can't believe how ill-tempered and shocking she is,
Julia."

" Yes, I can, my dear ! " said Julia.

" You can, perhaps, love," returned Dora, with her hand on
Julia's. "Forgive my not excepting you, my dear, at first."

I learnt, from this, that Miss Mills had had her trials in
the course of a chequered existence; and that to these,
perhaps, I might refer that wise benignity of manner which I
had already noticed. I found, in the course of the day, that
this was the case : Miss Mills having been unhappy in a
misplaced affection, and being understood to have retired
from the world on her awful stock of experience, but still to
take a calm interest in the unblighted hopes and loves of
youth.

VOL. II — 4



50 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

But now Mr. Spenlow came out of the house, and Dora
went to him, saying, " Look, papa, what beautiful flowers ! "
And Miss Mills smiled thoughtfully, as who should say, " Ye
May-flies enjoy your brief existence in the bright morning of
life ! " And we all walked from the lawn towards the car-
riage, which was getting ready.

I shall never have such a ride again. I have never had
such another. There were only those three, their hamper,
my hamper, and the guitar-case, in the phaeton; and, of
course, the phaeton was open ; and I rode behind it, and
Dora sat with her back to the horses, looking towards me.
She kept the bouquet close to her on the cushion, and wouldn't
allow Jip to sit on that side of her at all, for fear he should
crush it. She often carried it in her hand, often refreshed
herself with its fragrance. Our eyes at those times often
met ; and my great astonishment is that I didn't go over the
head of my gallant gray into the carriage.

There was dust, I believe. There was a good deal of dust,
I believe. I have a faint impression that Mr. Spenlow
remonstrated with me for riding in it ; but I knew of none.
I was sensible of a mist of love and beauty about Dora, but
of nothing else. He stood up sometimes, and asked me what
I thought of the prospect. I said it was delightful, and I
dare say it was ; but it was all Dora to me. The sun shone
Dora, and the birds sang Dora. The south wind blew Dora,
and the wild flowers in the hedges were all Doras, to a bud.
My comfort is, Miss Mills understood me. Miss Mills alone
could enter into my feelings thoroughly.

I don't know how long we were going, and to this hour I
know as little where we went. Perhaps it was near Guildford.
Perhaps some Arabian-night magician opened up the place for
the day, and shut it up for ever when we came away. It was
a green spot, on a hill, carpeted with soft turf. There were
shady trees, and heather, and, as far as the eye could see, a
rich landscape.

It was a trying thing to find people here, waiting for us ;
and my jealousy, even of the ladies, knew no bounds. But
all of my own sex — especially one impostor, three or four
years my elder, with a red whisker, on which he established



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 51

an amount of presumption not to be endured — were my
mortal foes.

We all unpacked our baskets, and employed ourselves in
getting dinner ready. Eed Whisker pretended he could make
a salad (which I don't believe); and obtruded himself on pub-
lic notice. Some of the young ladies washed the lettuces for
him, and sliced them under his directions. Dora was among
these. I felt that fate had pitted me against this man, and
one of us must fall.

Eed Whisker made his salad (I wondered how they could
eat it. Nothing should have induced me to touch it !) and
voted himself into the charge of the wine-cellar, which he
constructed, being an ingenious beast, in the hollow trunk of a
tree. By and by I saw him, with the majority of a lobster on
his plate, eating his dinner at the feet of Dora !

I have but an indistinct idea of what happened for some
time after this baleful object presented itself to my view. I
was very merry, I know; but it was hollow merriment. I
attached myself to a young creature in pink, with little eyes,
and flirted with her desperately. She received my attentions
with favor ; but whether on my account solely, or because she
had any designs on Eed Whisker, I can't say. Dora's health
was drunk. When I drank it, I affected to interrupt my con-
versation for that purpose, and to resume it immediately after-
wards. I caught Dora's eye as I. bowed to her, and I thought
it looked appealing. But it looked at me over the head of
Eed Whisker, and I was adamant.

The young creature in pink had a mother in green ; and I
rather think the latter separated us, from motives of policy.
Howbeit, there was a general breaking up of the party, while
the remnants of the dinner were being put away ; and I
strolled off by myself among the trees, in a raging and
remorseful state. I was debating whether I should pretend
that I was not well, and fly — I don't know where — upon my
gallant gray, when Dora and Miss Mills met me.

"Mr. Copperfield," said Miss Mills, "you are dull."

I begged her pardon. Not at all.

"And Dora," said Miss Mills, "you are dull."

Oh, dear, no ! Not in the least.



62 THE PEBSONAL HISTOBY AND EXPEBIENCE

"Mr. Copperfield and Dora," said [Miss Mills, with an
almost venerable air. " Enough of this. Do not allow a
trivial misunderstanding to wither the blossoms of spring,
which, once put forth and blighted, cannot be renewed. I
speak," said Miss Mills, " from experience of the past — the
remote irrevocable past. The gushing fountains which sparkle
in the sun must not be stopped in mere caprice ; the oasis in
the desert of Sahara, must not be plucked up idly."

I hardly knew what I did, I was burning all over to that
extraordinary extent; but I took Dora's little hand and kissed
it — and she let me ! I kissed Miss Mills's hand ; and we all
seemed, to my thinking, to go straight up to the seventh
heaven.

We did not come down again. We stayed up there all the
evening. At first we strayed to and fro among the trees : I
with Dora's shy arm drawn through mine : and Heaven
knows, folly as it all was, it would have been a happy fate to
have been struck immortal with those foolish feelings, and
have strayed among the trees for ever !

But, much too soon, we heard the others laughing and talk-
ing, and calling " Where's Dora ! " So we went back, and
they wanted Dora to sing. Eed Whisker would have got the
guitar-case out of the carriage, but Dora told him nobody
knew where it was, but I. So Red Whisker was done for in
a moment ; and I* got it, and I unlocked it, and i" took the
guitar out, and I sat by her, and i* held her handkerchief and
gloves, and J drank in every note of her dear voice, and she
sang to me who loved her, and all the others might applaud as
much as they liked, but they had nothing to do with it !

I was intoxicated with joy. I was afraid it was too happy
to be real, and that I should wake in Buckingham Street pres-
ently, and hear Mrs. Crupp clinking the teacups in getting
breakfast ready. But Dora sang, and others sang, and Miss
Mills sang — about the slumbering echoes in the caverns of
Memory ; as if she were a hundred years old — and the even-
ing came on ; and we had tea, with the kettle boiling gipsy-
fashion ; and I w r as still as happy as ever.

I was happier than ever when the party broke up, and the
other people, defeated Red Whisker and all, went their several






OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 53

ways, and we went ours through the still evening and the
dying light, with sweet scents rising up around us. Mr. Spen-
low being a little drowsy after the champagne — honor to the
soil that grew the grape, to the grape that made the wine, to
the sun that ripened it, and to the merchant who adulterated
it ! — and being fast asleep in a corner of the carriage, I rode
by the side and talked to Dora. She admired my horse and
patted him — oh, what a dear little hand it looked upon a
horse ! — and her shawl would not keep right, and now and
then I drew it round her with my arm ; and I even fancied
that Jip began to see how it was, and to understand that he
must make up his mind to be friends with me.

That sagacious Miss Mills, too ; that amiable, though quite
used up, recluse ; that little patriarch of something less than
twenty, who had done with the world, and mustn't on any
account have the slumbering echoes in the caverns of Memory
awakened ; what a kind thing she did !

" Mr. Copperfield," said Miss Mills, " come to this side of
the carriage a moment — if you can spare a moment. I want
to speak to you."

Behold me, on my gallant gray, bending at the side of Miss
Mills, with my hand upon the carriage door !

"Dora is coming to stay with me. She is coming home with
me the day after to-morrow. If you would like to call, I am
sure papa would be happy to see you."

What could I do but invoke a silent blessing on Miss Mills's
head, and store Miss Mills's address in the securest corner of
my memory ! What could I do but tell Miss Mills, with
grateful looks and fervent words, how much I appreciated her
good offices, and what an inestimable value I set upon her
friendship !

Then Miss Mills benignantly dismissed me, saying, " G-o
back to Dora ! " and I went ; and Dora leaned out of the car-
riage to talk to me, and we talked all the rest of the way ; and
I rode my gallant gray so close to the wheel that I grazed his
near fore-leg against it, and "took the bark off," as his owner
told me, " to the tune of three pun' sivin " — which I paid,
and thought extremely cheap for so much joy. What time
Miss Mills sat looking at the moon, murmuring verses and



54 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

recalling, I suppose, the ancient days when she and earth had
anything in common.

Norwood was many miles too near, and we reached it many
hours too soon ; but Mr. Spenlow came to himself a little short
of it, and said, " You must come in, Copperfield, and rest ! "
and I consenting, we had sandwiches and wine-and-water. In
the light room, Dora blushing looked so lovely, that I could
not tear myself away, but sat there staring, in a dream, until
the snoring of Mr. Spenlow* inspired me with sufficient con-
sciousness to take my leave. So we parted; I riding all the
way to London with the farewell touch of Dora's hand, still
light on mine, recalling every incident and word ten thousand
times ; lying down in my own bed at last, as enraptured a
young noodle as ever was carried out of his five wits by
love.

When I awoke next morning, I was resolute to declare my
passion to Dora, and know my fate. Happiness or misery
was now the question. There was no other question that I
knew of in the world, and only Dora could give the answer
to it. I passed three days in a luxury of wretchedness, tortur-
ing myself by putting every conceivable variety of discouraging
construction on all that ever had taken place between Dora and
me. At last, arrayed for the purpose at a vast expense, I went
to Miss Mills's, fraught with a declaration.

How many times I went up and down the street, and round
the square — painfully aware of being a much better answer to
the old riddle than the original one — before I could persuade
myself to go up the steps and knock, is no matter now. Even
when, at last, I had knocked, and was waiting at the door, I
had some flurried thought of asking if that were Mr. Blackboy's
(in imitation of poor Barkis), begging pardon, and retreating.
But I kept my ground.

Mr. Mills was not at home. I did not expect he would be.
Nobody wanted him. Miss Mills was at home. Miss Mills
would do.

I was shown into a room up stairs, where Miss Mills and
Dora were. Jip was there. Miss Mills was copying music
(I recollect, it was a new song, called Affection's Dirge), and
Dora was painting flowers. What were my feelings, when I



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 55

recognized my own flowers ; the identical Covent Garden Mar-
ket purchase ! I cannot say that they were very like, or
that they particularly resembled any flowers that have ever
come under my observation ; but I knew from the paper round
them, which was accurately copied, what the composition was.

Miss Mills was very glad to see me, and very sorry her papa
was not at home : though I thought we all bore that with for-
titude. Miss Mills was conversational for a few minutes, and
then, laying down her pen upon Affection's Dirge, got up, and
left the room.

I began* to think I would put it off till to-morrow.

" I hope your poor horse was not tired, when he got home
at night," said Dora, lifting up her beautiful eyes. "It was a
long way for him."

I began to think I would do it to-day.

" It was a long way for him" said I, " for he had nothing to
uphold him on the journey."

" Wasn't he fed, poor thing ? " asked Dora.

I began to think I would put it off till to-morrow.

H Ye — yes," I said, " he was well taken care of. I mean
he had not the unutterable happiness that I had in being so
near you."

Dora bent her head over her drawing, and said, after a little
while — I had sat, in the interval, in a burning fever, and with
my legs in a very rigid state —

" You didn't seem to be sensible of that happiness yourself,
at one time of the day.

I saw now that I was in for it, and it must be done on the
spot.

"You didn't care for that happiness in the least," said Dora,
slightly raising her eyebrows, and shaking her head, "when
you were sitting by Miss Kitt."

Kitt, I should observe, was the name of the creature in pink,
with the little eyes.

"Though certainly I don't know why you should," said
Dora, " or why you should call it a happiness at all. But of
course you don't mean what you say. And I am sure no one
doubts your being at liberty to do whatever you like. Jip, you
naughty boy, come here ! "



56 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

I don't know how I did it. I did it in a moment. I inter-
cepted Jip. I had Dora in my arms. I was full of eloquence.
I never stopped for a word. I told her how I loved her. I
told her I should die without her. I told her that I idolized
and worshipped her. Jip barked madly all the time.

When Dora hung her head and cried, and trembled, my elo-
quence increased so much the more. If she would like me to
die for her, she had but to say the word, and I was ready.
Life without Dora's love was not a thing to have on any terms.
I couldn't bear it, and I wouldn't. I had loved her every
minute, day and night, since I first saw her. I loved her at
that minute to distraction. I should always love her, every
minute, to distraction. Lovers had loved before, and lovers
would love again ; but no lover had ever loved, might, could,
would, or should ever love, as I loved Dora. The more I
raved, the more Jip barked. Each of us, in his own way, got
more mad every moment.

Well, well ! Dora and I were sitting on the sofa by and by,
quiet enough, and Jip was lying in her lap, winking peacefully
at me. It was off my mind. I was in a state of perfect rap-
ture. Dora and I were engaged.

I suppose we had some notion that this was to end in mar-
riage. We must have had some, because Dora stipulated that
we were never to be married without her papa's consent. But
in our youthful ecstasy, I don't think that we really looked
before us or behind us; or had any aspiration beyond the
ignorant present. We were to keep our secret from Mr. Spen-
low ; but I am sure the idea never entered my head then, that
there was anything dishonorable in that.

Miss Mills was more than usually pensive when Dora, going
to find her, brought her back ; — I apprehend, because there
was a tendency in what had passed to awaken the slumbering
echoes in the caverns of memory. But she gave us her bless-
ing, and the assurance of her lasting friendship, and spoke to
us, generally, as became a Voice from the Cloister.

What an idle time it was ! What an unsubstantial, happy,
foolish time it was !

When I measured Dora's finger for a ring that was to be
made of forget-me-nots, and when the jeweller, to whom I





took the measure, found me out, and laughed over his order
book, and charged me anything he liked for the pretty little
toy, with its blue stones — so associated in my remembrance
with Dora's hand, that yesterday, when I saw such another,
by chance, on the finger of my own daughter, there was a
momentary stirring in my heart, like pain !

When I walked about, exalted with my secret, and full of
my own interest, and felt the dignity of loving Dora, and of
being beloved, so much, that if I had walked the air, I could
not have been more above the people not so situated, who were
creeping on the earth !

When we had those meetings in the garden of the square,
and sat within the dingy summer-house, so happy, that I love
the London sparrows to this hour, for nothing else, and see
the plumage of the tropics in their smoky feathers !

When we had our first great quarrel (within a week of our
betrothal), and when Dora sent me back the ring, enclosed in
a despairing cocked-hat note, wherein she used the terrible
expression that "our love had begun in folly, and ended in
madness ! " which dreadful words occasioned me to tear my
hair, and cry that all was over !

When, under cover of the night, I flew to Miss Mills, whom
I saw by stealth in a back kitchen where there was a mangle,
and implored Miss Mills to interpose between us and avert
insanity. When Miss Mills undertook the office and returned
with Dora, exhorting us from the pulpit of her own bitter
youth, to mutual concession, and the avoidance of the Desert
of Sahara !

When we cried, and made it up, and were so blest again,
that the back-kitchen, mangle and all, changed to Love's own
temple, where we arranged a plan of correspondence through
Miss Mills, always to comprehend at least one letter on each
side every day !

What an idle time ! What an unsubstantial, happy, foolish
time ! Of all the times of mine that Time has in his grip,
there is none that in one retrospection I can smile at half so
much, and think of half so tenderly.



58 THE FEB SON AL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE



CHAPTER V.

MY AUNT ASTONISHES ME.

I wrote to Agnes as soon as Dora and I were engaged.
I wrote her a long letter, in which I tried to make her com-
prehend how blest I was, and what a darling Dora was. I
entreated Agnes not to regard this as a thoughtless passion
which could ever yield to any other, or had the least resem-
blance to the boyish fancies that we used to joke about. I
assured her that its profundity was quite unfathomable, and
expressed my belief that nothing like it had ever been known.

Somehow, as I wrote to Agnes on a fine evening by my
open window, and the remembrance of her clear calm eyes
and gentle face came stealing over me, it shed such a peaceful
influence upon the hurry and agitation in which I had been
living lately, and of which my very happiness partook in some
degree, that it soothed me into tears. I remember that I sat
resting my head upon my hand, when the letter was half
done, cherishing a general fancy as if Agnes were one of the
elements of my natural home. As if, in the retirement of the
house made almost sacred to me by her presence, Dora and I
must be happier than anywhere. As if, in love, joy, sorrow,
hope, or disappointment; in all emotions; my heart turned
naturally there, and found its refuge and best friend.

Of Steerforth, I said nothing. I only told her there had
been sad grief at Yarmouth, on account of Emily's flight;
and that on me it made a double wound, by reason of the cir-
cumstances attending it. I knew how quick she always was
to divine the truth, and that she would never be the first to
breathe his name.

To this letter, I received an answer by return of post. As
I read it, I seemed to hear Agnes speaking to me. It was like
her cordial voice in my ears. What can I say more !

While I had been away from home lately, Traddles had



OF DAVID COPPEEFIELD. 59

called twice or thrice. Finding Peggotty within, and being
informed by Peggotty (who always volunteered that informa-
tion to whomsoever would receive it), that she was my old
nurse, he had established a good-humored acquaintance with
her, and had stayed to have a little chat with her about me.
So Peggotty said ; but I am afraid the chat was all on her
own side, and of immoderate length, as she was very difficult
indeed to stop, God bless her ! when she had me for her
theme.

This reminds me, not only that I expected Traddles on a
certain afternoon of his own appointing, which was now come,
but that Mrs. Crupp had resigned everything appertaining to
her office (the salary excepted) until Peggotty should cease to
present herself. Mrs. Crupp, after holding divers conversa-
tions respecting Peggotty, in a very high-pitched voice, on
the staircase — with some invisible Familiar it would appear,
for corporeally speaking she was quite alone at those times —
addressed a letter to me, developing her views. Beginning
it with that statement of universal application, which fitted
every occurrence of her life, namely, that she was a mother
herself, she went on to inform me that she had once seen very
different days, but that at all periods of her existence she had
had a constitutional objection to spies, intruders, and inform-
ers. She named no names, she said ; let them the cap fitted,
wear it ; but spies, intruders, and informers, especially in wid-
ders' weeds (this clause was underlined), she had ever accus-
tomed herself to look down upon. If a gentleman was the
victim of spies, intruders, and informers (but still naming no
names), that was his own pleasure. He had a right to please
himself,; so let him do. All that she, Mrs. Crupp, stipulated
for, was, that she should not be "brought in contract" with
such persons. Therefore she begged to be excused from any
further attendance on the top set, until things were as they
formerly was, and as they could be wished to be ; and further
mentioned that her little book would be found upon the break-
fast-table every Saturday morning, when she requested an
immediate settlement of the same, with the benevolent view
of saving trouble, " and an ill-conwenience " to all parties.

After this, Mrs. Crupp confined herself to making pitfalls



60 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

on the stairs, principally with pitchers, and endeavoring to
delude Peggotty into breaking her legs. I found it rather
harassing to live in this state of siege, but was too much afraid
of Mrs. Crupp to see any way out of it.

"My dear Copperfield," cried Traddles, punctually appearing
at my door, in spite of all these obstacles, " how do you do ? "

"My dear Traddles," said I, "I am delighted to see you at
last, and very sorry I have not been at home before. But I
have been so much engaged — "

" Yes, yes, I know," said Traddles, " of course. Yours lives
in London, I think."

"What did you say?"

" She — excuse me — Miss D., you know," said Traddles,
coloring in his great delicacy, " lives in London, I believe ? "

" Oh, yes. Near London."

" Mine, perhaps you recollect," said Traddles, with a serious
look, "lives down in Devonshire — one of ten. Consequently,
I am not so much engaged as you — in that sense."

" I wonder you can bear," I returned, " to see her so seldom."

" Hah ! " said .Traddles, thoughtfully. " It does seem a
wonder. I suppose it is, Copperfield, because there's no help
for it ? "

"I suppose so," I replied with a smile, and not without a
blush. "And because you have so much constancy and pa-
tience, Traddles."

"Dear me," said Traddles, considering about it, "-do I strike
you in that way, Copperfield ? Really I didn't know that I
had. But she is such an extraordinarily dear girl herself, that
it's possible she may have imparted something of those virtues
to me. Now you mention it, Copperfield, I shouldn't wonder
at all. I assure you she is always forgetting herself, and tak-
ing care of the other nine."

" Is she the eldest ? " I inquired.

"Oh, dear, no," said Traddles. "The eldest is a Beauty."

He saw, I suppose, that I could not help smiling at the
simplicity of this reply ; and added, with a smile upon his own
ingenuous face :

" Not, of course, but that my Sophy — pretty name, Copper-
field, I always think ? "



OF J) AVID COPPEBFIELB. 61

" Very pretty ! " said I.

" Not, of course, but that Sophy is beautiful too in my eyes,
and would be one of the dearest girls that ever was, in any-
body's eyes (I should think). But when I say the eldest is a
Beauty, I mean she really is a — " he seemed to be describing
clouds about himself, with both hands : " Splendid, you know,"
said Traddles, energetically.

"Indeed!" said L

" Oh, I assure you," said Traddles, " something very uncom-
mon, indeed ! Then, you know, being formed for society and
admiration, and not being able to enjoy much of it in conse-
quence of their limited means, she naturally gets a little irri-
table and exacting, sometimes. Sophy puts her in good humor ! "

" Is Sophy the youngest ? " I hazarded.

" Oh, dear, no ! " said Traddles, stroking his chin. " The
two youngest are only nine and ten. Sophy educates 'em."

" The second daughter, perhaps ? " I hazarded.

"JSTo," said Traddles. " Sarah's the second. Sarah has
something the matter with her spine, poor girl. The malady
will wear out by and by, the doctors say, but in the meantime
she has to lie down for a twelvemonth. Sophy nurses her.
Sophy's the fourth."

" Is the mother living ? " I inquired.

" Oh, yes," said Traddles, " she is alive. She is a very supe-
rior woman, indeed, but the damp country is not adapted to her
constitution, and — in fact, she has lost the use of her limbs."

" Dear me ! " said I.

" Very sad, is it not ? " returned Traddles. "But in a merely
domestic view it is not so bad as it might be, because Sophy
takes her place. She is quite as much a mother to her mother,
as she is to the other nine."

I felt the greatest admiration for the virtues of this young
lady 5 and, honestly, with the view of doing my best to prevent
the good-nature of Traddles from being imposed upon, to the
detriment of their joint prospects in life, inquired how Mr.
Micawber was ? "

"He is quite well, Copperfield, thank you," said Traddles.
" I am not living with him at present."

"No?"



62 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

"No. You see the truth is," said Traddles, in a whisper,
" he has changed his name to Mortimer, in consequence of his
temporary embarrassments ; and he don't come out till after
dark — and then in spectacles. There was an execution put
into our house, for rent. Mrs. Micawber was in such a dread-
ful state that I really couldn't resist giving my name to that
second bill we spoke of here. You may imagine how delight-
ful it was to my feelings, Copperfield, to see the matter settled
with it, and Mrs. Micawber recover her spirits."

"Hum!" saidl.

"Not that her happiness was of long duration," pursued
Traddles, " for, unfortunately, within a week another execution
came in. It broke up the establishment. I have been living
in a furnished apartment since then, and the Mortimers have
been very private indeed. I hope you won't think it selfish,
Copperfield, if I mention that the broker carried off my little
round table with the marble top, and Sophy's flower-pot and
stand ? "

"What a hard thing ! " I exclaimed indignantly.

" It was a — it was a pull," said Traddles, with his usual
wince at that expression. "I don't mention it reproachfully,
however, but with a motive. The fact is, Copperfield, I was
unable to repurchase them at the time of their seizure ; in the
first place, because the broker, having an idea that I wanted
them, ran the price up to an extravagant extent ; and, in the
second place, because I — hadn't any money. Now, I have
kept my eye since, upon the broker's shop," said Traddles,
with a great enjoyment of his mystery, "which is up at the top
of Tottenham Court Koad, and, at last, to-day I find them put
out for sale. I have only noticed them from over the way,
because if the broker saw me, bless you, he'd ask any price
for them ! What has occurred to me, having now the money,
is, that perhaps you wouldn't object to ask that good nurse of
yours to come with me to the shop — I can show it her from
round the corner of the next street — and make the best bar-
gain for them, as if they were for herself, that she can ! "

The delight with which Traddles propounded this plan to
me, and the sense he had of its uncommon artfulness, are
among the freshest things in my remembrance.



^> rJ] m^



'//j*




OF DAVID C0PPEBF1ELD. 63

I told him that my old nurse would be delighted to assist
him, and that we would all three take the field together, but
on one condition. That condition was, that he should make a
solemn resolution to grant no more loans of his name, or any-
thing else, to Mr. Micawber.

"My dear Copperfield," said Traddles, "I have already done
so, because I begin to feel that I have not only been incon-
siderate, but that I have been positively unjust to Sophy.
My word being passed to myself, there is no longer any appre-
hension ; but I pledge it to you, too, with the greatest readi-
ness. That first unlucky obligation, I have paid. I have no
doubt Mr. Micawber would have paid it if he could, but he
could not. One thing I ought to mention, which I like very
much in Mr. Micawber, Copperfield. It refers to" the second
obligation, which is not yet due. He don't tell me that it is
provided for, but he says it will be. Now, I think there is
something very fair and honest about that ! "

I was unwilling to damp my good friend's confidence, and
therefore assented. After a little further conversation, we
went round to the chandler's shop to enlist Peggotty ; Traddles
declining to pass the evening with me, both because he en-
dured the liveliest apprehensions that his property would be
bought by somebody else before he could repurchase it, and
because it was the evening he always devoted to writing to
the dearest girl in the world.

I never shall forget him peeping round the corner of the
street in Tottenham Court Road, while Peggotty was bargain-
ing for the precious articles ; or his agitation when she came
slowly towards us after vainly offering a price, and was hailed
by the relenting broker, and went back again. The end of the
negotiation was, that she bought the property on tolerably
easy terms, and Traddles was transported with pleasure.

" I am very much obliged to you, indeed," said Traddles,
on hearing it was to be sent to where he lived, that night.
" If I might ask one other favor, I hope you would not think
it absurd, Copperfield ? "

I said beforehand, certainly not,

"Then if you would be good enough," aaid Traddles to



64 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

Peggotty, "to get the flower-pot now, I think I should like
(it being Sophy's, Copperfield) to carry it home myself ! "

Peggotty was glad to get it for him, and he overwhelmed
her with thanks, and went his way np Tottenham Court Road,
carrying the flower-pot affectionately in his arms, with one of
the most delighted expressions of countenance I ever saw.

We then turned back towards my chambers. As the shops
had charms for Peggotty which I never knew them possess in
the same degree for anybody else, I sauntered easily along,
amused by her staring in at the windows, and waiting for her
as often as she chose. We were thus a good while in getting
to the Adelphi.

On our way up stairs, I called her attention to the sudden
disappearance of Mrs. Crupp's pitfalls, and also to the prints
of recent footsteps. We were both very much surprised, com-
ing higher up, to find my outer door standing open (which I
had shut), and to hear voices inside.

We looked at one another, without knowing what to make
of this, and went into the sitting-room. What was my amaze-
ment to find, of all people upon earth, my aunt there, and Mr.
Dick! My aunt sitting on a quantity of luggage, with her
two birds before her, and her cat on her knee, like a female
Robinson Crusoe, drinking tea. Mr. Dick leaning thought-
fully on a great kite, such as we had often been out together
to fly, with more luggage piled about him !

"My dear aunt!" cried I. "Why, what an unexpected
pleasure ! "

We cordially embraced; and Mr. Dick and I cordially
shook hands ; and Mrs. Crupp, who was busy making tea, and
could not be too attentive, cordially said she had knowed well
as Mr. Copperfull would have his heart in his mouth, when he
see his dear relations.

" Halloa ! " said my aunt to Peggotty, who quailed before
her awful presence. " How are you ? "

" You remember my aunt, Peggotty ? * said I.

"Por the love of goodness, child," exclaimed my aunt,
" don't call the woman by that South Sea Island name ! If
she married and got rid of it, which was the best thing she
could do, why don't you give her the benefit of the change ?



OF DAVID COPPJEEFIJELD. 65

What's your name now, — P ? " said my aunt, as a compro-
mise for the obnoxious appellation.

" Barkis, ma'am," said Peggotty, with a courtesy.

" Well ! That's human/' said my aunt. " It sounds less as
if you wanted a Missionary. How d'ye do, Barkis ? I hope
you're well ? "

Encouraged by these gracious words, and by my aunt's
extending her hand, Barkis came forward, and took the hand,
and courtesied her acknowledgments.

" We are older than we were, I see," said my aunt. " We
have only met each other once before, you know. A nice
business we made of it then ! Trot, my dear, another cup."

I handed it dutifully to my aunt, who was in her usual
inflexible state of figure ; and ventured a remonstrance with
her on the subject of her sitting on a box.

" Let me draw the sofa here, or the easy chair, aunt," said I.
"Why should you be so uncomfortable ?"

" Thank you, Trot," replied my aunt. " I prefer to sit upon
my property." Here my aunt looked hard at Mrs. Crupp, and
observed, " We needn't trouble you to wait, ma'am."

" Shall I put a little more tea in the pot afore I go, ma'am ? "
said Mrs. Crupp.

" No, I thank you, ma'am," replied my aunt.

" Would you let me fetch another pat of butter, ma'am ? "
said Mrs. Crupp. " Or would you be persuaded to try a new-
laid hegg ? or should I brile a rasher ? Ain't there nothing I
could do for your dear aunt, Mr. Copperfull ? "

"Nothing, ma'am," returned my aunt. "I shall do very
well, I thank you."

Mrs. Crupp, who had been incessantly smiling to express
sweet temper, and incessantly holding her head on one side, to
express a general feebleness of constitution, and incessantly
rubbing her hands, to express a desire to be of service to all
deserving objects, gradually smiled herself, one-sided herself,
and rubbed herself, out of the room.

" Dick ? " said my aunt. " You know what I told you about
time-servers and wealth-worshippers ? "

Mr. Dick — with rather a scared look, as if he had forgotten
it — returned a hasty answer in the affirmative.

VOL. II — 6



66 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AJSTJ) EXPERIENCE

" Mrs. Crupp is one of them," said my aunt. " Barkis, I'll
trouble you to look after the tea, and let me have another cup,
for I don't fancy that woman's pouring out ! "

I knew my aunt sufficiently well to know that she had some-
thing of importance on her mind, and that there was far more
matter in this arrival than a stranger might have supposed.
I noticed how her eye lighted on me, when she thought my
attention otherwise occupied; and what a curious process of
hesitation appeared to be going on within her, while she pre-
served her outward stiffness and composure. I began to reflect
whether I had done anything to offend her ; and my conscience
whispered me that I had not yet told her about Dora. Could
it by any means be that, I wondered !

As I knew she would only speak in her own good time, I
sat down near her, and spoke to the birds, and played with the
cat, and was as easy as I could be. But I was very far from
being really easy ; and I should still have been so, even if
Mr. Dick, leaning over the great kite behind my aunt, had not
taken eveiy secret opportunity of shaking his head darkly at
me, and pointing at her.

"Trot/' said my aunt at last, when she had finished her
tea, and carefully smoothed down her dress, and wiped her
lips — " you needn't go, Barkis ! — Trot, have you got to be
firm and self-reliant ? "

" I hope so, aunt."

"What do you think ?" inquired Miss Betsey.

" I think so, aunt."

"Then why, my love," said my aunt, looking earnestly at
me, " why do you think I prefer to sit upon this property of
mine to-night ? "

I shook my head, unable to guess.

"Because," said my aunt, "it's all I have. Because I'm
ruined, my dear ! "

If the house, and every one of us, had tumbled out into the
river together, I could hardly have received a greater shock.

" Dick knows it," said my aunt, laying her hand calmly on
my shoulder. " I am ruined, my dear Trot ! All I have in
the world is in this room, except the cottage ; and that I have
left Janet to let. Barkis, I want to get a bed for this gentle-



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 67

man to-night. To save expense, perhaps you can make up
something here for myself. Anything will do. It's only for
to-night. We'll talk about this, more, to-morrow."

I was ronsed from my amazement, and concern for her — I
am sure, for her — by her falling on my neck for a moment,
and crying that she only grieved for me. In another moment,
she suppressed this emotion ; and said, with an aspect more
triumphant than dejected:

"We must meet reverses boldly, and not suffer them to
frighten us, my dear. We must learn to act the play out.
We must live misfortune down, Trot ! ;;



68 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE



CHAPTEE VI.

DEPRESSION,

As soon as I could recover my presence of mind, which
quite deserted me in the first overpowering shock of my aunt's
intelligence, I proposed to Mr. Dick to come round to the
chandler's shop/ and take possession of the bed which Mr.
Peggotty had lately vacated. The chandler's shop being in
Hiingerford Market, and Hungerford Market being a very dif-
ferent place in those days, there was a low wooden colonnade
before the door (not very unlike that before the house where
the little man and woman used to live, in the old weather-
glass), which pleased Mr. Dick mightily. The glory of lodg-
ing over this structure would have compensated him, I dare
say, for many inconveniences ; but, as there were really few to
bear, beyond the compound of flavors I have already men-
tioned, and perhaps the want of a little more elbow-room, he
was perfectly charmed with his accommodation. Mrs. Crupp
had indignantly assured him that there wasn't room to swing
a cat there ; but, as Mr. Dick justly observed to me, sitting
down on the foot of the bed, nursing his leg, " You know,
Trotwood, I don't want to swing a , cat. I never do swing a
cat. Therefore, what does that signify to me I "

I tried to ascertain whether Mr. Dick had any understand-
ing of the causes of this sudden and great change in my aunt's
affairs. As I might have expected, he had none at all. The
only account he could give of it, was, that my aunt had said to
him, the day before yesterday, " Now, Dick, are you really and
truly the philosopher I take you for?" That then he had
said, Yes, he hoped so. That then my aunt had said, " Dick,
I am ruined." That then he had said, "Oh, indeed!" That
then my aunt had praised him highly, which he was very glad
of. And that then they had come to me, and had had bottled
porter and sandwiches on the road.



OF DAVID COPPUBFIELD. 69

Mr. Dick was so very complacent, sitting on the foot of the
bed, nursing his leg, and telling me this, with his eyes wide
open and a surprised smile, that I am sorry to say I was pro-
voked into explaining to him that ruin meant distress, want,
and starvation; but, I was soon bitterly reproved for this
harshness, by seeing his face turn pale, and tears course down
his lengthened cheeks, while he fixed upon me a look of such
unutterable woe, that it might have softened a far harder heart
than mine. I took infinitely greater pains to cheer him up
again than I had taken to depress him ; and I soon understood
(as I ought to have known at first) that he had been so confi-
dent, merely because of his faith in the wisest and most won-
derful of women, and his unbounded reliance on my intellectual
resources. The latter, I believe, he considered a match for
any kind of disaster not absolutely mortal.

"What can we do, Trotwood?" said Mr. Dick. "There's
the Memorial — "

"To be sure there is," said I. "But all we can do just now,
Mr. Dick, is to keep a cheerful countenance, and not let my
aunt see that we are thinking about it."

He assented to this in the most earnest manner; and im-
plored me, if I should see him wandering an inch out of the
right course, to recall him by some of those superior methods
which were always at my command. But I regret to state
that the fright I had given him proved too much for his best
attempts at concealment. All the evening his eyes wandered
to my aunt's face, with an expression of the most dismal
apprehension, as if he saw her growing thin on the spot. He
was conscious of this, and put a constraint upon his head; but
his keeping that immovable, and sitting rolling his eyes like a
piece of machinery, did not mend the matter at all. I saw
him look at the loaf at supper (which happened to be a small
one), as if nothing else stood between us and famine; and
when my aunt insisted on his making his customary repast, 1
detected him in the act of pocketing fragments of his bread
and cheese ; I have no doubt for the purpose of reviving us
with those savings, when we should have reached an advanced
stage of attenuation.

My aunt, on the other hand, v/as in a composed frame of



70 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

mind, which was a lesson to all of us — to me, I am sure. She
was extremely gracious to Peggotty, except when I inadver-
tently called her by that name ; and, strange as I knew she
felt in London, appeared quite at home. She was to have my
bed, and I was to lie in the sitting-room, to keep guard over
her. She made a great point of being so near the river, in
case of a conflagration ; and I suppose really did find some
satisfaction in that circumstance.

" Trot, my dear," said my aunt, when she saw me making
preparations for compounding her usual night-draught, "No!"

"Nothing, aunt?"

" Not wine, my dear. Ale."

"But there is wine here, aunt. And you always have it
made of wine."

"Keep that, in case of sickness," said my aunt. "We
musn't use it carelessly, Trot. Ale for me. Half a pint."

I thought Mr. Dick would have fallen, insensible. My aunt
being resolute, 1 went out and got the ale myself. As it was
growing late, Peggotty and Mr. Dick took that opportunity of
repairing to the chandler's shop together. I parted from him,
poor fellow, at the corner of the street, with his great kite at
his back, a very monument of human misery.

My aunt was walking up and down the room when I re-
turned, crimping the borders of her nightcap with her fingers.
I warmed the ale and made the toast on the usual infallible
principles. When it was ready for her, she was ready for it,
with her. nightcap on, and the skirt of her gown turned back
on her knees.

"My dear," said my aunt, after taking a spoonful of it;
" it's a great deal better than wine. Not half so bilious."

I suppose I looked doubtful, for she added :

" Tut, tut, child. If nothing worse than Ale happens to us,
we are well off."

" I should think so myself, aunt, I am sure," said I.

" Well, then, why donH you think so ? " said my aunt.

" Because you and I are very different people," I returned.

" Stuff and nonsense. Trot," replied my aunt.

My aunt went on with a quiet enjoyment, in which there



OF DAVID GOPPEEFIELD. 71

was very little affectation, if any ; drinking the warm ale with
a teaspoon, and soaking her strips of toast in it.

" Trot," said she, " I don't care for strange faces in general,
but I rather like that Barkis of yours, do you know ! "

" It's better than a hundred pounds to hear you say so ! "
said I;

" It's a most extraordinary world," observed my aunt, rub-
bing her nose ; " how that woman ever got into it with that
name, is unaccountable to me. It would be much more easy
to be born a Jackson, or something of that sort, one would
think."

" Perhaps she thinks so, too ; it's not her fault," said I.

"I suppose not," returned my aunt, rather grudging the
admission; "but it's very aggravating. However, she's Barkis
now. That's some comfort. Barkis is uncommonly fond of
you, Trot."

" There is nothing she would leave undone to prove it,"
said I.

" Nothing, I believe," returned my aunt. " Here, the poor
fool has been begging and praying about handing over some
of her money — because she has got too much of it ! A
simpleton ! "

My aunt's tears of pleasure were positively trickling down
into the warm ale.

a She's the most ridiculous creature that ever was born, 7 '
said my aunt. " I knew, from the first moment when I saw
her with that poor dear blessed baby of a mother of yours,
that she was the most ridiculous of mortals. But there are
good points in Barkis ! "

Affecting to laugh, she got an opportunity of putting her
hand to her eyes. Having availed herself of it, she resumed
her toast and her discourse together.

" Ah ! Mercy upon us ! " sighed my aunt. " I know all
about it, Trot ! Barkis and myself had quite a gossip while
you were out with Dick. I know all about it. I don't know
where these wretched girls expect to go to, for my part. I
wonder they don't knock out their brains against — against
mantelpieces," said my aunt; an idea which was probably
suggested to her by her contemplation of mine.



72 THE PERSONAL HISTOBY AND EXPERIENCE

"Poor Emily!" saidL

"01i ; don't talk to me about poor," returned my aunt.
"She should have thought of that, before she caused so much
misery ! Give me a kiss, Trot. I am sorry for your early
experience."

As I bent forward, she put her tumbler on my knee to
detain me, and said :

" Oh, Trot, Trot ! And so you fancy yourself in love ! Do
you ? "

"Fancy, aunt!" I exclaimed, as red as I could be. "I
adore her with my whole soul ! "

"Dora, indeed!" returned my aunt. "And you mean to
say the little thing is very fascinating, I suppose ? "

" My dear aunt," I replied, " no one can form the least idea
what she is ! "

" Ah ! And not silly ? " said my aunt.

"Silly, aunt!"

I seriously believe it had never once entered my head for a
single moment, to consider whether she was or not. I resented
the idea, of course ; but I was in a manner struck by it, as a
new one altogether.

" Not light-headed ? " said my aunt.

"Light-headed, aunt!" I could only repeat this daring
speculation with the same kind of feeling with which I had
repeated the preceding question.

" Well, well ! " said my aunt. " I only ask. I don't depre-
ciate her. Poor little couple ! And so you think you were
formed for one another, and are to go through a party-supper-
table kind of life, like two pretty pieces of confectionery, dc
you, Trot ! "

She asked me this so kindly, and with such a gentle air, half
playful and half sorrowful, that I was quite touched.

"We are young and inexperienced, aunt, I know," I replied;
" and I dare say we say and think a good deal that is rather
foolish. But we love one another truly, I am sure. If I
thought Dora could ever love anybody else, or cease to love
me ; or that I could ever love anybody else, or cease to love
her ; I don't know what I should do — go out of my mind, I
think!"





" Ah, Trot ! " said my aunt, shaking her head, and smiling
gravely; " blind, blind, blind!" *

u Some one that I know, Trot," my aunt pursued, after a
pause, " though of a very pliant disposition, has an earnestness
of affection in him that reminds me of poor Baby. Earnest-
ness is what that Somebody must look for, to sustain him
and improve him, Trot. Deep, downright, faithful earnest-
ness."

" If you only knew the earnestness of Dora, aunt ! " I cried.

"Oh, Trot!" she said again; "blind, blind!" and without
knowing why, I felt a vague unhappy loss or want of some-
thing overshadow me like a cloud.

" However," said my aunt, " I don't want to put two young
creatures out of conceit with themselves, or to make them
unhappy; so, though it is a girl and boy attachment, and
girl and boy attachments very often — mind! I don't say
always ! — come to nothing, still we'll be serious about it, and
hope for a prosperous issue one of these days. There's time
enough for it to come to anything ! "

This was not upon the whole very comforting to a rapturous
lover ; but I was glad to have my aunt in my confidence, and I
was mindful of her being fatigued. So I thanked her ardently
for this mark of her affection, and for all her other kindnesses
towards me ; and after a tender good night, she took her night-
cap into my bed-room.

How miserable I was, when I lay down ! How I thought
and thought of my being poor, in Mr. Spenlow's eyes; about
my not being what I thought I was, when I proposed to Dora;
about the chivalrous necessity of telling Dora what my worldly
condition was, and releasing her from her engagement if she
thought fit ; about how I should contrive to live, during the
long term .of my articles, when I was earning nothing; about
doing something to assist my aunt, and seeing no way of
doing anything; about coming down to have no money in
my pocket, and to wear a shabby coat, and to be able to carry
Dora no little presents, and to ride no gallant grays, and to
show myself in no agreeable light ! Sordid and selfish as I
knew' it was, and as I tortured myself by knowing that it was,
to let my mind run on my own distress so much, I was so



74 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

devoted to Dora that I could not help it. I knew that it was
base in me not to think more of my aunt, and less of myself ;
but, so far, selfishness was inseparable from Dora, and I could
not put Dora on one side for any mortal creature. How
exceedingly miserable I was, that night !

As to sleep, I had dreams of poverty in all sorts of shapes,
but I seemed to dream without the previous ceremony of
going to sleep. l$ow I was ragged, wanting to sell Dora
matches, six bundles for a halfpenny ; now I was at the office
in a nightgown and boots, remonstrated with by Mr. Spenlow
on appearing before the clients in that airy attire; now I was
hungrily picking up the crumbs that fell from old Tiffey's
daily buscuit, regularly eaten when Saint Paul's struck one ;
now I was hopelessly endeavoring to get a license to marry
Dora, having nothing but one of Uriah Heep's gloves to offer
in exchange, which the whole Commons rejected; and still,
more or less conscious of my own room, I was always tossing
about like a distressed ship in a sea of bed-clothes.

My aunt was restless, too, for I frequently heard her walk-
ing to and fro. Two or three times in the course of the night,
attired in a long flannel wrapper in which she looked seven
feet high, she appeared, like a disturbed ghost, in my room,
and came to the side of the sofa on which I lay. On the first
occasion I started up in alarm, to learn that she inferred from
a particular light in the sky, that Westminster Abbey was on
fire ; and to be consulted in reference to the probability of its
igniting Buckingham-street, in case the wind changed. Lying
still, after that, I found that she sat down near me, whispering
to herself "Poor boy ! " And then it made me twenty times
more wretched, to know how unselfishly mindful she was of
me, and how selfishly mindful I was of myself.

- It was difficult to believe that a night so long to me, could
be short to anybody else. This consideration set me thinking
and thinking of an imaginary party where people were dancing
the hours away, until that became a dream too, and I heard
the music incessantly playing one tune, and saw Dora inces-
santly dancing one dance, without taking the least notice of
me. The man who had been playing the harp all night, was
trying in vain to cover it with an ordinary-sized nightcap,



OF DA VID COPPEBFIELD. 75

when I awoke ; or I should rather say, when I left off trying
to go to sleep, and saw the sun shining in through the window
at last.

There was an old Roman bath in those days at the bottom
of one of the streets out of the Strand-^- it may be there still
— in which I have had many a cold plunge. Dressing myself
as quietly as I could, and leaving Peggotty to look after my
aunt, I tumbled head foremost into it, and then went for a
walk to Hampstead. I had a hope that this brisk treatment
might freshen my wits a little ; and I think it did them good,
for I soon came to the conclusion that the first step I ought
to take was to try if my articles could be cancelled and the
premium recovered. I got some breakfast on the Heath, and
walked back to Doctors' Commons, along the watered roads
and through a pleasant smell of summer flowers, growing in
gardens and carried into town on hucksters' heads, intent on
this first effort to meet our altered circumstances.

I arrived at the office so soon, after all, that I had half an
hour's loitering about the Commons, before old Tiffey, who
was always first, appeared with his key. Then I sat down in
my shady corner, looking up at the sunlight on the opposite
chimney-pots, and thinking about Dora; until Mr. Spenlow
came in, crisp and curly.

" How are you, Copperfield ? " said he. " Pine morning ! "

"Beautiful morning, sir," said I. "Could I say a word to
you before you go into Court ? "

" By all means," said he. " Come into my room."

I followed him into his room, and he began putting on his
gown, and touching himself up before a little glass he had,
hanging inside a closet door.

"I am sorry to say," said I, "that I have some rather
disheartening intelligence from my aunt."

" ItSTo ! " said he. " Dear me ! Not paralysis, I hope ? "

" It has no reference to her health, sir," I replied. " She
has met with some large losses. In fact, she has very little
left, indeed."

" You as-tound me, Copperfield ! " cried Mr. Spenlow.

I shook my head. "Indeed, sir," said I, "her affairs are
so changed, that I wished to ask you whether it would be



76 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

possible — at a sacrifice on our part of some portion of the
premium, of course," I put in this on the spur of the moment,
warned by the blank expression of his face — " to cancel my
articles ? "

What it cost me to make this proposal, nobody knows. It
was like asking, as a favor, to be sentenced to transportation
from Dora.

"To cancel your articles, Copperfield ? Cancel ? "

I explained with tolerable firmness, that I really did not
know where my means of subsistence were to come from,
unless I could earn them for myself. I had no fear for the
future, I said — and I laid great emphasis on that, as if to
imply that I should still be decidedly eligible for a son-in-law
one of these days — but, for the present, I was thrown upon
my own resources.

" I am extremely sorry to hear this, Copperfield," said Mr,
Spenlow. " Extremely sorry. It is not usual to cancel arti-
cles for any such reason. It is not a professional course of
proceeding. It is not a convenient precedent at all. Par from
it. At the same time — "

"You are very good, sir," I murmured, anticipating a
concession.

"Not at all. Don't mention it," said Mr. Spenlow. "At
the same time, I was going to say, if it had been my lot to
have my hands unfettered — if I had not a partner — Mr.
Jorkins — "

My hopes were dashed in a moment, but I made another
effort.

" Do you think, sir," said I, " if I were to mention it to Mr.
Jorkins — "

Mr. Spenlow shook his head discouragingly. " Heaven for-
bid, Copperfield," he replied, " that I should do any man an
injustice j still less, Mr. Jorkins. But I know my partner,
Copperfield. Mr. Jorkins is not a man to respond to a propo-
sition of this peculiar nature. Mr. Jorkins is very difficult to
move from the beaten track. You know what he is ? "

I am sure I knew nothing about him, except that he had
originally been alone in the business, and now lived by him-
self in a house near Montagu-square, which was fearfully in





want of painting ; that he came very late of a day, and went
away very early; that he never appeared to be consulted
about anything ; and that he had a dingy little black-hole of
his own up stairs, where no business was ever done, and where
there was a yellow old cartridge-paper pad upon his desk,
unsoiled by ink, and reported to be twenty years of age.

" Would you object to my mentioning it to him, sir?" I
asked.

"By no means," said Mr. Spenlow. "But I have some
experience of Mr. Jorkins, Copperfield. I wish it were other-
wise, for I should be happy to meet your views in any respect.
I cannot have the least objection to your mentioning it to Mr.
Jorkins, Copperfield, if you think it worth while."

Availing myself of this permission, which was given with a
warm shake of the hand, I sat thinking about Dora, and look-
ing at the sunlight stealing from the chimney-pots down the
wall of the opposite house, until Mr. Jorkins came. I then
went up to Mr. Jorkins's room, and evidently astonished Mr.
Jorkins very much by making my appearance there.

" Come in, Mr. Copperfield," said Mr. Jorkins. " Come in ! "

I went in, and sat down ; and stated my case to Mr. Jorkins
pretty much as I had stated it to Mr. Spenlow. Mr. Jorkins
was not by any means the awful creature one might have
expected, but a large, mild, smooth-faced man of sixty, who
took so much snuff that there was a tradition in the Commons
that he lived principally on that stimulant, having little room
in his system for any other article of diet.

" You have mentioned this to Mr. Spenlow, I suppose ? "
said Mr. Jorkins j when he had heard me, very restlessly, to
an end.

I answered Yes, and told him that Mr. Spenlow had intro-
duced his name.

"He said I should object ? " asked Mr. Jorkins.

I was obliged to admit that Mr. Spenlow had considered it
probable.

" I am sorry to say, Mr. Copperfield, I can't advance your
object," said Mr. Jorkins, nervously. "The fact is — but I
have an appointment at the Bank, if you'll have the goodness
to excuse me."



78 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

With that he rose in a great hurry, and was going out of
the room, when I made bold to say that I feared, then, there
was no way of arranging the matter ?

"No ! " said Mr. Jorkins, stopping at the door to shake his
head. " Oh, no ! I object you know," which he said very
rapidly, and went out. "You must be aware, Mr. Copper-
field," he added, looking restlessly in at the door again, " if
Mr. Spenlow objects — "

" Personally he does not object, sir," said I.

"Oh! Personally !" repeated Mr. Jorkins in an impatient
manner. "I assure you there's an objection, Mr. Copperfield.
Hopeless ! What you wish to be done, can't be done. I— I
really have got an appointment at the Bank." With that he
fairly ran away; and, to the best of my knowledge, it was three
days before he showed himself in the Commons again.

Being yery anxious to leave no stone unturned, I waited
until Mr. Spenlow came in, and then described what had
passed ; giving him to understand that I was not hopeless of
his being able to soften the adamantine Jorkins, if he would
undertake the task.

" Copperfield," returned Mr. Spenlow, with a gracious smile,
" you have not known my partner, Mr. Jorkins, as long as I
have. Nothing is farther from my thoughts than to attribute
any degree of artifice to Mr. Jorkins. But Mr. Jorkins has a
way of stating his objections which often deceives people. No,
Copperfield! shaking his head, "Mr. Jorkins is not to be
moved, believe me ! "

I was completely bewildered between Mr. Spenlow and Mr.
Jorkins, as to which of them really was the objecting partner ;
but I saw with sufficient clearness that there was obduracy
somewhere in the firm, and that the recovery of my aunt's
thousand pounds was out of the question. In a state of
despondency, which I remember with anything but satisfaction,
for I know it still had too much reference to myself (though
always in connection with Dora), I left the office, and went
homeward.

I was trying to familiarize my mind with the worst, and to
present to myself the arrangements we should have to make
for the future in their sternest aspect, when a hackney chariot



OF DAVID C0PPEBF1ELD. 79

coming after me, and stopping at my very feet, occasioned me
to look up. A fair hand was stretched forth to me from the
window ; and the face I had never seen without a feeling of
serenity and happiness, from the moment when it first turned
back on the old pak staircase with the great broad balustrade,
and when I associated its softened beauty with the stained
glass window in the church, was smiling on me.

" Agnes !" I joyfully exclaimed. " Oh, my dear Agnes, of
all people in the world, what a pleasure to see you ! "

" Is it, indeed ? " she said, in her cordial voice.

" I want to talk to you so much ! " said I. " It's such a
lightening of my heart, only to look at you ! If I had had a
conjuror's cap, there is no one I should have wished for but
you ! "

" What ? " returned Agnes.

" Well ! perhaps Dora first," I admitted with a blush.

" Certainly, Dora first, I hope," said Agnes, laughing.

" But you next ! " said I. " Where are you going ? "

She was going to my rooms to see my aunt. The day being
very fine, she was glad to come out of the chariot, which smelt
(I had my head in it all this time) like a stable put under a
cucumber-frame. I dismissed the coachman, and she took my
arm, and we walked on together. She was like Hope em-
bodied, to me. How different I felt in one short minute, hav-
ing Agnes at my side !

My aunt had written her one of the odd, abrupt notes —
very little longer than a Bank note — to which her epistolary
efforts were usually limited. She had stated therein that she
had fallen into adversity, and was leaving Dover for good, but
had quite made up her mind to it, and was so well that nobody
need be uncomfortable about her. Agnes had come to London
to see my aunt, between whom and herself there had been a
mutual liking these many years ; indeed, it dated from the
time of my taking up my residence in Mr. Wickfield's house.
She was not alone, she said. Her papa was with hex — and
Uriah Heep.

" And now they are partners," said I. " Confound him ! "

" Yes," said Agnes. "They have some business here; and
I took advantage of their coming, to come too. You must not



80 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

think my visit all friendly and disinterested, Trotwood, for —
I am afraid I may be cruelly prejudiced — I do not like to let
papa go away alone, with him."

"Does he exercise the same influence over Mr. Wickfield
still, Agnes ? "

Agnes shook her head. " There is such a change at home,"
said she, " that you would scarcely know the dear old house.
They live with us now."

"They?" said I.

" Mr. Heep and his mother. He sleeps in your old room,"
said Agnes, looking up into my face.

" I wish I had the ordering of his dreams," said I. " He
wouldn't sleep there long."

"I keep my own little room," said Agnes, "where I used to
learn my lessons. How the time goes ! You remember ? The
little panelled room that opens from the drawing-room ? "

" Eemember, Agnes ? When I saw you, for the first time,
coming out at the door, with your quaint little basket of keys
hanging at your side ? "

" It is just the same," said Agnes, smiling. " I am glad
you think of it so pleasantly. We were very happy."

" We were, indeed," said I.

"I keep that room to myself still 5 but I cannot always
desert Mrs. Heep, you know. And so," said Agnes, quietly,
" I feel obliged to bear her company, when I might prefer to
be alone. But I have no other reason to complain of her. If
she tires me, sometimes, by her praises of her son, it is only
natural in a mother. He is a very good son to her."

I looked at Agnes when she said these words, without detect-
ing in her any consciousness of Uriah's design. Her mild but
earnest eyes met mine with their own beautiful frankness, and
there was no change in her gentle face.

" The chief evil of their presence in the house," said Agnes,
" is that I cannot be as near papa as I could wish — Uriah
Heep being so much between us — and cannot watch over him,
if that is not too bold a thing to say, as closely as I would.
But, if any fraud or treachery is practising against him, I hope
that simple love and truth will be stronger, in the end. I





hope that real love and truth are stronger in the end than any
evil or misfortune in the world."

A certain bright smile, which I never saw on any other
face, died away, even while I thought how good it was, and
how familiar it had once been to me ; and she asked me, with
a quick change of expression (we were drawing very near my
street), if I knew how the reverse in my aunt's circumstances
had been brought about. On my replying no, she had not
told me yet, Agnes became thoughtful, and I fancied I felt her
arm tremble in mine.

We found my aunt alone, in a state of some excitement. A
difference of opinion had arisen between herself and Mrs.
Crupp, on an abstract question (the propriety of chambers
being inhabited by the gentler sex); and my aunt, utterly
indifferent to spasms on the part of Mrs. Crupp, had cut the
dispute short, by informing that lady that she smelt of my
brandy, and that she would trouble -her to walk out. Both of
these expressions Mrs. Crupp considered actionable, and had
expressed her intention of bringing before a " British Judy "
— meaning, it was supposed, the bulwark of our national
liberties.

My aunt, however, having had time to cool, while Peggotty
was out showing Mr. Dick the soldiers at the Horse Guards —
and being, besides, greatly pleased to see Agnes — .rather
plumed herself on the affair than otherwise, and received us
with unimpaired good humor. When Agnes laid her bonnet
on the table, and sat down beside her, I could not but think,
looking on her mild eyes and her radiant forehead, how natural
it seemed to have her there : how trustfully, although she was
so young and inexperienced, my aunt confided in her; how
strong she was, indeed, in simple love and truth.

We began to talk about my aunt's losses, and I told them
what I. had tried to do that morning.

"Which was injudicious, Trot," said my aunt, "but well
meant. You are a generous boy — I suppose I must say, young
man, now — and I am proud of you, my dear. So far so good.
Now, Trot and Agnes, let us look the case of Betsey Trotwood
in the face, and see how it stands."

I observed Agnes turn pale, as she looked very attentively

VOL. II — 6



82 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

at my aunt. My aunt, patting her cat, looked very attentively
at Agnes.

m Betsey Trotwood," said my aunt, who had always kept her
money matters to herself: " — I don't mean your sister, Trot,
my dear, but myself — had a certain property. It don't matter
how much ; enough to live on. More ; for she had saved a
little and added to it. Betsey funded her property for some
time, and then, by the advice of her man of business, laid it
out on landed security. That did very well, and returned very
good interest, till Betsey was paid off. I am talking of
Betsey as if she was a man-of-war. Well ! Then, Betsey had
to look about her, for a new investment. She thought she
was wiser, now, than her man of business, who was not such
a good' man of business by this time, as he used to be — I am
alluding to your father, Agnes — and she took it into her head
to lay it out for herself. So she took her pigs/' said my aunt,
" to a foreign market ; and a very bad market it turned out to
be. First, she lost in the" mining way, and then she lost in
the diving way — fishing up treasure, or some such Tom. Tidier
nonsense/' explained my aunt, rubbing her nose ; " and then
she lost in the mining way again, and, last of all, to set the
thing entirely to rights, she lost in the banking way. I don't
know what the Bank shares were worth for a little while,"
said my aunt; "cent per cent was the lowest of it, I believe ;
but the Bank was at the other end of the world, and tumbled
into space, for what I know; anyhow, it fell to pieces, and
never will and never can pay sixpence ; and Betsey's sixpences
were all there, and there's an end of them. Least said, soon-
est mended ! "

My aymt concluded this philosophical summary, by fixing
her eyes with a kind of triumph on Agnes, whose color was
gradually returning.

"Dear Miss Trotwood, is that all the history ? " said Agnes.

" I hope it's enough, child," said my aunt. " If there had
been more money to lose, it wouldn't have been all, I dare say.
Betsey would have contrived to throw that after the rest, and
make another chapter, I have little doubt. But, there was no
more money, and there's no more story."

Agnes had listened at first with suspended breath. Her





color still came and went, but she breathed more freely. I
thought I knew why. I thought she had had some fear that
her unhappy father might be in some way to blame for what
had happened. My aunt took her hand in hers, and laughed.

" Is that all ? " repeated my aunt. " Why, yes, that's all,
except, < And she lived happy ever, afterwards/ Perhaps I
may add that of Betsey yet, one of these days. Now, Agnes,
you have a wise head. So have you, Trot, in some things,
though I can't compliment you always ; " and here my aunt
shook her own at me, with an energy peculiar to herself.
" What's to be done ? Here's the cottage, taking one time
with another, will produce, say seventy pounds a-year. I think
we may safely put it down at that. Well ! — That's all we've
got," said my aunt; with whom it was an idiosyncrasy, as it
is with some horses, to stop very short when she appeared to
be in a fair way of going on for a long while.

"Then," said my aunt, after a rest, "there's Dick. He's
good for a hundred a-year, but of course that must be expended
on himself. I would sooner send him away, though I know I
am the only person who appreciates him, than have him and
not spend his money on himself. How can Trot and I do
best, upon our means ? What do you say, Agnes ? "

u I say, aunt," I interposed, * that I must do something ! "

u Go for a soldier, do you mean ? " returned my aunt,
alarmed ; " or go to sea ? I won't hear of it. You are to be
a proctor. We're not going to have any knockings on the head
in this family, if you please, sir."

I was about to explain that I was not desirous of introducing
that mode of provision into the family, when Agnes inquired
if my rooms were held for any long term ?

u You come to the point, my dear," said my aunt. " They
are not to be got rid of, for six months at least, unless they
could be underlet, and that I don't believe. The last man
died here. Five people out of six would die — of course — of
that woman in nankeen with the flannel petticoat. I have a
little ready money ; and I agree with you, the best thing we
can do, is, to live the term out here, and get Dick a bed-room
hard by."

I thought it my duty to hint at the discomfort my aunt



84 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

would sustain, from living in a continual state of guerilla war-
fare with Mrs. Crupp; but she disposed of that objection
summarily by declaring, that, on the first demonstration of
hostilities, she was prepared to astonish Mrs. Crupp for the
whole remainder of her natural life.

" I have been thinking, Trotwood," said Agnes, diffidently,
u that if you had time — "

" I have a good deal of time, Agnes. I am always disen-
gaged after four or five o'clock, and I have time early in the
morning. In one way and another," said I, conscious of red-
dening a little as I thought of the hours and hours I had
devoted to fagging about town, and to and fro upon the Nor-
wood Road, " I have abundance of time."

" I know you would not mind," said Agnes coming to me,
and speaking in a low voice, so full of sweet and hopeful con-
sideration that I hear it now, " the duties of a secretary."

" Mind, my dear Agnes ? "

" Because," continued Agnes, " Doctor Strong has acted on
his intention of retiring, and has come to live in London ; and
he asked papa, I know, if he would recommend him one.
Don't you think he would rather have his favorite old pupil
near him, than anybody else ? "

" Dear Agnes ! " said I. " What should I do without you !
You are always my good angel. I told you so. I never think
of you in any other light."

Agnes answered with her pleasant laugh, that one good
Angel (meaning Dora) was enough ; and went on to remind
me that the Doctor had been used to occupy himself in his
study, early in the morning, and in the evening — and that
probably my leisure would suit his requirements very well.
I was scarcely more delighted with the prospect of earning
my own bread, than with the hope of earning it under my old
master ; in short, acting on the advice of Agnes, I sat down
and wrote a letter to the Doctor, stating my object, and ap-
pointing to call on him next day at ten in the forenoon. This
I addressed to Highgate — « for in that place, so memorable to
me, he lived — and went and posted, myself, without losing a
minute.

Wherever Agnes was, some agreeable token of her noise-



OF DAVID COPPJEBFIELD. 85

less presence seemed inseparable from the place. When I
came back, I found my aunt's birds hanging, just as they had
hung so long in the parlor window of the cottage ; and my
easy chair imitating my aunt's much easier chair in its posi-
tion at the open window ; and even the round green fan, which
my aunt had brought away with her, screwed on to the window-
sill. I knew who had done all this, by its seeming to have
quietly done itself ; and I should have known in a moment
who had arranged my neglected books in the old order of my
school days, even if I had supposed Agnes to be miles away,
instead of seeing her busy with them, and smiling at the dis-
order into which they had fallen.

My aunt was quite gracious on the subject of the Thames
(it really did look very well with the sun upon it, though not
like the sea before the cottage), but she could not relent
towards the London smoke, which, she said, " peppered every-
thing." A complete revolution, in which Peggotty bore a
prominent part, was being effected in every corner of my
rooms, in regard of this pepper ; and I was looking on, think-
ing how little even Peggotty seemed to do with a good deal of
bustle, and how much Agnes did without any bustle at all,
when a knock came at the door.

" I think," said Agnes, turning pale, " it's papa. He prom-
ised me that he would come."

I opened the door, and admitted, not only Mr. Wickfield,
but Uriah Heep. I had not seen Mr. Wickfield for some time.
I was prepared for a great change in him, after what I had
heard from Agnes, but his appearance shocked me.

It was not that he looked many years older, though still
dressed with the old scrupulous cleanliness ; or that there was
an unwholesome ruddiness upon his face; or that his eyes
were full and bloodshot ; or that there was a nervous trem-
bling in his hand, the cause of which I knew, and had for some
years seen at work. It was not that he had lost his good
looks, or his old bearing of a gentleman — for that he had
not — but the thing that struck me most, was, that with the evi-
dences of his native superiority still upon him, he should
submit himself to that crawling impersonation of meanness,
Uriah Heep. The reversal of the two natures, in their relative



86 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

positions, Uriah's of power and Mr. Wickficld's of dependence,
was a sight more painful to me than I can express. If I had
seen an Ape taking command of a Man, I should hardly have
thought it a more degrading spectacle.

He appeared to be only too conscious of it himself. When
he came in, he stood still ; and with his head bowed, as if he
felt it. This Avas only for a moment ; for Agnes softly said
to him, "Papa! Here is Miss Trotwood — and Trotwood,
whom you have not seen for a long while ! " and then he
approached, and constrainedly gave my aunt his hand, and
shook hands more cordially with me. In the moment's pause
I speak of, I saw Uriah's countenance form itself into a most
ill-favored smile. Agnes saw it too, I think, for she shrank
from him.

What my aunt saw, or did not see, I defy the science of
physiognomy to have made out, without her own consent. I
believe there never was anybody with such an imperturbable
countenance when she chose. Her face might have been a
dead wall on the occasion in question, for any light it threw
upon her thoughts; until she broke silence with her usual
abruptness.

" Well, Wickfield ! " said my aunt ; and he looked up at her
for the first time. " I have been telling your daughter how
well I have been disposing of my money for myself, because I
couldn't trust it to you, as you were growing rusty in business
matters. We have been taking counsel together, and getting
on very well, all things considered. Agnes is worth the whole
firm, in my opinion/'

"If I may umbly make the remark," said Uriah Heep,
with a writhe, " I fully agree with Miss Betsey Trotwood, and
should be only too appy if Miss Agnes was a partner."

" You're a partner yourself, you know," returned my aunt,
" and that's about enough for you, I expect. How do you find
yourself, sir ? "

In acknowledgment of this question, addressed to him with
extraordinary curtness, Mr. Heep, uncomfortably clutching the
blue bag he carried, replied that he was pretty well, he thanked
my aunt, and hoped she was the same.

"And you, Master — I should say, Mister Copperfield," pur-





sued Uriah. " I hope I see you well ! I am rejoiced to see
you, Mister Copperfield, even under present circumstances."
I believed that; for he seemed to relish them very much.
"Present circumstances is not what your friends would wish
for you, Mister Copperfield, but it isn't money makes the
man : it's — I am really unequal with my umble powers to
express what it is," said Uriah, with a fawning jerk, " but it
isn't money ! "

Here he shook hands with me : not in the common way,
but standing at a good distance from me, and lifting my hand
up and down like a pump handle, that he was a little afraid of.

"And how do you think we are looking, Master Copper-
field, — I should say, Mister?" fawned Uriah. "Don't you
find Mr. Wickfield blooming, sir ? Years don't tell much in
our firm, Master Copperfield, except in raising up the umble,
namely, mother and self — and in developing," he added as an
after-thought, "the beautiful, namely Miss Agnes."

He jerked himself about, after this compliment, in such an
intolerable manner, that my aunt, who had sat looking straight
at him, lost all patience.

" Deuce take the man ! " said my aunt, sternly, " what's he
about ? Don't be galvanic, sir ! "

"I ask you pardon, Miss Trotwood," -returned Uriah; "I'm
aware you're nervous."

"Go along with you, sir!" said my aunt, anything but
appeased. "'Don't presume to say so ! I am nothing of the
sort. If you're an eel, sir, conduct yourself like- one. If
you're a man, control your limbs, sir ! Good God ! " said my
aunt, with great indignation, " I am not going to be serpentined
and corkscrewed out of my senses ! "

Mr. Heep was rather abashed, as most people might have
been, by this explosion ; which derived great additional force
from the indignant manner in which my aunt afterwards
moved in her chair, and shook her head as if she were 'making
snaps or bounces at him. But he said to me aside in a meek
voice :

" I am well aware, Master Copperfield, that Miss Trotwood,
though an excellent lady, has a quick temper (indeed I think
I had the pleasure of knowing her, when I was an umble



88 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

clerk, before you did, Master Copperfield), and it's only
natural, I am sure, that it should be made quicker by present
circumstances. The wonder is, that it isn't much worse ! I
only called to say that if there was anything we could do, in
present circumstances, mother or self, or Wickfield and Heep,
we should be really glad. I may go so far ? " said Uriah, with
a sickly smile at his partner.

" Uriah Heep," said Mr. Wickfield, in a monotonous forced
way, " is active in the business, Trot wood. "What he says,
I quite concur in. You know I had an old interest in you.
Apart from that, what Uriah says I quite concur in ! "

" Oh, what a reward it is," said Uriah, drawing up one leg,
at the risk of bringing down upon himself another visitation
from my aunt, " to be so trusted in ! But I hope I am able to
do something to relieve him from the fatigues of business,
Master Copperfield ! "

" Uriah Heep is a great relief to me," said Mr. Wickfield,
in the same dull voice. " It's a load off my mind, Trotwood,
to have such a partner."

The red fox made him say all this, I knew, to exhibit him
to me in the light he had indicated on the night when he
poisoned my rest. I saw the same ill-favored smile upon his
face again, and saw how he watched me.

" You are not going, papa ? " said Agnes, anxiously. " Will
you not walk back with Trotwood and me ?-"

He would have looked to Uriah, I believe, before replying,
if that worthy had not anticipated him.

"I am bespoke myself," said Uriah, "on business; other-
wise I should have been appy to have kept with my friends.
But I leave my partner to represent the firm. Miss Agnes,
ever yours ! I wish you good day, Master Copperfield, and
leave my umble respects for Miss Betsey Trotwood."

With those words, he retired, kissing his great hand, and
leering at us like a mask.

We sat there, talking about our pleasant old Canterbury
days, an hour or two. Mr. Wickfield, left to Agnes, soon
became more like his former self ; though there was a settled
depression upon him, which he never shook off. For all that,
he brightened; and had an evident pleasure in hearing us



OF DAVID COPPEEFIELD. 89

recall the little incidents of our old life, many of which he
remembered very well. He said it was like those times, to be
alone with Agnes and me again; and he wished to Heaven
they had never changed. I am sure there was an influence in
the placid face of Agnes, and in the very touch of her hand
upon his arm, that did wonders for him.

My aunt (who was busy nearly all this while with Peggotty,
in the inner room), would not accompany us to the place
where they were staying, but insisted on my going ; and I
went. We dined together. After dinner, Agnes sat beside
him, as of old, and poured out his wine. He took what she
gave him, and no more — like a child — and we all three sat
together at a window as the evening gathered in. When it
was almost dark, he lay down on a sofa, Agnes pillowing his
head and bending over him a little while ; and when she came
back to the window, it was not so dark but I could see tears
glittering in her eyes.

I pray Heaven that I never may forget the dear girl in her
love and truth, at that time of my life ; for if I should, I must
be drawing near the end, and then I would desire to remember
her best! She filled my heart with such good resolutions,
strengthened my weakness so, by her example, so directed — I
know not how, she was too modest and gentle to advise me in
many words — the wandering ardor and unsettled purpose
within me, that all the little good I tave done, and all the
harm I have forborne, I solemnly believe I may refer to her.

And how she spoke to me of Dora, sitting at the window in
the dark ; listened to my praises of her ; praised again ; and
round the little fairy-figure shed some glimpses of her own
pure light, that made it yet more precious and more innocent
to me ! Oh, Agnes, sister of my boyhood, if I had known then,
what I knew long afterwards ! —

There was a beggar in the street, when I went down ; and
as I turned my head towards the window, thinking of her calm,
seraphic eyes, he made me start by muttering, as if he were an
echo of the morning :

"Blind! Blind! Blind I"



90 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE



CHAPTEE VII.

ENTHUSIASM.

I began the next day with another dive into the Roman
bath, and then started for Highgate. I was not dispirited now.
I was not afraid of the shabby coat, and had no yearnings after
gallant grays. My whole manner of thinking of our late mis-
fortune was. changed. What I had to do, was, to show T my
aunt that her past goodness to me had not been thrown away
on an insensible, ungrateful object. What I had to do, was,
to turn the painful discipline of my younger days to account,
by going to work with a resolute and steady heart. What I
had to do, was, to take my woodman's axe in my hand, and
clear my own way through the forest of difficulty, by cutting
down the trees until I came to Dora. And I went on at a
mighty rate, as if it could be done by walking.

When I found myself on the familiar Highgate road, pursu-
ing such a different errand from that old one of pleasure, with
which it was associated, it seemed as if a complete change had
come on my whole life. But that did not discourage me.
With the new life, came new purpose, new intention. Great
was the labor; priceless the reward. Dora was the reward,
and Dora must be won.

I got into such a transport, that I felt quite sorry my coat
was not a little shabby already. I wanted to be cutting at
those trees in the forest of difficulty, under circumstances that
should prove my strength. I had a good mind to ask an old
man, in wire spectacles, who was breaking stones upon the road,
to lend me his hammer for a little while, and let me begin to
beat a path to Dora out of granite. I stimulated myself into
such a heat, and got so out of breath, that I felt as if I had
been earning I don't know how much. In this state, I went
into a cottage that I saw was to let, and examined it narrowly,
— for I felt it necessary to be practical. It would, do for me



OF DAVID COPPERFIFLD. 9]

and Dora admirably : with a little front garden for Jip to ran
about ill-, and bark at the tradespeople through the railings,
and a capital room up stairs for my aunt. I came out again,
hotter and faster than ever, and dashed up to Highgate, at such a
rate that I was there an hour too early ; and, though I had not
been, should have been obliged to stroll about to cool myself,
before I was at all presentable.

My first care, after putting myself under this necessary
course of preparation, was to find the Doctor's house. It was
not in that part of Highgate where Mrs. Steerforth lived, but
quite on the opposite side of the little town. When I had
made this discovery, I went back, in an attraction I could not
resist, to a lane by Mrs. Steerforth's, and looked ver a corner
of the garden wall. His room was shut up close. The con-
servatory doors were standing open, and Rosa Dartle was
walking, bareheaded, with a quick impetuous step, up and
down a gravel walk on one side of the lawn. She gave me
the idea of some fierce thing, that was dragging the length
of its chain to and fro upon a beaten track, and wearing its
heart out.

I came softly away from my place of observation, -and avoid-
ing that part of the neighborhood, and wishing I had not gone
near it, strolled about until it was ten o'clock. The church
wihhthe slender spire, that stands on the top of the hill now,
was not there then to tell me the time. An old red-brick
mansion, used as a school, was in its place ; and a fine old
house it must have been to go to school at, as I recollect it.

When I approached the Doctor's cottage — a pretty old
place, on which he seemed to have expended some money, if I
might judge from the embellishments and repairs that had the
look of being just completed — I saw him walking in the
garden at the side, gaiters and all, as if he had never left off
walking since the days of my pupilage. . He had his old com-
panions about him, too ; for there were plenty of high trees in
the neighborhood, and two or three rooks were on the grass,
looking after him, as if they had been written to about him
by the Canterbury rooks,, and were observing him closely in
consequence.

Knowing the utter hopelessness of attracting his attention



92 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

*

from that distance, I made bold to open the gate, and walk
after him, so as to meet him when he should turn round. When
he did, and came towards me, he looked at me thoughtfully
for a few moments, evidently without thinking about me at
all ; and then his benevolent face expressed extraordinary pleas-
ure, and he took me by both hands.

" Why, my dear Copperfield," said the Doctor ; " you are a
man ! How do you do ? I am delighted to see you. My dear
Copperfield, how very much you have improved !. You are
quite — yes — dear me ! "

I hoped he was well, and Mrs. Strong too.

" Oh dear, yes ! " said the Doctor, " Annie's quite well, and
she'll be delighted to see you. You were always her favorite.
She said so, last night, when I showed her your letter. And
— yes to be sure — you recollect Mr. Jack Maldon, Copper-
field ? "

"Perfectly, sir."

" Of course," said the Doctor. " To be sure. He's pretty
well, too."

" Has he come home, sir ? " I inquired.

"From India?" said the Doctor. "Yes. Mr. Jack Mal-
don couldn't bear the climate, my dear. Mrs. Markleham —
you have not forgotten Mrs. Markleham ? "

Forgotten the Old Soldier ! And in that short time !

"Mrs. Markleham," said the Doctor, "was quite vexed about
him, poor thing ; so we have got him at home again ; and we
have bought him a little Patent place, which agrees with him
much better."

I knew enough of Mr. Jack Maldon to suspect from this
account that it was a place where there was not much to do,
and which was pretty well paid. The Doctor, walking up and
down with his hand on my shoulder, and his kind face turned
encouragingly to mine, went on :

" Now, my dear Copperfield, in reference to this proposal of
yours. It's very gratifying and agreeable to me, I am sure ;
but don't you think you could do better. You achieved dis-
tinction, you know, when you were with us. You are qualified
for many good things. You have laid a foundation that any
edifice may be raised upon; and is it not a pity that you





should devote the springtime of your life to such a poor pur-
suit as I can offer ? "

I became very glowing again, and, expressing myself in a
rhapsodical style, I am afraid, urged my request strongly ;
reminding the Doctor that I had already a profession.

" Well, well" returned the Doctor, " that's true. Certainly,
your having a profession, and being actually engaged in study-
ing it, makes a difference. But, my good young friend, what's
seventy pounds a-year ? " *

u It doubles our income, Doctor Strong/' said I.

u Dear me ! " replied the Doctor. " To think of that ! Not
that I mean to say it's rigidly limited to seventy pounds a-year,
because I have always contemplated making any young friend
I might thus employ, a present too. Undoubtedly," said the
Doctor, still walking me up and down with his hand on my
shoulder. "I have always taken an annual present into
account."

"My dear tutor," said I (now, really, without any non-
sense), " to whom I owe more obligations already than I ever
can acknowledge — "

" No, no," interposed the Doctor. " Pardon me ! "

" If you will take such time as I have, and that is my morn-
ings and evenings, and can think it worth seventy pounds
a-year, you will do me such a service as I cannot express."

" Dear me ! " said the Doctor, innocently. " To think that
so little should go for so much ! Dear, dear ! And when you
can do better, you will ? On your word, now ? " said the
Doctor, — which he had always made a very grave appeal to
the honor of us boys.

" On my word, sir ! " I returned, answering in our old school
manner.

u Then be it so," said the Doctor, clapping me on the shoul-
der, and still keeping his hand there, as we still walked up and
down.

" And I shall be twenty times happier, sir," said I, with a
little — I hope innocent — flattery, " if my employment is to
be on the Dictionary."

The Doctor stopped, smilingly clapped me on the shoulder
again, and exclaimed, with a triumph most delightful to behold,



94 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

as if I had penetrated to the profoundest depths of mortal
sagacity, " My dear young friend, you have hit it. It is the
Dictionary ! "

How could it be anything else ! His pockets were as full
of it as his head. It was sticking out of him in all directions.
He told me that since his retirement from scholastic life, he
had been advancing with it wonderfully ; and that nothing
could suit him better than the proposed arrangements for
morning and evening work, as it was his custom to walk about
in the day-time with his considering cap on. His papers were
in a little confusion, in consequence of Mr. Jack Maldon hav-
ing lately proffered his occasional services as an amanuensis,
and not being accustomed to that occupation ; but we should
soon put right what was amiss, and go on swimmingly. After-
wards, when we were fairly at our work, I found Mr. Jack
Maldon's efforts more troublesome to me than I had expected,
as he had not confined himself to making numerous mistakes,
but had sketched so many soldiers, and ladies' heads, over the
Doctor's manuscript, that I often became involved in laby-
rinths of obscurity.

The Doctor was quite happy in the prospect of our going to
work together on that wonderful performance, and we settled
to begin next morning at seven o'clock. We were to work two
hours every morning, and two or three hours every night,
except on Saturdays, when I was to rest. On Sundays, of
course, I was to rest also, and I considered these very easy
terms.

Our plans being thus arranged to our mutual satisfaction,
the Doctor took me into the house to present me to Mrs.
Strong, whom we found in the Doctor's new study, dusting
his books, — a freedom which he never permitted anybody
else to take with those sacred favorites.

They had postponed their breakfast on my account, and we
sat down to table together. We had not been seated long,
when I saw an approaching arrival in Mrs. Strong's face,
before I heard any sound of it. A gentleman on horseback
came to the gate, and leading his horse into the little court,
with the bridle over his arm, as if he were quite at home, tied
him to a ring in the empty coach-house wall, and came into





the breakfast parlor, whip in hand. It was Mr. Jack Maldon ;
and Mr. Jack Maldon was not at all improved by India, I
thought. I was in a state of ferocious virtue, however, as to
young men who were not cutting down the trees in the forest
of difficulty ; and my impression must be received with du*
allowance.

" Mr. Jack ! " said the Doctor. " Copperfield ! "

Mr. Jack Maldon shook hands with me; but not very
warmly, I believed ; and with an air of languid patronage, at
which I secretly took great umbrage. But his languor alto-
gether was quite a wonderful sight ; except when he addressed
himself to his cousin Annie.

"Have you breakfasted this morning, Mr. Jack ? " said the
Doctor.

" I hardly ever take breakfast, sir," he replied, with his
head thrown back in an easy chair. "I find it bores me."

" Is there any news to-day ? " inquired the Doctor.

" Nothing at all, sir," replied Mr. Maldon. "There's an
account about the people being hungry and discontented down
in the North, but they are always being hungry and dis-
contented somewhere."

The Doctor looked grave, and said, as though he wished to
change the subject, "Then there's no news at all; and no
news, they say, is good news."

" There's a long statement in the papers, sir, about a mur-
der," observed Mr. Maldon. " But somebody is always being
murdered, and I didn't read it."

A display of indifference to all the actions and passions of
mankind was not supposed to be such a distinguished quality
at that time, I think, as I have observed it to be considered
since. I have known it very fashionable indeed. I have seen
it displayed with such success, that I have encountered some
fine ladies and gentlemen who might as well have been born
caterpillars. Perhaps it impressed me the more then, because
it was new to me, but it certainly did not tend to exalt my
opinion of, or to strengthen my confidence i$, Mr. Jack
Maldon.

" I came out to inquire whether Annie would like to go to
the opera to-night," said Mr. Maldon, turning to her. "It's



96 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

the last good night there will be, this season ; and there's a
singer there, whom she really ought to hear. She is perfectly
exquisite. Besides which, she is so charmingly ugly," relaps-
ing into languor.

The Doctor, ever pleased with what was likely to please his
young wife, turned to her and said :

" You must go, Annie. You must go."

"I would rather not," she said to the Doctor. "I prefer
to remain at home. I would much rather remain at home."

Without looking at her cousin, she then addressed me, and
asked me about Agnes, and whether she should see her, and
whether she was not likely to come that day; and was so
much disturbed, that I wondered how even the Doctor, butter-
ing his toast, could be blind to what was so obvious.

But he saw nothing. He told her, good-naturedly, that she
was young and ought to be amused and entertained, and must
not allow herself to be made dull by a dull old fellow. More-
over, he said, he wanted to hear her sing all the new singer's
songs to him; and how could she do that well, unless she
went? So the Doctor persisted in making the engagement
for her, and Mr. Jack Maldon was to come back to dinner.
This concluded, he went to his Patent place, I suppose ; but
at all events went away on his horse, looking very idle.

I was curious to find out next morning, whether she had
been. She had not, but had sent into London to put her
cousin off ; and had gone out in the afternoon to see Agnes,
and had prevailed upon the Doctor to go with her ; and they had
walked home by the fields, the Doctor told me, the evening
being delightful. I wondered then, whether she would have
gone if Agnes had not been in town, and whether Agnes had
some good influence over her too !

She did not look very happy, I thought, but it was a good
face, or a very false one. I often glanced at it, for she sat in
the window all the time we were at work; and made our
breakfast, which we took by snatches as we were employed.
When I left, at nine o'clock, she was kneeling on the ground
at the Doctor's feet, putting on his shoes and gaiters for him.
There was a softened shade upon her face, thrown from some
green leaves overhanging the open window of the low room ;





and I thought all the way to Doctor s* Commons, of the night
when I had seen it looking at him as he read.

I was pretty busy now; up at five in the morning, and
home at nine or ten at night. But I had infinite satisfaction
in being so closely engaged, and never walked slowly on any
account, and felt enthusiastically that the more I tired myself,
the more I was doing to deserve Dora. I had not revealed
myself in my altered character to Dora yet, because she was
coming to see Miss Mills in a few days, and I deferred all I
had to tell her until then ; merely informing her in my letters
(all our communications were secretly forwarded through Miss
Mills), that I had much to tell her. In the meantime, I put
myself on a short allowance of bear's grease, wholly abandoned
scented soap and lavender water, and sold off three waistcoats
at a prodigious sacrifice, as being too luxurious for my stern
career.

Not satisfied with all these proceedings, but burning with
impatience to do something more, I went to see Traddles, now
lodging up behind the parapet of a house in Castle Street,
Holborn. Mr. Dick, who had been with me to Highgate twice
already, and had resumed his companionship with the Doctor,
I took with me.

I took Mr. Dick with me, because, acutely sensitive to my
aunt's reverses, and sincerely believing that no galley-slave or
convict worked as I did, he had begun to fret and worry him-
self out of spirits and appetite, as having nothing useful to
do. In this condition, he felt more incapable of finishing the
Memorial than ever; and the harder he worked at it, the
oftener that unlucky head of King Charles the First got into
it. Seriously apprehending that his malady would increase,
unless we put some innocent deception upon him and caused
him to believe that he was useful, or unless we could put him
in the way of being really useful (which would be better), I
made up my mind to try if Traddles could help us. Before we
went, I wrote Traddles a full statement of all that had hap-
pened, and Traddles wrote me back a capital answer, expressive
of his sympathy and friendship.

We found him hard at work with his inkstand and papers,
refreshed by the sight of the flowerpot-stand and the little

VOL. II — 7



98 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

round table in a comer of the small apartment. He received
us cordially, and made friends with Mr. Dick in a moment.
Mr. Dick professed an absolute certainty of having, seen him
before, and we both said, "Very likely."

The first subject on which I had to consult Traddles was
this. — I had heard that many men distinguished in various
pursuits had begun life by reporting the debates in Parlia-
ment. Traddles having mentioned newspapers to me, as one
of his hopes, I had put the two things together, and told
Traddles in my letter that I wished to know how I could
qualify myself for this pursuit. Traddles now informed me,
as the result of his inquiries, that the mere mechanical acqui-
sition necessary, except in rare cases, for thorough excellence
in it, that is to say, a perfect and entire command of the
mystery of short-hand writing and reading, was about equal
in difficulty to the mastery of six languages ; and that it might
perhaps be attained, by dint of perseverance, in the course of
a few years. Traddles reasonably supposed that this would
settle the business ; but I, only feeling that here indeed were
a few tall trees to be hewn down, immediately resolved to
work my way on to Dora through this thicket, axe in hand.

" I am very much obliged to you, my dear Traddles ! " said
I. " Til begin to-morrow."

Traddles looked astonished, as he well might ; but he had
no notion as yet of my rapturous condition.

" Fll buy a book," said I, " with a good scheme of this art
in it ; Fll work at it at the Commons, where I haven't half
enough to do; I'll take down the speeches in our court for
practice — Traddles, my dear fellow, Fll master it ! "

" Dear me," said Traddles, opening his eyes, " I had no idea
you were such a determined character, Copperfield ! "

I don't know how he should have had, for it was new enough
to me. I passed that off, and brought Mr. Dick on the carpet.

"You see," said Mr. Dick, wistfully, "if I could exert
myself, Mr. Traddles — if I could beat a drum — or blow any-
thing ! "

Poor fellow ! I have little doubt he would have preferred
such an employment in his heart to all others. Traddles, who
would not have smiled for the world, replied composedly :





"But you are a very good penman, sir. You told me so,
Cbpperfield ? "

" Excellent ! " said I. And indeed he was. He wrote with
extraordinary neatness.

" Don't you think," said Traddles, " you could copy writings,
sir, if I got them for you ? "

Mr. Dick looked doubtfully at me. "Eh, Trotwood ? "

I shook my head. Mr. Dick shook his, and sighed. " Tell
him about the Memorial," said Mr. Dick.

I explained to Traddles that there was a difficulty in keep-
ing King Charles the First out of Mr. Dick's manuscripts ; Mr.
Dick in the meanwhile looking very deferentially and seriously
at Traddles, and sucking his thumb.

"But these writings, you know, that I speak of, are already
drawn up and finished," said Traddles after a little considera-
tion. "Mr. Dick has nothing to do with them. Wouldn't
that make a difference, Copperfield ? At all events wouldn't
it be well to try ? "

This gave us new hope. Traddles and I laying our heads
together apart, while Mr. Dick anxiously watched us from his
chair, we concocted a scheme in virtue of which we got him
to work next day, with triumphant success.

On a table by the window in Buckingham Street, we set out
the work Traddles procured for him — which was to make, I
forget how many copies of a legal document about some right
of way — and on another table we spread the last unfinished
original of the great Memorial. Our instructions to Mr. Dick
were that he should copy exactly what he had before him,
without the least departure from the original ; and that when
he felt it necessary to make the slightest allusion to King
Charles the Eirst, he should fly to the Memorial. We exhorted
him to be resolute in this, and left my aunt to observe him.
My aunt reported to us, afterwards, that, at first, he was like
a man playing the kettle-drums, and constantly divided his
attentions between the two ; but that, finding this confuse
and fatigue him, . and having his copy there, plainly be-
fore his eyes, he soon sat at it in an orderly, business-like
manner, and postponed the Memorial to a more convenient
time. In a word, although we took great care that he should



100 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

have no more to do than was good for him, and although he
did not begin with the beginning of a week, he earned by the
following Saturday night ten shillings and nine pence ; and
never, while I live, shall I forget his going about to all the
shops in the neighborhood to change this treasure into six-
pences, or his bringing them to my aunt arranged in the form
of a heart upon a waiter, with tears of joy* and pride in his
eyes. He was like one under the propitious influence of a
charm, from the moment of his being usefully employed ; and
if there were a happy man in the world, that Saturday night,
it was the grateful creature who thought my aunt the most
wonderful woman in existence, and me the most wonderful
young man.

"jSTo starving now, Trotwood," said Mr. Dick, shaking
hands with me in a corner. " Fll provide for her, sir ! 7 and he
flourished his ten fingers in the air, as if they were ten banks.

I hardly know which was the better pleased, Traddles or I.

"It really," said Traddles, suddenly, taking a letter out of
his pocket, and giving it to me, " put Mr. Micawber quite out
of my head ! "

The letter (Mr. Micawber never missed any possible oppor-
tunity of writing a letter) was addressed to me "By the kind-
ness of T. Traddles, Esquire, of the Inner Temple." It ran
thus : —

"My dear Copperfield,

" You may possibly not be unprepared to receive the
intimation that something has turned up. I may have men-
tioned to you on a former occasion that I was in expectation
of such an event.

"I am about to establish myself in one of the provincial
towns of our favored island, (where the society may be de-
scribed as a happy admixture of the agricultural and the
clerical), in immediate connection with one of the learned
professions. Mrs. Micawber and our offspring will accompany
me. Our ashes, at a future period, will probably be found
commingled in the cemetery attached to a venerable pile, for
which the spot to which I refer, has acquired a reputation,
shall I say from China to Peru ?



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 101

" In bidding adieu to the modern Babylon, where we have
undergone many vicissitudes, I trust not ignobly, Mrs. Micaw-
ber and myself cannot disguise from our minds that we part,
it may be for years and it may be for ever, with an individual
linked by strong associations to the altar of our domestic life.
If, on the eve of such a departure, you will accompany our
mutual friend, Mr. Thomas Traddles, to our present abode,
and there reciprocate the wishes natural to the occasion, you
will confer a Boon

"On
"One
"Who
"Is
"Ever yours,

"WlLKIKS MlCAWBER."

I was glad to find that Mr. Micawber had got rid of his dust
and ashes, and that something really had turned up at last.
Learning from Traddles that the invitation referred to the
evening then wearing away, I expressed my readiness to do
honor to it ; and we went off together to the lodging which
Mr. Micawber occupied as Mr. Mortimer, and which was situ-
ated near the top of the Gray's Inn Eoad.

The resources of this lodging were so limited, that we found
the twins, now some eight or nine years old, reposing in a
turn-up bedstead in the family sitting-room, where Mr. Micaw-
ber had prepared, in a wash-hand-stand jug, what he called a-
"Brew" of the agreeable beverage for which he was famous.
I had the pleasure, on this occasion, of renewing the acquaint-
ance of Master Micawber, whom I found a promising boy of
about twelve or thirteen, very subject to that restlessness of
limb which is not an unfrequent phenomenon in youths of
his age. I also became once more known to his sister, Miss
Micawber, in whom, as Mr. Micawber told us, "her mother
renewed her youth, like the Phoenix."

"My dear Copperfield," said Mr. Micawber, "yourself and
Mr. Traddles find us on the brink of migration, and will ex-
cuse any little discomforts incidental to that position."

Glancing round as I made a suitable reply, I observed that



102 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

the family effects were already packed, and that the amount
of luggage was by no means overwhelming. I congratulated
Mrs. Micawber on the approaching change.

"My dear Mr. Copperfield," said Mrs. Micawber, "of your
friendly interest in all our affairs, I am well assured. My
family may consider it banishment, if they please ; but I am a
wife and mother, and I never will desert Mr. Micawber."

Traddles appealed to, by Mrs. Micawber's eye, feelingly
acquiesced.

" That," said Mrs. Micawber, " that, at least, is my view,
my dear Mr. Copperfield and Mr. Traddles, of the obligation
which I took upon myself when I repeated the irrevocable
words, 'I, Emma, take thee, Wilkins.' I read the service
over with a flat candle on the previous night, and the conclu-
sion I derived from it was, that I never could desert Mr.
Micawber. And," said Mrs. Micawber, "though it is possible
I may be mistaken in my view of the ceremony, I never will !"

"My dear," said Mr. Micawber a little impatiently, "I am
not conscious that you are expected to do anything of the sort."

" I am aware, my dear Mr. Copperfield," pursued Mrs. Mi-
cawber, " that I am now about to cast my lot among strangers ;
and I am also aware that the various members of my family,
to whom Mr. Micawber has written in the most gentlemanly
terms, announcing that fact, have not taken the least notice of
Mr. Micawber's communication. Indeed I may be super-
stitious," said Mrs. Micawber, "'but it appears to me that
Mr. Micawber is destined never to receive any answers what-
ever to the great majority of the communications he writes.
I may augur from the silence of my family, that they object
to the resolution I have taken ; but I should not allow myself
to be swerved from the path of duty, Mr. Copperfield, even by
my papa and mamma, were they still living."

I expressed my opinion that this was going in the right
direction.

" It may be a sacrifice," said Mrs. Micawber, " to immure
one's self in a Cathedral town 5 but surety, Mr. Copperfield, if
it is a sacrifice in me, it is much more a sacrifice in a man of
Mr. Micawber's abilities."

" Oh ! You are going to a Cathedral town ? " said I.



OF DAVID C0PPE11FIELD. 103

Mr. Micawber, who had been helping us all, out of the wash-
hand-stand jug, replied:

"To Canterbury. In fact, my dear Copperfield, I have
entered into arrangements, by virtue of which I stand pledged
and contracted to our friend Heep, to assist and serve him in
the capacity of — and to be — his confidential clerk."

I stared at Mr. Micawber, who greatly enjoyed my surprise.

" I am bound to state to you," he said, with an official air,
"that the business habits, and the prudent suggestions, of
Mrs. Micawber, have in a great measure conduced to this
result. The gauntlet, to which Mrs. Micawber referred upon
a former occasion, being thrown down in the form of an ad-
vertisement, was taken up by my friend Heep, and led to a
mutual recognition. Of my friend Heep," said Mr. Micawber,
" who is a man of remarkable shrewdness, I desire to speak
with all possible respect. My friend Heep has not fixed the
positive remuneration at too high a figure, but he has made a
great deal, in the way of extrication from the pressure of
pecuniary difficulties, contingent on the value of my services ;
and on the value of those services, I pin my faith. Such
address and intelligence as I chance to possess," said Mr.
Micawber, boastfully disparaging himself, with the old genteel
air, "will be devoted to my friend Heep's service. I have
already some acquaintance with the law — as a defendant on
civil process — and I shall immediately apply myself to the
Commentaries of one of the most eminent and remarkable of
our English Jurists. I believe it is unnecessary to add that I
allude to Mr. Justice Blackstone."

These observations, and indeed the greater part of the obser-
vations made that evening, were interrupted by Mrs. Micawber's
discovering .that Master Micawber was sitting on his boots, or
holding his head on with both arms as if he felt it loose, or
accidently kicking Traddles under the table, or shuffling his
feet over one another, or producing them at distances from
himself apparently outrageous to nature, or lying sideways
with his hair among the wine-glasses, or developing his rest-
lessness of limb in some other form incompatible with the
general interests of society; and by Master Micawber's re-
ceiving those discoveries in a resentful spirit. I sat all the



104 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

while, amazed by Mr. Micawber's disclosure, and wondering
what it meant ; until Mrs. Micawber resumed the thread of
the discourse, and claimed my attention.

" What I particularly request Mr. Micawber to be careful
of, is," said Mrs. Micawber, "that he does not, my dear Mr.
Copperfield, in applying himself to this subordinate branch of
the law, place it out of his power to rise, ultimately, to the
top of the tree. I am convinced "that Mr. Micawber, giving
his mind to a profession so adapted to his fertile resources,
and his flow of language, must distinguish himself. Now, for
example, Mr. Traddles," said Mrs. Micawber, assuming a pro-
found air, "a Judge, or even say a Chancellor. Does an indi-
vidual place himself beyond the pale of those preferments by
entering on such an office as Mr. Micawber has accepted ? "

"My dear," observed Mr. Micawber — but glancing inquisi-
tively at Traddles, too ; " we have time enough before us, for
the consideration of those questions."

" Micawber," she returned, " no ! Your mistake in life is,
that you do not look forward far enough. You are bound in
justice to your family, if not to yourself, to take in at a com-
prehensive glance the extremest point in the horizon to which
your abilities may lead you."

Mr. Micawber coughed, and drank his punch with an air of
exceeding satisfaction — still glancing at Traddles, as if he
desired to have his opinion.

" Why, the plain state of the case, Mrs. Micawber," said
Traddles, mildly breaking the truth to her, " I mean the real
prosaic fact, you know — "

"Just so," said Mrs. Micawber, "my dear Mr. Traddles, I
wish to be as prosaic and literal as possible on a subject of so
much importance."

" — Is," said Traddles, "that this branch of the law, even
if Mr. Micawber were a regular solicitor — "

"Exactly so," returned Mrs. Micawber. ("Wilkins, you
are squinting, and will not be able to get your eyes back. v )

" — Has nothing," pursued Traddles, "to do with that.
Only a barrister is eligible for such preferments ; and Mr.
Micawber could not be a barrister, without being entered at an
inn of court as a student, for five years."



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 105

" Do I follow you ? n said Mrs. Micawber, with her most
affable air of business. " Do I understand, my dear Mr.
Traddles, that, at the expiration of that period, Mr. Micawber
would be eligible as a Judge or Chancellor ? "

"He would be eligible" returned Traddles, with a strong
emphasis on that word.

" Thank you," said Mrs. Micawber. "That is quite suffi-
cient. If such is the case, and Mr. Micawber forfeits no privi-
lege by entering on these duties, my anxiety is set at rest. I
speak," said Mrs. Micawber, " as a female, necessarily ; but I
have always been of opinion that Mr. Micawber possesses what
I have heard my papa call, when I lived at home, the judicial
mind ; and I hope Mr. Micawber is now entering on a field
where that mind will develop itself, and take a commanding
station."

I quite believe that Mr. Micawber saw himself, in his judi-
cial mind's eye, on the woolsack. He passed his hand com-
placently over his bald head, and said with ostentatious
resignation :

" My dear, we will not anticipate the decrees of fortune. If
I am reserved to wear a wig, I am at least prepared, externally,"
in allusion to his baldness, " for that distinction. I do not,"
said Mr. Micawber, " regret my hair, and I may have been
deprived of it for a specific purpose. I cannot say. It is my
intention, my dear Copperfield, to educate my son for the
Church ; I will not deny that I should be happy, on his
account, to attain to eminence."

" For the Church ? " said I, still pondering between whiles,
on Uriah Heep.

"Yes," said Mr. Micawber. "He has a remarkable head-
voice, and will commence as a chorister. Our residence at
Canterbury, and our local connection, will, no doubt, enable
him to take advantage of any vacancy that may arise in the
Cathedral corps."

On looking at Master Micawber again, I saw that he had a
certain expression of face, as if his voice were behind his eye-
brows ; where it presently appeared to be, on his singing us
(as an alternative between that and bed), "The Wood-Pecker
tapping." After many compliments on this performance, we



106 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

fell into some general conversation ; and as I was too full of
my desperate intentions to keep my altered circumstances to
myself, I made them known to Mr- and Mrs. Micawber. I
cannot express how extremely delighted they both were, by
the idea of my aunt's being in difficulties ; and how comfort-
able and friendly it made them.

When we were nearly come to the last round of the punch,
I addressed myself to Traddles, and reminded him that we
must not separate, without wishing our friends health, happi-
ness, and success in their new career* I begged Mr. Micawber
to fill us bumpers, and proposed the toast in due form : shak-
ing hands with him across the table, and kissing Mrs. Micaw-
ber, to commemorate that eventful occasion. Traddles imi-
tated me in the first particular, but did not consider himself a
sufficiently old friend to venture on the second.

" My dear Copperfield," said Mr. Micawber, rising with one
of his thumbs in each of his waistcoat pockets, "the companion
of my youth: if I may be allowed the expression — and my
esteemed friend Traddles : if I may be permitted to call him so
— will allow me, on the part of Mrs. Micawber, myself, and
our offspring, to thank them in the warmest and most uncom-
promising terms for their good wishes. It may be expected
that on the eve of a migration which will consign us to a per-
fectly new existence/' Mr. Micawber spoke as if they were
going five hundred thousand miles, " I should offer a few"* vale-
dictory remarks to two such friends as I see before me. But all
that I have to say in this way, I have said. Whatever station
in society I may attain, through the medium of the learned
profession of which I am about to become an unworthy mem-
ber, I shall endeavor not to disgrace, and Mrs. Micawber will
be safe to adorn. Under the temporary pressure of pecuniary
liabilities, contracted with a view to their immediate liquida-
tion, but remaining unliquidated through a combination of
circumstances, I have been under the necessity of assuming a
garb from which my natural instincts recoil — I allude to
spectacles — and possessing myself of a cognomen, to which I
can establish no legitimate pretensions. All I have to say on
that score is, that the cloud has passed from the dreary scene,
and the God of Day is once more high upon the mountain



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 107

tops. On Monday next, on the arrival of the four o'clock
afternoon coach at Canterbury, my foot will be on my native
heath — my name, Micawber ! "

Mr. Micawber resumed his seat on the close of these remarks,
and drank two glasses of punch in grave succession. He then
said with much solemnity :

"One thing more I have to do, before this separation is
complete, and that is to perform an act of justice. My friend
Mr. Thomas Traddles has, on two several occasions, 'put his
name/ if I may use a common expression, to bills of exchange
for my accommodation. On the first occasion Mr. Thomas
Traddles was left — let me say, in short, in the lurch. The
fulfilment of the second has not yet arrived. The amount of
the first obligation/' here Mr. Micawber carefully referred to
papers, "was, I believe, twenty-three, four, nine and a half;
of the second, according to my entry of that transaction,
eighteen, six, two. These sums, united, make a total, if my
calculation is correct, amounting to forty-one, ten, eleven and
a half. My friend Copperfield will perhaps do me the favor
to check that total ? "

I did so and found it correct.

"To leave this metropolis," said Mr. Micawber, "and my
friend Mr. Thomas Traddles, without acquitting myself of the
pecuniary part of this obligation, would weigh upon my mind
to an insupportable extent. I have, therefore, prepared for
my friend Mr. Thomas Traddles, and I now hold in my hand,
a document, which accomplishes the desired object. I beg to
hand to my friend Mr. Thomas Traddles my I. 0. U. for forty-
one, ten, eleven and a half; and I am happy to recover my
moral dignity, and to know that I can once more walk erect
before my fellow man ! "

With this introduction (which greatly affected him), Mr.
Micawber placed his I. 0. U. in the hands of Traddles, and
said he wished him well in every relation of life. I am per-
suaded, not only that this was quite the same td Mr. Micawber
as paying the money, but that Traddles himself hardly knew
the difference until he had had time to think about it.

Mr. Micawber walked so erect before his fellow man, on the
strength of this virtuous action, that his chest looked half as



108 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

broad again when he lighted us down stairs. We parted with
great heartiness on both sides ; and when I had seen Traddles
to his own door, and was going home alone, I thought, among
the other odd and contradictory things I mused upon, that,
slippery as Mr. Micawber was, I was probably indebted to
some compassionate recollection he retained of me as his boy-
lodger, for never having been asked by him for money. I
certainly should not have had the moral courage to refuse it ;
and I have no doubt he knew that (to his credit be it written),
quite as well as I did.







CHAPTER VIII.

A LITTLE COLD WATER.

My new life had lasted for more than a week, and I was
stronger than ever in those tremendous practical resolutions
that I felt the crisis required. I continued to walk extremely
fast, and to have a general idea that I was getting on. I
made it a rule to take as much out of myself as I possibly
could, in my way of doing everything to which I applied my
energies. I made a perfect victim of myself. I even enter-
tained some idea of putting myself on a vegetable diet, vaguely
conceiving that, in becoming a graminivorous animal, I should
sacrifice to Dora.

As yet, little Dora was quite unconscious of my desperate
firmness, otherwise than as my letters darkly shadowed it forth.
But, another Saturday came, and on that Saturday evening
she was to be at Miss Mills's ; and when Mr. Mills had gone
to his whist-club (telegraphed to me in the street, by a bird-
cage in the drawing-room middle window), I was to go there
to tea.

By this time, we were quite settled down in Buckingham
Street, where Mr. Dick continued his copying in a state of
absolute felicity. My aunt had obtained a signal victory over
Mrs. Crupp, by paying her off, throwing the first pitcher she
planted on the stairs out of window, and protecting in person,
up and down the staircase, a supernumerary whom she engaged
from the outer world. These vigorous measures struck such
terror to the breast of Mrs. Crupp, that she subsided into her
own kitchen, under the impression that my aunt was mad. My
aunt being supremely indifferent to Mrs. Crupp's opinion and
everybody else's, and rather favoring than discouraging the
idea, Mrs. Crupp, of late the bold, became within a few days so
faint-hearted, that rather than encounter my aunt upon the
staircase, she would endeavor to hide her portly form behind



110 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

doors — leaving visible, however, a wide margin of flannel
petticoat — or would shrink into dark corners. This gave my
aunt such unspeakable satisfaction, that I believe she took a
delight in prowling up and down, with- her bonnet insanely
perched on the top of her head, at times when Mrs. Crupp was
likely to be in the way.

My aunt, being uncommonly neat and ingenious, made so
many little improvements in our domestic arrangements, that
I seemed to be richer instead of poorer. Among the rest, she
converted the pantry into a dressing-room for me ; and pur-
chased and embellished a bedstead for my occupation, which
looked as like a bookcase in the daytime as a bedstead could.
I was the object of her constant solicitude; and my poor
mother herself could not have loved me better, or studied more
how to make me happy.

Peggotty had considered herself highly privileged in being
allowed to participate in these labors ; and, although she still
retained something of her old sentiment of awe in reference to
my aunt, had received so many marks of encouragement and
confidence, that they were the best friends possible. But the
time had now come (I am speaking of the Saturday when I
was to take tea at Miss Mills's) when it was necessary for her
to return home, and enter on the discharge of the duties she
had undertaken in behalf of Ham. "So good by, Barkis,"
said my aunt, "and take care of yourself! I am sure I never
thought I could be so ry to lose you ! "

I took Peggotty to the coach-office, and saw her off. She
cried at parting, and confided her brother to my friendship as
Ham had done. We had he. rd nothing of him since he went
away, that sunny afternoon.

"And now, my own dear Davy," said Peggotty, "if, while
you're a prentice, you should want any money to spend; or if,
when you're out of your time, my dear, you should want any
to set you up (and you must do one or other, or both, my dar-
ling) ; who has such a good right to ask leave to lend it you, as
my sweet girl's own old stupid me !"

I was not so savagely independent as to say anything in
reply, but that if ever I borrowed money of any one, I would
borrow it of her. Next to accepting r large sum on the spot,



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. Ill

I believe this gave Peggotty more comfort than anything I
could have done.

" And, my dear!" whispered Peggotty, "tell the pretty little
angel that I should so have liked to see her, only for a min-
ute ! And tell her that before she marries my boy, Pll come
and make your house so beautiful for you, if you'll let me ! "

I declared that nobody else should touch it ; and this gave
Peggotty such delight, that she went away in good spirits.

I fatigued myself as much as I possibly could in the Com-
mons all day, by a variety of devices, and at the appointed
time in the evening repaired to Mr. Mills's street. Mr. Mills,
who was a terrible fellow to fall asleep after dinner, had not
yet gone out, and there was no bird-cage in the middle window.

He kept me waiting so long, that I fervently hoped the club
would fine him for being late. At last he came out ; and then
I saw my own Dora hang up the bird-cage, and peep into the
balcony to look for me, and run in again when she saw I was
there, while Jip remained behind, to bark injuriously at an
immense butcher's dog in the street, who could have taken him
like a pill.

Dora came to the drawing-room door to meet me ; and Jip
came scrambling out, tumbling over his own growls, under the
impression that I was a Bandit ; and we all three went in, as
happy and loving as could be. I soon carried desolation into
the bosom of our joys — lot that I meant to do it, but that I
was so full of the subject — by asking Dora, without the
j jmall est preparation, if she could love a beggar ?

My pretty, little, startled Dora ! Her only association with
the word was a yellow face and a nightcap, or a pair of
crutches, or a wooden leg, or a dog with a decanter-stand in
his mouth, or something of that kind ; and she stared at me
with the most delightful wonder.

" How can you ask me anything so foolish ? " pouted Dora.
" Love a beggar ! "

"Dora, my own dearest ! " said L " I am a beggar ! "

"How can you be such a silly thing," replied Dora, slapping
my hand, " as to sit there, telling such stories ? I'll make Jip
bite you ! "

Her childish way was the most delicious way in the world



112 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

to me, but it was necessary to be explicit, and I solemnly
repeated :

" Dora, my own life, I am your ruined David ! "

" I declare I'll make Jip bite you ! " said Dora, shaking her
curls, " if you are so ridiculous."

But I looked so serious, that Dora left off shaking her curls,
and laid her trembling little hand upon my shoulder, and first
looked scared and anxious, then began to cry. That was
dreadful. I fell upon my knees before the sofa, caressing her,
and imploring her not to rend my heart ; but, for some time,
poor little Dora did nothing but exclaim Oh dear ! Oh dear !
And oh, she was so frightened ! And where was Julia Mills !
And oh, take her to Julia Mills, and go away, please ! until I
was almost beside myself.

At last, after an agony of supplication and protestation, I
got Dora to look at me, with a horrified expression of face,
which I gradually soothed until it was only loving, and her
soft, pretty cheek was lying against mine. Then I told her,
with my arms clasped round her, how I loved her, so dearly,
and so dearly ; how I felt it right to offer to release her from
her engagement, because now I was poor ; how I never could
bear it, or recover it, if I lost her ; how I had no fears of
poverty, if she had none, my arm being nerved and my heart
inspired by her ; how I was already working with a courage
such as none but lovers knew ; how I had begun to be prac-
tical, and to look into the future ; how a crust well-earned wag
sweeter far than a feast inherited; and much more to the
same purpose, which I delivered in a burst of passionate elo-
quence quite surprising to myself, though I had been thinking
about it, day and night, ever since my aunt had astonished me.

"Is your heart mine still, de#r Dora ? " said I, rapturously,
for I knew by her clinging to me that it was.

" Oh, yes ! " cried Dora, ff Oh, yes, it's all yours. Oh,
don't be dreadful ! "

/dreadful! To Dora!

" Don't talk about being poor, and working hard ! " said
Dora, nestling closer to me. " Oh, don't, don't ! "

" My dearest love," said I, " the crust well-earned — "

u Oh, yes; but I don't want to hear any more about crusts ! "





said Dora. " And Jip must have a mutton-chop every day at
twelve, or he'll die ! "

I was charmed with her childish, winning way. I fondly
explained to Dora that Jip should have his mutton-chop with
his accustomed regularity. I drew a picture of our frugal
home, made independent by my labor — sketching in the
little house I had seen at Highgate, and my aunt in her room
up stairs.

" I am not dreadful now, Dora ? " said I, tenderly.

"Oh, no, no!" cried Dora. "But I hope your aunt will
keep in her own room a good deal ! And I hope she's not a
scolding old thing ! "

If it were possible for me to love Dora more than ever, I am
sure I did. But I felt she was a little impracticable. It
damped my new-born ardor, to find that ardor so difficult of
communication to her. I made another trial. When she was
quite herself again, and was curling Jip's ears, as he lay upon
her lap, I became grave, and said :

" My own ! May I mention something ? "

"Oh, please don't be practical!" said Dora coaxingly.
"Because it frightens me so !"

"Sweet heart!" I returned; "there is nothing to alarm
you in alLihis. I want you to think of it quite differently.
I want to make it nerve you, and inspire you, Dora ! "

" Oh, but that's so shocking ! " gried Dora.

" My love, no. Perseverance and strength of character will
enable us to bear much worse things."

"But I haven't got any strength at all," said Dora, shaking
her curls. " Have I, Jip ? Oh, do kiss Jip, and be agreea-
ble!"

It was impossible to resist kissing Jip, when she held him
up to me for that purpose, putting her own bright, rosy little
mouth into kissing form, as she directed the operation, which
she insisted should be performed symmetrically, on the centre
of his nose. I did as she bade me — rewarding myself after-
wards for my obedience — and she charmed me out of my
graver character for I don't know how long.

"But, Dora, my beloved!" said I, at last resuming it; "I
was going to mention something."
vol. n — 8



114 THE PERSONAL HISTOEY AND EXPEDIENCE

The Judge of the Prerogative Court might have fallen in
love with her, to see her fold her little hands and hold them
up, begging and praying me not to be dreadful any more.

" Indeed I am not going to be, my darling ! " I assured
her. "But, Dora, my love, if you will sometimes think, — not
despondingly, you know; far from that! — but if you will
sometimes think — just to encourage yourself — that you are
engaged to a poor man — "

"Don't, don't! Pray don't!" cried Dora. "It's so very
dreadful!"

* My soul, not at all ! " said I, cheerfully. " If you will
sometimes think of that, and look about now and then at
your papa's housekeeping, and endeavor to acquire a little
habit — of accounts, for instance — "

Poor little Dora received this suggestion with something
that was half a sob and half a scream.

" — It would be so useful to us afterwards," I went on.
"And if you would promise me to read a little — a little
Cookery Book that I would send you, it would be so excellent
for both of us. Por our path in life, my Dora," said I, warm-
ing with the subject, "is stony and rugged now, and it rests
with us to smooth it. We must fight our way onward. We
must be brave. There are obstacles to be met, and we must
meet, and crush them ! "

I was going on at a great rate, with a clenched hand, and
a most enthusiastic countenance ; but it was quite unnecessary
to proceed. I had said enough. I had done it again. Oh,
she was so frightened ! Oh, where was Julia Mills ! Oh,
take her to Julia Mills, and go away, please ! So that, in
short, I was quite distracted, and raved about the drawing-
room.

I thought I had killed her, this time. I sprinkled water
on her face. I went down on my knees. I plucked at my
hair. I denounced myself as a remorseless brute, and a ruth-
less beast. I implored her forgiveness. I besought her to
look up. I ravaged Miss Mills's work-box for a smelling-
bottle, and in my agony of mind applied an ivory needle-case
instead, and dropped all the needles over Dora. I shook my
fists at Jip, who was as frantic as myself. I did every wild





extravagance that could be done, and was a long way beyond
the end of my wits when Miss Mills came into the room.

" Who has done this ! " exclaimed Miss Mills, succoring her
friend.

I replied, " J, Miss Mills ! I have done it ! Behold the
destroyer ! " — or words to that effect — and hid my face from
the light, in the sofa cushion.

At first Miss Mills thought it was a quarrel, and that we
were verging on the Desert of Sahara ; but she soon found out
how matters stood, for my dear affectionate little Dora, em-
bracing her, began exclaiming that I was "a poor laborer,"
and then cried for me, and embraced me, and asked me would
I let her give me all her money to keep, and then fell on Miss
Mills's neck, sobbing as if her tender heart were broken.

Miss Mills must have been born to be a blessing to us.
She ascertained from me in a few words what it was all about,
comforted Dora, and gradually convinced her that I was not
a laborer — from my manner of stating the case I believe
Dora concluded-that I was a navigator, and went balancing
myself up and down a plank all day with a wheelbarrow +-
and so brought us together in peace. When we were quite
composed, and Dora had gone up stairs to put some rose-water
to her eyes, Miss Mills rang for tea. In the ensuing interval,
I told Miss Mills that she was evermore my friend, and
that my heart must cease to vibrate ere I could forget her
sympathy.

I then expounded to Miss Mills what I had endeavored, so
very unsuccessfully, to expound to Dora. Miss Mills replied,
on general principles, that the Cottage of content was better
than the Palace of cold splendor, and that where love was,
all was.

I said to Miss Mills that this was very true, and who should
know it better than I, who loved Dora with a love that- never
mortal had experienced yet. But on Miss Mills observing,
with despondency, that it were well indeed for some hearts if
this were so, I explained that I begged leave to restrict the
observation to mortals of the masculine gender.

I then put it to Miss Mills, to say whether she considered
that there was or was not any practical merit in the sugges-



116 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

tion I had been anxious to make, concerning the accounts, the
housekeeping, and the Cookery Book ?

Miss Mills, after some consideration, thus replied :

"Mr. Copperfield, I will be plain with you. Mental suf-
fering and trial supply, in some natures, the place of years,
and I will be as plain with you as if I were a Lady Abbess.
No. The suggestion is not appropriate to our Dora. Our
dearest Dora is a favorite child of nature. She is a thing of
light, and airiness, and joy. I am free to confess that if it
could be done, it might be well, but — " And Miss Mills
shook her head.

I was encouraged by this closing admission on the part of
Miss Mills to ask her, whether, for Dora's sake, if she had
any opportunity of luring her attention to such preparations
for an earnest life, she would avail herself of it ? Miss Mills
replied in the affirmative so readily, that I further asked her
if she would take charge of the Cookery Book ; and, if she
ever could insinuate it upon Dora's acceptance, without fright-
ening her, undertake to do me that crowning service. Miss
Mills accepted this trust, too ; but was not sanguine.

And Dora returned, looking such a lovely little creature,
that I really doubted whether she ought to be troubled with
anything so ordinary. And she loved me so much, and was
so captivating (particularly when she made Jip stand on his
hind legs for toast, and when she pretended to hold that nose
of his against the hot tea-pot for punishment because he
wouldn't), that I felt like a sort of Monster who had got into
a Fairy's bower, when I thought of having frightened her, and
made her cry.

After tea we had the guitar ; and Dora sang those same
dear old French songs about the impossibility of ever on any
account leaving off dancing, La ra la, La ra la, until I felt a
much greater Monster than before.

We had only one check to our pleasure, and that happened
a little while before I took my leave, when, Miss Mills chanc-
ing to make some allusion to to-morrow morning, I unluckily
let out that being obliged to exert myself now, I got up at five
Vclock. Whether Dora had any idea that I was a Private





Watchman, I am unable to say ; but it made a great impres-
sion on her, and she neither played nor sang any more.

It was still on her mind when I bade her adieu ; and she
said to me, in her pretty coaxing way — as if I were a doll, I
used to think !

"Now don't get up at five o'clock, you naughty boy. It's
so nonsensical ! "

" My love," said I, " I have work to do."

"But don't do it ! " returned Dora. " Why should you ?"

It was impossible to say to that sweet little surprised face,
otherwise than lightly and playfully, that we must work, to
live.

" Oh ! How ridiculous ! " cried Dora.

" How shall we live without, Dora ? " said I.

" How ? Anyhow ! " said Dora.

She seemed to think she had quite settled the question, and
gave me such a triumph^nFlittle kiss, direct from her innocent
heart, that I would hardly have put her out of conceit with
her answer, for a fortune. '

Well ! I loved her, and I went on loving her, most absorb-
ingly, entirely, and completely. But going on, too, working
pretty hard, and busily keeping red-hot all the irons I now had
in the fire, I would sit sometimes of a night, opposite my aunt,
thinking how I had 'frightened Dora that time, and how I
could best make my way with a guitar-case through the forest
of difficulty, until I used to fancy that my head was turning
quite gray.



118 THE PEBSONAL HISTOBY AXD EXPEBIENCE



CHAPTER IX.

A DISSOLUTION OF PARTNERSHIP.

I bib not allow my resolution, with respect to the Parlia-
mentary Debat s, to cool. It was one of the irons I began to
heat immediately, and one of the irons I kept hot, and ham-
mered at, with a perseverance I may honestly admire. I
bought an approved scheme of the noble art and mystery of
stenography (which cost me ten and sixpence) ; and plunged
into a sea of perplexity that brought me, in a few weeks, to
the confines of distraction. The changes that were rung upon
dots, which in such a position meant such a thing, and in such
another position something else, entirely different; the won-
derful vagaries that were played by ircles- the unaccount-
able consequences that resulted from marks like flies' legs;
the tremendous effects of a curve in a wrong place ; not only
troubled my waking hours, but reappeared before me in my
sleep. When I had groped my way, blindly, through these
difficulties, and had mastered the a pha 1 t, which was an
Egyptian Temple in itself, there then appeared a pro ession
of new horrors, called arbitrary characters ; the most despotic
characters I have ever known; who insisted, for instance,
that a thing like the beginning of a cobweb, meant expectation,
and that a pen and ink sky-rocket stood for disadvantageous.
When I had fixed these wretches in my mind, I found that
they had driven everything else out' of it ; then, beginning
again, I forgot them ; while I was picking them up, I dropped
the other fragments of the system; in short, it was almost
heart-breaking.

It might have been quite heart-breaking, but for Dora, who
was the stay and anchor of my tempest-driven bark. Every
scratch in the scheme was a gnarled oak in the forest of diffi-
culty, and I went on cutting them down, one after another,
with such vigor, that in three or four months I was in a con-



— w / r /




DC

<



UJ

ID
O
Ll



LU



UJ

Q
Q
<



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 119

dition to make an experiment on one of our crack speakers in
the Commons. Shall I ever forget how the crack speaker
walked off from me before I began, and left my imbecile pencil
staggering about the paper as if it were in a fit !

This would not do, it was quite clear. I was flying too
high, and should never get on, so. I resorted to Traddles for
advice ; who suggested that he should dictate speeches to me,
at a pace, and with occasional stoppages, adapted to my weak-
ness. Very grateful for this friendly aid, I accepted the pro-
posal ; and night after night, almost every night, for a long
time, we had a sort of private Parliament in Buckingham-
street, after I came home from the Doctor's.

I should like to see such a Parliament anywhere else ! My
aunt and Mr. Dick represented the Government or the Opposi-
tion (as the case might be), and Traddles, with the assistance
of Enfield's Speaker or a volume of parliamentary orations,
thundered astonishing invectives against them. Standing by
the table, with his finger in the page to keep the place, and
his right arm flourishing above his head, Traddles, as Mr. Pitt,
Mr. Pox, Mr. Sheridan, Mr. Burke, Lord Castlereagh, Viscount
Sidmouth, or Mr. Canning, would work himself into the most
violent heats, and deliver the most withering denunciations of
the profligacy and corruption of my aunt and Mr. Dick; while
I used to sit, at a little distance, with my note-book on my
knee, fagging after him with all my might and main. The
inconsistency and recklessness of .Traddles were not to be
exceeded by any real politician. . He was for any description
of policy, in the compass of a week ; and nailed all sorts of
colors to every denomination of mast. My aunt looking very
like an immovable Chancellor of the Exchequer, would occa-
sionally throw in an interruption or two, as "Hear!" or "No!"
or "Oh!" when the text seemed to require it: which was
always a signal to Mr. Dick (a perfect country gentleman) to
follow lustily with the same cry. But Mr. Dick got taxed with
such things in the course of his Parliamentary career, and was
made responsible for such awful consequences, that he became
uncomfortable in his mind sometimes. I believe he actually
began to be afraid he really had been doing something, tend-



120 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

ing to the annihilation of the British constitution, and the
ruin of the country.

Often and often we pursued these debates until the clock
pointed to midnight, and the candles were burning down.
The result of so much good practice was, that by and by I
began to keep pace with Traddles pretty well, and should
have been quite triumphant if I had had the least idea what
my notes were about. But, as to reading them after I had got
them, I might as well have copied the Chinese inscriptions on
an immense collection of tea-chests, or the golden characters
on all the great red and green bottles in the chemists' shops !

There was nothing for it, but to turn back and begin all
over again. It was very hard, but I turned back, though
with a heavy heart, and began laboriously and methodically to
plod over the same tedious ground at a snails pace ; stopping
to examine minutely every speck in the way, on all sides, and
making the most desperate efforts to know these elusive' char-
acters by sight wherever I met them. I was always punctual
at the office • at the doctor's too : and I really did work, as
the common expression ±s, like a cart-horse.

One day, when I went to the Commons as usual, I found
Mr. Spenlow in the doorway looking extremely grave, and
talking to himself. As he was in the habit of complaining of
pains in his head — he had naturally a short throat, and I do
seriously believe he overstarched himself — I was at first
alarmed by the idea that he was not quite right in that direc-
tion ; but he soon relieved my uneasiness.

Instead of returning my "Good morning" with his usual
affability, he looked at me in a distant, ceremonious manner,
and coldly requested me to accompany him to a certain coffee-
house, which in those days, had a door opening into the Com-
mons, just within the little archway in St. Paul's churchyard.
I complied, in a very uncomfortable state, and with a warm
shooting all over me, as if my apprehensions were breaking
out into buds. When I allowed him to go on a little before,
on account of the narrowness of the way, I observed that he
carried his head with a lofty air that was particularly unprom-
ising ; and my mind misgave me that he had found out about
my darling Dora.



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 121

If I had not guessed this, on the way to the coffee-house, I
could hardly have failed to know what was the matter when
I followed him into an up-stairs room, and found Miss Murd-
stone there, supported by a background of sideboard, on which
were several inverted tumblers sustaining lemons, and two of
those extraordinary boxes, all corners and flutings, for stick-
ing knives and forks in, which, happily for mankind, are now
obsolete.

Miss Murdstone gave me her chilly finger-nails, and sat
severely rigid. Mr. Spenlow shut the door, motioned me to a
chair, and stood on the hearth-rug in front of the fireplace.

"Have the goodness to show Mr. Copperfield," said Mr.
Spenlow, "what you have in your reticule, Miss Murdstone."

I believe it was the old identical steel-clasped reticule of
my childhood, that shut up like a bite. Compressing her
lips, in sympathy with the snap, Miss Murdstone opened it —
opening her mouth a little at the same time — and produced
my last letter to Dora, teeming with expressions of devoted
affection.

" I believe that is your writing, Mr. Copperfield ? " said Mr.
Spenlow.

I was very hot, and the voice I heard was very unlike mine,
when I said, " It is, sir ! "

"If I am not mistaken," said Mr. Spenlow, as Miss Murd-
stone brought a parcel of letters out of her reticule, tied round
with the dearest bit of blue ribbon, " those are also from your
pen, Mr. Copperfield ? "

I took them from her with a most desolate sensation ; and,
glancing at such phrases at the top, as " My ever dearest and
own Dora," " My best beloved angel," " My blessed one for
ever," and the like, blushed deeply, and inclined my head.

"No, thank you!" said Mr. Spenlow, coldly, as I mechani-
cally offered them back to him. " I will not deprive you of
them. Miss Murdstone, be so good as to proceed ! "

That gentle creature, after a moment's thoughtful survey
of the carpet, delivered herself with much dry unction as
follows :

"I must confess to having entertained my suspicions of
Miss Spenlow, in reference to David Copperfield, for some



122 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

time. I observed Miss Spenlow and David Copperfield when
they first met ; and the impression made upon me then was
not agreeable. The depravity of the human heart is such — "

"You will oblige me, ma'ani," interrupted Mr. Spenlow,
" by confining yourself to facts."

Miss Murdstone cast down her eyes, shook her head as if
protesting against this unseemly interruption, and with frown-
ing dignity resumed :

" Since I am to confine myself to. facts, I will state them as
drily as I can. Perhaps that will be considered an acceptable
course of proceeding. I have already said, sir, that I have
had my suspicions of Miss Spenlow, in reference to David
Copperfield, for some time. I have frequently endeavored to
find decisive corroboration of those suspicions, but without
effect. I have therefore forborne to mention them to Miss
Spenlow's father ; " looking severely at him ; " knowing how
little disposition there usually is in such cases, to acknowledge
the conscientious discharge of duty."

Mr. Spenlow seemed quite cowed by the gentlemanly stern-
ness of Miss Murdstone's manner, and deprecated her severity
with a conciliatory little wave of his hand.

"On my return to Norwood, after the period of absence
occasioned by my brother's marriage," pursued Miss Murd-
stone in a disdainful voice, "and on the return of Miss Spen-
low from her visit to her friend Miss Mills, I imagined that
the manner of Miss Spenlow gave me greater occasion for
suspicion than before. Therefore I watched Miss Spenlow
closely."

Dear, tender little Dora, so unconscious of this Dragon's eye.

" Still," resumed Miss Murdstone, " I found no proof until
last night. It appeared to me that Miss Spenlow received too
many letters from her friend Miss Mills ; but Miss Mills being
her friend with her father's full concurrence," another telling
blow at Mr. Spenlow, " it was not for me to interfere. If I
may not be permitted to allude to the natural depravity of the
human heart, at least I may — I must — be permitted, so far
to refer to misplaced confidence."

Mr. Spenlow apologetically murmured his assent.

"Last evening after tea," pursued Miss Murdstone, "I ob-



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 123

served the little dog starting, rolling, and growling about the
drawing-room, worrying something. I said to Miss Spenlow,
c Dora, what is that the dog has in his mouth ? It's paper/
Miss Spenlow immediately put her hand to her frock, gave a
sudden cry, and ran to the dog. I interposed, and said, e Dora
my love, you must permit me.' "

Oh, Jip, miserable Spaniel, this wretchedness, then, was your
work !

"Miss Spenlow endeavored/' said Miss Murdstone, "to
bribe me with kisses, work-boxes, and small articles of
jewelry — that, of course, I pass over. The little dog re-
treated under the sofa on my approaching him, and was with
great difficulty dislodged by the fire-irons. Even when dis-
lodged, he still kept the letter in his mouth; and on my
endeavoring to take it from him, at the imminent risk of being
bitten, he kept it between his teeth so pertinaciously as to
suffer himself to be held suspended in the air by means of the
document. At length I obtained possession of it. After
perusing it, I taxed Miss Spenlow with having many such
letters in her possession ; and ultimately obtained from her,
the packet which is now in David Copperfield's hand."

Here she ceased ; and snapping her reticule again, and shut-
ting her mouth, looked as if she might be broken, but could
never be bent.

"You have heard Miss Murdstone/' said Mr. Spenlow, turn-
ing to me. "I beg to ask, Mr. Copperfield, if you have any-
thing to say in reply ? "

The picture I had before me, of the beautiful little treasure
of my heart, sobbing and crying all night — of her being
alone, frightened, and wretched, then — of her having so
piteously begged and prayed that stony-hearted woman to
forgive her — of her having vainly offered her those kisses,
work-boxes, and trinkets — of her being in such grievous dis-
tress, and all for me — very much impaired the little dignity
I had been able to muster. I am afraid I was in a tremulous
state for a minute or so, though I did my best to disguise it.

" There is nothing I can say, sir," I returned, " except that
all the blame is mine. Dora — V

"Miss Spenlow, if you please," said her father, majestically.



124 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" — was induced and persuaded by me," I went on, swal-
lowing that colder designation, " to consent to this conceal-
ment, and I bitterly regret it."

"You are very much to blame, sir," said Mr. Spenlow,
walking to and fro upon the hearth-rug, and emphasizing what
he said with his whole body instead of his head, on account
of the stiffness of his cravat and spine. "You have done a
stealthy and unbecoming action, Mr. Copperfield. When I
take a gentleman to my house, no matter whether he is nine-
teen, twenty -nine, or ninety, I take him there in a spirit of
confidence. If he abuses my confidence, he commits a dis-
honorable action, Mr. Copperfield."

"I feel it, sir, I assure you," I returned. "But I nev£r
thought so, before. Sincerely, honestly, indeed, Mr. Spenlow,
I never thought so ; before. I love Miss Spenlow to that
extent — "

" Pooh ! nonsense ! " said Mr. Spenlow, reddening. " Pray
don't tell me to my face that you love my daughter, Mr.
Copperfield ! "

" Could I defend my conduct if I did not, sir ? " I returned,
with all humility,

" Can you defend your conduct if you do, sir ? " said Mr.
Spenlow, stopping short upon the hearth-rug. "Have you
considered your years, and my daughter's years, Mr. Copper-
field ? Have you considered what it is to undermine the con-
fidence that should subsist between my daughter and myself ?
Have you considered my daughter's station in life, the projects
I may contemplate for her advancement, the testamentary
intentions I may have with reference to her? Have you
considered anything, Mr. Copperfield ? "

" Very little, sir, I am afraid," I answered, speaking to him
as respectfully and sorrowfully as I felt ; " but pray believe
me, I have considered my own worldly position. When I
explained it to you, we were already engaged — "

"I beg," said Mr. Spenlow, more like Punch than I had
ever seen him, as he energetically struck one hand upon the
other — I could not help noticing that even in my despair ;
"that you will not talk to me of engagements, Mr. Copper-
field ! »





The otherwise immovable Miss Murdstone laughed con-
temptuously in one short syllable.

"When I explained my altered position to you, sir/' I
began again, substituting a new form of expression for what
was so unpalatable to him ; " this concealment, into which I
am so unhappy as to have led Miss Spenlow, had begun.
Since I have been in that altered position, I have strained
every nerve, I have exerted every energy, to improve it. I am
sure I shall improve it in time. Will you grant me time —
any length of time ? We are both so young, sir, — "

"You are right," interrupted Mr. Spenlow, nodding his
head a great many times, and frowning very much, "you are
both very young. It's all nonsense. Let there be an end of
the nonsense. Take away those letters, and throw them in
the fire. Give me Miss Spenlow's letters to throw in the
fire ; and although our future intercourse must, you are aware,
be restricted to the Commons here, we will agree to make no
further mention of. the past. Come, Mr. Copperfield, you
don't want sense ; and this is the sensible course."

No. I couldn't think of agreeing to it. I was very sorry,
but there was a higher consideration than sense. Love was
above all earthly considerations, and I loved Dora to idolatry,
and Dora loved me. I didn't exactly say so; I softened it
down as much as I could ; but I implied it, and I was resolute
upon it. I don't think I made myself very ridiculous, but I
know I was resolute.

" Very well, Mr. Copperfield," said Mr. Spenlow, " I must
try my influence with my daughter."

Miss Murdstone, by an expressive sound, a long drawn
respiration, which was neither a sigh nor a moan, but was
like both, gave it as her opinion that he should have done
this at first.

* I must try," said Mr. Spenlow, confirmed by this support,
"my influence with my daughter. Do you decline to take
those letters, Mr. Copperfield?" For I had laid them on
the table.

Yes. I told him I hoped he would not think it wrong, but
I couldn't possibly take them from Miss Murdstone,

" Nor from me ? " said Mr. Spenlow.



126 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

'No, I replied with, the profoundest respect ; nor from him.

" Very well ! " said Mr. Spenlow.

A silence succeeding, I was undecided whether to go or
stay. At length I was moving quietly towards the door, with
the intention of saying that perhaps I should consult his
feelings best by withdrawing : when he said, with his hands
in his coat pockets, into which it was as much as he could do
to get them; and with what I should call, upon the whole, a
decidedly pious air :

" You are probably aware, Mr. Copperfield, that I am not
altogether destitute of worldly possessions, and that my daugh-
ter is my nearest and dearest relative ? "

I hurriedly made him a reply to the effect, that I hoped the
error into which I had been betrayed by the desperate nature
of my love, did not induce him to think me mercenary too ?

" I don't allude to the matter in that light," said Mr. Spen-
low. " It would be better for yourself, and all of us, if you
were mercenary, Mr. Copperfield — I mean, if you were more
discreet and less influenced by all this youthful nonsense.
Ko. I merely say, with quite another view, you are probably
aware I have Some property to bequeath to my child ? "

I certainly supposed so.

"And you can hardly think," said Mr. Spenlow, " having
experience of what we see, in the Commons here, every day,
of the various unaccountable and negligent proceedings of
men, in respect of their testamentary arrangements — of all
subjects, the one on which perhaps the strangest revelations
of human inconsistency are to be met with — but that mine
are made ? f

I inclined my head in acquiescence.

"I should not allow," said Mr. Spenlow, with an evident
increase of pious sentiment, and slowly shaking his head as
he poised himself upon his toes and heels alternately, "my
suitable provision for my child to be influenced by a piece of
youthful folly like the present. It is mere folly. Mere
nonsense. In a little while, it will weigh lighter than any
feather. But I might — I might — if this silly business were
not completely relinquished altogether, be induced in some
anxious moment to guard her from, and surround her with



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 127

protections against, the consequences of any foolish, step in
the way of marriage. Now, Mr. Copperfield, I hope that you
will not render it necessary for me to open, even for a quarter
of an hour, that closed page in the book of life, and unsettle,
even for a quarter of an hour, grave affairs long since com-
posed."

There was a serenity, a tranquillity, a calm-sunset air
about him, which quite affected me. He was so peaceful and
resigned — clearly had his affairs in such perfect train, and so
systematically wound up — that he was a man to feel touched
in the contemplation of. I really think I saw tears rise to his
eyes, from the depth of his own feeling of all this.

But what could I do ? I could not deny Dora and my own
heart. When he told me I had better take a week to consider
of what he had said, how could I say I wouldn't take a week,
yet how could I fail to know that no amount of weeks could
influence such love as mine ?

" In the meantime, confer with Miss Trotwood, or with any
person with any knowledge of life," said Mr. Spenlow, adjust-
ing his cravat with both hands. " Take a week, Mr. Copper-
field."

I submitted ; and, with a countenance as expressive as I
was able to make it of dejected and despairing constancy, came
out of the room. Miss Murdstone's heavy eyebrows followed
me to the door — I say her eyebrows rather than her eyes,
because they were much more important in her face — and she
looked so exactly as she used to look, at about that hour of
the morning, in our parlor at Blunderstone, that I could have
fancied I had been breaking down in my lessons again, and
that the dead weight on my mind was that horrible old spelling-
book with oval woodcuts, shaped, to my youthful fancy, like
the glasses out of spectacles.

When I got to the office, and, shutting out old Tiffey and
the rest of them with my hands, sat at my desk, in my own
particular nook, thinking of this earthquake that had taken
place so unexpectedly, and in the bitterness of my spirit
cursing Jip, I fell into such a state of torment about Dora,
that I wonder I did not take up my hat and rush insanely to
Norwood. The idea of their frightening her, and making her



128 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

cry, and of my not being there to comfort her, was so excruci-
ating, that it impelled me to write a wild letter to Mr. Spenlow,
beseeching him not to visit upon her the consequences of my
awful destiny. I implored him to spare her gentle nature —
not to crush a fragile flower — and addressed him generally,
to the best of my remembrance, as if, instead of being her
father, he had been an Ogre, or the Dragon of Wantley. This
letter I sealed and laid upon his desk before he returned ; and
when he came in, I saw him, through the half -opened door of
his room, take it up and read it.

He said nothing about it all the morning; but before he
went away in'the afternoon he called me in, and told me that
I need not make myself at all uneasy about his daughter's
happiness. He had assured her, he said, that it was all non-
sense ; and he had nothing more to say to her. He believed
he was an indulgent father (as indeed he was), and I might
spare myself any solicitude on her account.

" You may make it necessary, if you are foolish or obstinate,
Mr. Copperfield," he observed, " for me to send my daughter
abroad again, for a term ; but I have a better opinion of you.
I hope you will be wiser than that, in a few days. As to
Miss Murdstone," for I had alluded to her in the letter, "I
respect that lady's vigilance, and feel obliged to her ; but she
has strict charge to avoid the subject. All I desire, Mr. Cop-
perfield, is, that it should be forgotten. All you have got to
do, Mr. Copperfield, is, to forget it."

All ! In the note I wrote to Miss Mills, I bitterly quoted
this sentiment. All I had to do, I said, with gloomy sarcasm,
was to forget Dora. That was all, and what was that ? I
entreated Miss Mills to see me, that evening. If it could not-
be done with Mr. Mills sanction and concurrence, I besought
a clandestine interview in the back kitchen where the Mangle
was. I informed her that my reason was tottering on its
throne, and only she, Miss Mills, could prevent its being
deposed. I signed myself, hers distractedly; and I couldn't
help feeling, when I read this composition over, before sending
it by a porter, that it was something in the style of Mr.
Micawber.

However, I sent it. At night I repaired to Miss Mills's



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 129

street, and walked up and down, until I was stealthily fetched
in by Miss Mills's maid, and taken the area way to the back
kitchen. I have since seen reason to believe that there was
nothing on earth to prevent my going in at the front door, and
being shown up into the drawing-room, except Miss Mills's
love of the romantic and mysterious.

In the back kitchen I raved as became me. I went there, I
suppose, to make a fool of myself, and I am quite sure I did it.
Miss Mills had received a hasty note from Dora, telling her
that all was discovered, and saying, " Oh, pray come to me,
Julia, do, do ! " But Miss Mills, mistrusting the acceptability
of her presence to the higher powers, had not yet gone ; and
we were all benighted in the Desert of Sahara.

Miss Mills had a wonderful flow of words, and liked to pour
them out. I could not help feeling, though she mingled her
tears with mine, that she had a dreadful luxury in our afflic-
tions. She petted them, as I may say, and made the most of
them. A deep gulf, she observed, had opened between Dora
and me, and Love could only span it with its rainbow. Love
must suffer in this stern world ; it ever had been so, it ever
would be so. "No matter, Miss Mills remarked. Hearts confined
by cobwebs would burst at last, and then Love was avenged.

This was small consolation, but Miss Mills wouldn't encour-
age fallacious hopes. She made me much more wretched than
I was before, and I felt (and told her with the deepest grati-
tude) that she was indeed a friend. We resolved that she
should go to Dora the first thing in the morning, and find
some means of assuring her, either by looks or words, of my
devotion and misery. We parted, overwhelmed with grief;
and I think Miss Mills enjoyed herself completely.

I confided all to my aunt when I got home ; and in spite of
all she could say to me, went to bed despairing. I got up
despairing, and went out despairing. It was Saturday morn-
ing, and I went straight to the Commons.

I was surprised, when I came within sight of our office-door,
to see the ticket-porters standing outside talking together, and
some half dozen stragglers gazing at the windows which were
shut up. I quickened my pace, and, passing among them,
wondering at their looks, went hurriedly in.

VOL. II — 9



130 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

The clerks were there, but nobody was doing anything.
Old Tiffey, for the first time in his life I should think, was
sitting on somebody else's stool, and had not hung up his
hat.

"This is a dreadful calamity, Mr. Copperfield," said he, as I
entered.

"What is ? " I exclaimed. " What's the matter ? "

" Don't you know ? " cried Tiffey, and all the rest of them,
coming round me.

" Xo ! " said I, looking from face to face.

"Mr. Spenlow," said Tiffey.

"What about him?"

"Dead!"

I though it was the office reeling, and not I, as one of the
clerks caug] hold of me. They sat me down in a chair,
untied my neckcloth, and brought me some water. I have no
idea whether th ? took any time.

" Dead ? " said I.

" He dined in town yesterday, and drove down in the phae-
ton by himself," said Tiffey, "having sent his own groom
home by the coach, as he sometimes did, you know — m

" Well ? "

"The phaeton went home without him. The horses stopped
at the stable gate. The man went out with a lantern.
^Nobody in the carriage."

" Had they run away ? "

" They were not hot," said Tiffey, putting on his glasses ;
" no hotter, I understand, than they would have been, going
down at the usual pace. The reins were broken, but they had
been dragging on the ground. The house was roused up
directly, and three of them went out along the road. They
found him a mile off."

" More than a mile off, Mr. Tiffey," interposed a junior.

"Was it? I believe you are right," said Tiffey, — "more
than a mile off — not far from the church — lying partly on
the road-side, and partly on the path, upon his face. Whether
he fell out in a fit, or got out, feeling ill before the fit came
on — or even whether he was quite dead then, though there is
no doubt he was quite insensible — no one appears to know.








If he breathed, certainly he never spoke. Medical assistance
was got as soon as possible, but it was quite useless."

I cannot describe the state of mind into which I was thrown
by this intelligence. The shock of such an event happening
so suddenly, and happening to one with whom I had been in
any respect at variance — the appalling vacancy in the room
he had occupied so lately, where his chair and table seemed to
wait for him, and his handwriting of yesterday was like a
ghost — the indefinable impossibility of separating him from
the place, and feeling, when the door opened, as if he might
come in — the lazy hush and rest there was in the office, and
the insatiable relish with which our people talked about it,
and other people came in and out all day, and gorged them-
selves with the subjbo — this is easily intelligible to any one.
What I cannot d cribe is, ^ow, in the innermost recesses of
my own heart, I had-a, lurking jealousy even of Death. How
I felt as if its might wou I ush me from my ground in Dora's
thoughts. How I was, in a grudging way I have no words
for, envious of her grief. How it made me restless to think
of her w r eeping to others, or being consoled by others. How
I had a grasping, avaricious wish to shut out everybody from
her but myself, and to be all in all to her, at that unseasonable
time of all times.

In the trouble of this state of mind — not exclusively my
own, I hope, but known to others — I went down to Norwood
that night ; and finding from one of the servants, when I made
my inquiries at the door, that Miss Mills was there, got my
aunt to direct a letter to her, which I wrote. I deplored the
untimely death of Mr. -penlow most sincerely, and shed tears
in doing so. I entreated her to tell Dora, if Dora were in a
state to hear it, that he had spoken to me with the utmost
kindness and consideration • and had coupled nothing but ten-
derness, not a single or reproachful word, with her name. I
know I did this selfishly, to have my name brought before
her ; but I tried to believe it was an act of justice to his mem-
ory. Perhaps I did believe it.

My aunt received a few lines next day in reply ; addressed,
outside, to her ; within, to me. Dora was overcome by grief ;
and when her friend had asked her should she send her love to



132 THE PEBSONAL HISTOBY AND EXPEBIENCE

me ; had only cried, as she was always crying, " Oh, dear papa !
oh, poor papa ! " But she had not said No, and that I made
the mo t of.

Mr. Jorkins, who had been at Norwood since the occurrence,
came to the office a few days afterwards. He and Tiffey were
closeted together for some few moments, and then Tiffey
looked out at the door and beckoned me in.

"Oh!" said Mr. Jorkins. "Mr. Tiffey and myself, Mr.
Copperfield, are about to examine the desk, the drawers, and
other such repositories of the deceased, with the view of seal-
ing up his private papers, and searching for a Will. There is
no trace of any, elsewhere. It may be as well for you to
assist us, if you please."

I " ad been n agony to obtain some knowledge of the
circumstances in which my Dora would be placed — as, in
whose guardianship, and so forth — uiid this was something
towards it. We began the search at once ; Mr. Jorkins unlock-
ing the drawers and desks, and we all taking out the papers.
The office papers we placed on one side, and the private
papers (which were not numerous) on the other. We were
very grave ; and when we came to a stray seal, or pencil-case,
or ring, or any little article of that kind which we associated
personally with him, we spoke very low.

We had sealed up several packets 3 and were still going on
dustily and quietly, when Mr. Jorkins said to us, applying
exactly the same words to his late partner as his late partner
had applied to him :

"Mr. Spenlow was very difficult to move from the beaten
track. You know what he was ! I am disposed to think he
had made no will."

" Oh, I know he had ! " said I.

They both stopped and looked at me.

"On the very day when I last saw him," said I, "he told
me that he had, and that his affairs were long since settled."

Mr. Jorkins and old Tiffey shook their heads with one
accord.

"That looks unpromising," said Tiffey.

"Very unpromising," said Mr. Jorkins.

" Surely you don't doubt — "I began.



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 133

u My good Mr. Copperfiold ! * said Tiffey, laying his hand
upon my arm, and shutting up both his eyes as he shook his
head : u if you had been in the Commons as long as I have,
you would know that there is no subject on which men are so
inconsistent, and so little to be trusted."

" Why, bless my soul, he made that very remark ! " I replied
persistently.

"I should call that almost final," observed Tiffey. "My
opinion is — no will."

It appeared a wonderful thing to me, but it turned out that
there was no will. He had never so much as thought of mak-
ing one, so far as his papers afforded any evidence ; for there
was no kind of hint, sketch, or memorandum, of any testamen-
tary intention whatever. What was scarcely less astonishing
to me, was, that his affairs were in a most disordered state. It
was extremely difficult, I heard, to make out what he owed, or
what he had paid, or of what he died possessed. It was con-
sidered likely that for years he could have had no clear opin-
ion on these subjects himself. By little and little it came out,
that, in the competition on all points of appearance and gen-
tility then running high in the Commons, he had spent more
than his professional income, which was not a very large one,
and had reduced his private means, if they ever had been
great (which was exceedingly doubtful), to a very low ebb
indeed. There was a sale of the furniture and lease, at Nor-
wood ;.and Tiffey told me, little thinking how interested I was
in the story, that, paying all the just debts of the deceased,
and deducting his share of outstanding bad and doubtful debts
due to the firm, he wouldn't give a thousand pounds for all
the assets remaining.

This was at the expiration of about six weeks. I had suf-
fered tortures all the time ; and thought I really must have
laid violent hands upon myself, when Miss Mills still reported
to me, that my broken-hearted little Dora would say nothing,
when I was mentioned, but " Oh, poor papa ! Oh, dear papa ! n
Also, that she had no other relations than two aunts, maiden
sisters of Mr. Spenlow, who lived at Putney, and who had not
held any other than chance communication with their brother
for many years. Not that they had ever quarrelled (Miss



134 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

Mills informed me); but that having been, on the occasion
of Dora^s christening, invited to tea, when they considered
themselves privileged to be invited to dinner, they had
expressed their opinion, in writing, that it was " better for the
happiness of all parties n that they should stay away. Since
which they had gone their road, and their brother had gone
his.

These two ladies now emerged from their retirement, and
proposed to take Dora to live at Putney. Dora, clinging to
them both, and weeping, exclaimed, " yes, aunts ! Please
take Julia Mills and me and Jip to Putney ! " So they went,
very soon after the funeral.

How I found time to haunt Putney, I am sure I don't know ;
but I contrived, by some means or other, to prowl about the
neighborhood pretty often. Miss Mills, for the more exact
discharge of the duties of friendship, kept a journal ; and she
used to meet me sometimes, on the Common, and read it, or
(if she had not time to do that) lend it to me. How I treas-
ured up the entries, of which I subjoin a sample !

" Monday. My sweet D. still much depressed. Headache.
Called attention to J. as being beautifully sleek. D. fondled
J. Associations thus awakened, opened floodgates of sorrow.
Rush of grief admitted. (Are tears the dewdrops of the
heart? J. M.)

"Tuesday. D. weak and nervous. Beautiful in pallor.
(Do we not remark this in moon likewise ? J. M.) D. J. M.
and J. took airing in carriage. J. looking out of window, and
barking violently at dustmen, occasioned smile to overspread
features of D. (Of sucli slight links is chain of life composed !
J. M.)

" Wednesday. D. comparatively cheerful. Sang to her, as
congenial melody, Evening Bells. Effect not soothing, but
reverse. D. inexpressibly affected. Found sobbing afterwards,
in own room. Quoted verses respecting self and young Gazelle.
Ineffectually. Also referred to Patience on Monument. (Qy.
Why on Monument ? J. M.)

" Thursday. D. certainly improved* Better night. Slight
tinge of damask revisiting cheek. Resolved to mention name
of D. C. Introduced same, cautiously, in coarse of airing. D.



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 135

immediately overcome. < Oh, dear, dear Julia ! Oh, I have
been a naughty and undutiful child ! ' Soothed and caressed.
Drew ideal picture of D. C. on verge of tomb. D. again over-
come. ' Oh, what shall I do, what shall I do ? Oh, take me
somewhere !' Much alarmed. Fainting of D. and glass of
water from public-house. (Poetical affinity. Chequered sign
on door-post ; chequered human life. Alas ! J. M.)

" Friday. Day of incident. Man appears in kitchen, with
blue bag, 'for lady's boots left out to heel/ Cook replies,
'No such orders/ Man argues point. Cook withdraws to
inquire, leaving man alone with J. On Cook's return, man
still argues point, but ultimately goes. J, missing. D. dis-
tracted. Information sent to police. Man to be identified by
broad nose, and legs like balustrades of bridge. Search made
in every direction. No J. D. weeping bitterly, and incon-
solable. Kenewed reference to young Gazelle. Appropriate,
but unavailing. Towards evening, strange boy calls. Brought
into parlor. Broad nose, but no balustrades. Says he* wants
a pound, and knows a dog. Declines to explain further,
though much pressed. Pound being produced by D. takes
Cook to little house, where J. alone tied up to leg of table.
Joy of D. who dances round J. while he eats his supper.
Emboldened by this happy change, mention D. C. up stairs.
D. weeps afresh, cries piteously. 'Oh, don't, don't, don't.
It is so wicked to think of anything but poor papa!' —
embraces J. and sobs herself to sleep. (Must not D. C. con-
fine himself to the broad pinions of Time ? J. M.) "

Miss Mills and her 'journal were my sole consolation at this
period. To see her, who had seen Dora but a little while
before — to trace the initial letter of Dora's name through her
sympathetic pages — to be made more and more miserable by
her — were my only comforts. I felt as if I had been living
in a palace of cards, which had tumbled down, leaving only
Miss Mills and me among the ruins ; as if some grim enchanter
had drawn a magic circle round the innocent goddess of my
heart, which nothing indeed but those same strong pinions,
capable of carrying so many people over so much, would
enable me to enter !



136 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE



CHAPTER X._

WICKFIELD AXD HEEP.

JIy aunt ; beginning, I imagine, to be made seriously uncom-
fortable by my prolonged dejection, made a pretence of being
anxious that I should go to Dover, to see that all was working
well at the cottage, which was let ; and to conclude an agree-
ment, with the same tenant, for a longer term of occupation.
Janet was drafted into the service of Mrs. Strong, where I saw
her every day. She had been undecided, on leaving Dover,
whether or no to give the finishing touch to that renuncia-
tion of mankind in which she had been educated, by marrying
a pilot ; but she decided against that venture. Xot so much
for the sake of principle, I believe, as because she happened
not to like him.

Although it required an effort to leave Miss Mills, I fell
rather willingly into my aunt's pretence, as a means of ena-
bling me to pass a few tranquil hours with Agnes. I consulted
the good Doctor relative to an absence of three days ; and the
Doctor wishing me to take that relaxation, — he wished me to
take more ; but my energy could not bear that, — I made up
my mine to go.

As to the Commons, I had no great occasion to be particular
about my duties in that quarter. To say the truth, we were
getting in no very good odor among the tip-top proctors, and
were rapidly sliding down to but a doubtful position. The
business had been indifferent under Mr. Jorkins, before Mr.
Spenlow's time ; and although it had been quickened by the
infusion of new blood, and by the display which Mr. Spenlow
made, still it was not established on a sufficiently strong basis
to bear, without being shaken, such a blow as the sudden loss
of its active manager. It fell off very much. Mr. Jorkins,
notwithstanding his reputation in the firm, was an easy-going,
incapable sort of man, whose reputation out of doors was not



OF DAVID C0PPEBF1ELD. 137

calculated to back it up. I was turned over to him now, and
when I saw him take his snuff and let the business go", I
regretted my aunt's thousand pounds more than ever.

But this was not the worst of it. There were a number of
hangers-on and out-siders about the Commons, who, without
being proctors themselves, dabbled in common-form business,
and got it done by real proctors, who lent their names in con-
sideration of a share in the spoil; — and there were a good
many of these too. As our house now wanted business on any
terms, we joined this noble band ; and threw out lures to the
hangers-on and out-siders, to bring their business to us. Mar-
riage licenses and small probates were what we all looked for,
and what paid us best ; and the competition for these ran very
high indeed. Kidnappers and inveiglers were planted in all
the avenues of entrance to the Commons, with instructions to
do their utmost to cut off all persons in mourning, and all
gentlemen with anything bashful in their appearance, and
entice them to the offices in which their respective employers
were interested; which instructions were so well observed,
that I myself, before I was known by sight, was twice hustled
into the premises of our principal opponent. The conflicting
interests of these touting gentlemen being of a nature to irri-
tate their feelings, personal collisions took place ; and the
Commons was even scandalized by our principal inveigler
(who had formerly been in the wine trade, and afterwards in
the sworn brokery line) walking about for some days with a
black eye. Any one of these scouts used to think nothing of
politely assisting an old lady in black out of a vehicle, killing
any proctor whom she inquired for, representing his employer
as the lawful successor and representative of that proctor, and
bearing the old lady off (sometimes greatly affected) to his
employer's office. Many captives were brought to me in this
way. As to marriage licenses, the competition rose to such a
pitch, that a shy gentleman in want of one, had nothing to do
but submit himself to the first inveigler, or be fought for, and
become the prey of the strongest. One of our clerks, who was
an out-sider, used, in the height of this contest, to sit with his
hat on, that he might be ready to rush out and swear before
a surrogate any victim who was brought in. The system of



138 THE PEESONAL HISTOBY AND EXPERIENCE

inveigling continues, I believe, to this day. The last time
I was in the Commons, a civil able-bodied person in a white
apron pounced out upon me from a doorway, and whispering
the word " Marriage-license " in, my ear, was with great diffi-
culty prevented from taking me up in his arms and lifting me
into a proctor's.

From this digression, let me proceed to Dover.

I found everything in a satisfactory state at the cottage;
and was enabled to gratify my aunt exceedingly by reporting
that the tenant inherited her feud, and waged incessant war
against donkeys. Having settled the little business I had to
transact there, and slept there one night, I walked on to Can-
terbury early in the morning. It was now winter again ; and
the fresh, cold, windy day, and the sweeping downland, bright-
ened up my hopes a little.

Coming into Canterbury, I loitered through the old streets
with a sober pleasure that calmed my spirits, and eased my
heart. There were the old signs, the old name^ over the shops,
the old people serving in them. It appeared so long, since I
had been a schoolboy there, that I wondered the place was so
little changed, until I reflected how little I was changed myself.
Strange to say, that quiet influence which was inseparable in
my mind from Agnes, seemed to pervade even the city where
she dwelt. The venerable cathedral towers, and the old jack-
daws and rooks, whose airy voices made them more retired
than perfect silence would have done ; the battered gateways,
once stuck full with statues, long thrown down, and crumbled
away, like the reverential pilgrims who had gazed upon them ;
bhe still nooks, where the ivied growth of centuries crept over
gabled ends and ruined walls 5 the ancient houses, the pastoral
landscape of field, orchard, and garden ; everywhere — on
everything — I felt the same serener air, the same calm,
thoughtful, softening spirit'.

Arrived at Mr. Wickfield's house, I found, in the little lower
room on the ground floor, where Uriah Heep had been of old
accustomed to sit, Mr. Micawber plying his pen with great
assiduity. He was dressed in a legal-looking suit of black,
and loomed, burly and large, in that small office.

Mr. Micawber was extremely glad to see me, but a little



OF DAVID COPPERFISLD. 139

confused too. He would have conducted me immediately into
the presence of Uriah, but I declined.

"I know the house of old, you recollect," said I, "and
will find my way up stairs. How do you like the law, Mr.
Micawber ? ,"

" My dear Copperfield," he replied. " To a man possessed pf
the higher imaginative powers, the objection to legal studies
is the amount of detail which they involve. Even in our
professional correspondence," said Mr. Micawber, glancing at
some letters he was writing, "the mind is not at liberty to
soar to any exalted form of expression. Still it is a great
pursuit. A great pursuit ! "

He then told me that he had become the tenant of Uriah
Heep's old house ; and that Mrs. Micawber would be delighted
to receive me, once more, under her own roof.

"It is humble," said Mr. Micawber, "to quote a favorite
expression of my friend Heep ; but it may prove the stepping-
stone to more ambitious domiciliary accommodation."

I asked him whether he had reason, so far, to be satisfied
with his friend Heep's treatment of him ? He got up to
ascertain if the door were close shut, before he replied, in a
lower voice :

" My dear Copperfield, a man who labors under the pressure
of pecuniary embarrassments, is, with the generality of people^
at a disadvantage. That disadvantage is not diminished, when
that pressure necessitates the drawing of stipendiary emolu-
ments, before those emoluments are strictly due and payable.
All I can say is, that my friend Heep has responded to
appeals to which I need not more particularly refer, in a man-
ner calculated to redound equally to the honor of his head,
and of his heart."

" I should not have supposed him to be very free with his
money either," I observed.

" Pardon me ! " said Mr. Micawber, with an air of constraint,
" I speak of my friend Heep as I have experience."

" I am glad your experience is so favorable," I returned.

"You are very obliging, my dear Copperfield," said Mr.
Micawber ; and hummed a tune.



140 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

a Do you see much, of Mr. Wickfield ? " I asked, to change
the subject.

" Not much," said Mr. Micawber, slightingly. " Mr. Wick-
field is, I dare say, a man of very excellent intentions j but he
is — in short, he is obsolete."

" I am afraid his partner seeks to make him so," said I.

" My dear Copperfield ! " returned Mr. Micawber, after some
uneasy evolutions on his stool, " allow me to offer a remark !
I am here, in a capacity of confidence. I am here, in a posi-
tion of trust. The discussion of some topics, even with Mrs.
Micawber herself (so long the partner of my various vicissi-
tudes, and a woman of a remarkable lucidity of intellect), is,
I am led to consider, incompatible with the functions now
devolving on me. I would therefore take the liberty of sug-
gesting that in our friendly intercourse — which I trust will
never be disturbed! — we draw 'a line. On one side of this
line," said Mr. Micawber, representing it on the desk with the
office ruler, "is the whole range of the human intellect^ with
a trifling exception ; on the other, is that exception ; that is
to say, the affairs of Messrs. Wickfield and Heep, with all
belonging and appertaining thereunto. I trust I give no
offence to the companion of my youth, in submitting this
proposition to his cooler judgment ? "

Though I saw an uneasy change in Mr. Micawber, which
sat tightly on him, as if his new duties were a misfit, I felt I
had no right to be offended. My telling him so, appeared to
relieve him ; and he shook hands with me.

" I am charmed, Copperfield," said Mr. Micawber, " let me
assure you, with Miss Wickfield. She is a very superior
young lady, of very remarkable attractions, graces, and virtues.
Upon my honor," said Mr. Micawber, indefinitely kissing his
hand and bowing with his genteelest air, "I do Homage U
Miss Wickfield ! Hem ! "

" I am glad of that, at least," said I.

"If you had not assured us, my dear Copperfield, on the occ?
sion of that agreeable afternoon we had the happiness of pas .
ing with you, that D. was your favorite letter," said M/.
Micawber, "I should unquestionably have supposed that A.
had been so."



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 141

We have all some experience of a feeling, that comes over
us occasionally, of what we are saying and doing having been
said and done before, in a remote time — of our having been sur-
rounded, dim ages ago, by the same faces, objects, and circum-
stances — of our knowing perfectly what will be said next, as if
we suddenly remembered it ! I never had this mysterious impres-
sion more strongly in my life, than before he uttered those words.

I took my leave of Mr. Micawber, for the time, charging him
with my best remembrances to all at home. As I left him,,
resuming his stool and his pen, and rolling his head in his
stock, to get it into easier writing order, I clearly perceived
that there was something interposed between him and me,
since he had come into his new functions which prevented our
getting at each other as we used to do, and quite altered the
character of our intercourse.

There was no one in the quaint old drawing-room, though it
presented tokens of Mrs. Heep's whereabout. I looked into
the room still belonging to Agnes, and saw her sitting by the
fire, at a pretty old-fashioned desk she had, writing.

My darkening the light made her look up. What a pleasure
to be the cause of that bright change in her attentive face, and
the object of that sweet regard and welcome !

"Ah, Agnes !" said I, when we were sitting together, side
by side ; " I have missed you so much, lately ! "

" Indeed ? " she replied. " Again ! And so soon ? "

I shook my head.

" I don't know how it is, Agnes ; I seem to want some
faculty of mind that I ought to have. You were so much in
the habit of thinking for me, in the happy old days here, and
I came so naturally to you for counsel and support, that I
really think I have missed acquiring it."

" And what is it ? " said Agnes, cheerfully.

" I don't know what to call it," I replied. " T think I am
earnest and persevering ? "

" I am sure of it," said Agnes.

"And patient, Agnes ? " I inquired, with a little hesitation.

" Yes," returned Agnes, laughing. " Pretty well."

"And yet," said I, "I get so miserable and worried, and
am so unsteady and irresolute in my power of assuring myself,



142 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

that I know I must want — shall I call it — reliance, of some
kind?"

" Call it so, if you will/' said Agnes.

"Well!" I returned. "See here! You come to London,
I rely on you, and I have an object and a course at once. I
am driven out of it, I come here, and in a moment I feel an
altered person. The circumstances that distressed me are
not changed, since I came into this room ; but an influence
comes over me in that short interval that alters me, oh, how
much for the better ! What is it ? What is your secret,
Agnes ? "

Her head was bent down, looking at the fire.

" It's the old story," said I. " Don't laugh, when I say it
was always the same in little things as it is in greater ones.
My old troubles were nonsense, and now they are serious ; but
whenever I have gone away from my adopted sister — "

Agnes looked up — with such a Heavenly face ! — and gave
me her hand, which I kissed.

"Whenever I have not had you, Agnes, to advise and
approve in the beginning, I have seemed to go wild, and to get
into all sorts of difficulty. When I have come to you, at last
(as I have always done), I have come to peace and happiness.
I come home, now, like a tired traveller, and find such a
blessed sense of rest ! "

I felt so deeply what I said, it affected me so sincerely, that
my voice failed, and I covered my face with my hand, and
broke into tears. I write the truth. Whatever contradictions
and inconsistencies there were within me, as there are within
so many of us ; whatever might have been so different, and so
much better ; whatever I had done, in which I had perversely
wandered away from the voice of my own heart; I knew
nothing of. I only knew that I was fervently in earnest, when
I felt the rest and peace of having Agnes near me.

In her placid sisterly manner ; with her beaming eyes ; with
her tender voice ; and with that sweet composure, which had
long ago made the house that held her quite a sacred place to
me ; she soon won me from this weakness, and led me on to
tell all that had happened since our last meeting.

"And there is not another word to tell, Agnes," said I,






OF DAVID GOPPERFIELD. 143

when I had made an end of my confidence. " Now, my reliance
is on you."

"But it must not be on me, Trotwood," returned Agnes,
with a pleasant smile. " It must be on some one else."

"On Dora? " said I.

" Assuredly."

"Why, I have not mentioned, Agnes," said I, a little em-
barrassed, " that Dora is rather difficult to — I would not, for
the world, say, to rely upon, because she is the soul of purity
and truth — but rather difficult to — I hardly know how to
express it, really, Agnes. She is a timid little thing, and
easily disturbed and frightened. Some time ago, before her
father's death, when I thought it right to mention to her —
but I'll tell you, if you will bear with me, how it was."

Accordingly, I told Agnes about my declaration of poverty,
about the cookery-book, the housekeeping accounts, and all
the rest of it.

" Oh, Trotwood ! " she remonstrated, with a smile. " Just
your old headlong way ! You might have been in earnest in
striving to get on in the world, without being so very sudden
with a timid, loving, inexperienced girl. Poor Dora ! "

I never heard such sweet forbearing kindness expressed in a
voice, as she expressed in making this reply. It was as if I
had seen her admiringly and tenderly embracing Dora, and
tacitly reproving me, by her considerate protection, for my hot
haste in fluttering that little heart. It was as if I had seen
Dora, in all her fascinating artlessness, caressing Agnes, and
thanking her, and coaxingly appealing against me, and loving
me with all her childish innocence.

I felt so grateful to Agnes, and admired her so ! I saw
those two together, in a bright perspective, such well-associated
friends, each adorning the other so much !

"What ought I to do then, Agnes?" I inquired, after
looking at the fire a little while. " What would it be right
to do ? "

" I think," said Agnes, " that the honorable course to take,
would be to write to those, two ladies. Don't you think that
any secret course is an unworthy one ? "

"Yes. If you think so," said I.



144 THE PERSONAL HISTOET AND EXPEBIENCE

" I am poorly qualified to judge of such matters,", replied
Agnes, with a modest hesitation, "but I certainly feel — in
short, I feel that your being secret and clandestine, is not
being like yourself."

"Like myself, in the too high opinion you have of me,
^gnes, I am afraid," said I.

"Like yourself, in the candor of your nature," she returned ;
"and therefore I would write to those two ladies. I would
relate, as plainly and as openly as possible, all that has taken
place ; and I would ask their permission to visit sometimes, at
their house. Considering that you are young, and striving for
a place in life, I think it would be well to say that you would
readily abide by any conditions they might impose upon you.
I would entreat them not to dismiss your request, without a
reference to Dora; and to discuss it with her when they
should think the time suitable. I would not be too vehe-
ment," said Agnes, gently, "or propose too much. I would
trust to my fidelity and perseverance — and to Dora."

" But if they were to frighten Dora again, Agnes, by speak-
ing to her," said I. " And if Dora were to cry, and say noth-
ing about me ! "

" Is that likely ? " inquired Agnes, with the same sweet
consideration in her face.

" God bless her, she is as easily scared as a bird," said I.
" It might be ! Or if the two Miss Spenlows (elderly ladies of
that sort are odd characters sometimes) should not be likely
persons to address in that way ! "

" I don't think, Trotwood," returned Agnes, raising her soft
eyes to mine, " I would consider that. Perhaps it would be
better only to consider whether' it is right to do this ; and, if
it is, to do it."

I had no longer any doubt on the subject. With a lightened
heart, though with a profound sense of the weighty importance
of my task, I devoted the whole afternoon to the composition
of the draft of this letter; for which great purpose, Agnes
relinquished her desk to me. But first I went down stairs to
see Mr. Wickfield and Uriah Heep.

I found Uriah in possession of a new, plaster-smelling office,
built out in the garden j looking extraordinarily mean, in the





midst of a quantity of books and papers. He received me in
his usual fawning way, and pretended not to have heard of
my arrival from Mr. Micawber ; a pretence I took the liberty
of disbelieving. He accompanied me into Mr. Wickfield's
room, which was the shadow of its former self — having been
divested of a variety of conveniences, for the accommodation
of the new partner — and stood before the fire, warming his
back, and shaving his chin with his bony hand, while Mr.
Wickfield and I exchanged greetings.

" You stay with us, Trotwood, while you remain in Canter-
bury ? " said Mr. Wickfield, not without a glance at Uriah for
his approval.

" Is there room for me ? " said I.

" I am sure, Master Copperfield — I should say Mister, but
the other comes so natural," said Uriah, — "I would turn out
of your old room with pleasure, if it would be agreeable."

"No, no," said Mr. Wickfield. "Why should you be incon-
venienced ? There's another room. There's another room."

" Oh, but you know," returned Uriah, with a grin, " I should
really be delighted ! "

To cut the matter short, I said I would have the other room
or none at all ; so it was settled that I should have the other
room : and, taking my leave of the firm until dinner, I went
up stairs again.

I had hoped, to have no other companion than Agnes. But
Mrs. Heep had asked permission to bring herself and her
knitting near the fire, in that room ; on pretence of its having
an aspect more favorable for her rheumatics, as the wind
then was, than the drawing-room or dining-parlor. Though I
could almost have consigned her to the mercies of the wind
on the topmost pinnacle of the Cathedral, without remorse, I
made a virtue of necessity, and gave her a friendly salutation.

"I'm umbly thankful to you, sir," said Mrs. Heep, in ac-
knowledgment of my inquiries concerning her health, "but
I'm only pretty well. I haven't much to boast of. If I could
see my Uriah well settled in life, I couldn't expect much more
I think. How do you think my Ury looking, sir ? "

I thought him looking as villanous as ever, and I replied
that I saw no change in him.

VOL. II — 30



146 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

"Oh, don't you think he's changed?" said Mrs. Heep.
"There I must unibly beg leave to differ from you. Don't
you see a thinness in him ? "

"Not more than usual," I replied.

"Don't you though!" said Mrs. Heep. ^ "But you don't
take notice of him with a mother's eye ! "

His mother's eye was an evil eye to the rest of the world, I
thought as it met mine, howsoever affectionate to him ; and I
believe she and her son were devoted to one another. It
passed me, and went on to Agnes.

"Don't you see a wasting and a wearing in him, Miss Wick-
field ? " inquired Mrs. Heep.

" No," said Agnes, quietly pursuing the work on which she
was engaged. "You are too solicitous about him. He is
very well."

Mrs. Heep, with a prodigious sniff, resumed her knitting.

She never left off, or left us for a moment. I had arrived
early in the day, and we had still three or four hours before
dinner; but she sat there, plying her knitting-needles as
monotonously as an hour-glass might have poured out its
sands. She sat on one side of the fire; I sat at the desk in
front of it ; a little beyond me, on the other side, sat Agnes.
Whensoever, slowly pondering over my letter, I lifted up my
eyes, and meeting the thoughtful face of Agnes, saw it clear,
and beam encouragement upon me, with its own angelic
expression, I was conscious presently of the evil eye passing
me, and going on to her, and coming back to me again, and drop-
ping furtively upon the knitting. What the knitting was, I
don't know, not being learned in that art ; but it looked like
a net ; and as she worked away with those Chinese chopsticks
of knitting-needles, she showed in the firelight like an ill-
looking enchantress, balked as yet by the radiant goodness
opposite, but getting ready for a cast of her net by and by.

At dinner she maintained her watch, with the same unwink-
ing eyes. After dinner, her son took his turn ; and when Mr.
Wickfield, himself, and I were left alone together, leered at
me, and writhed until I could hardly bear it. In the drawing-
room, there was the mother knitting and watching again. All
the time that Agnes sang and played, the mother sat at the








piano. Once she asked for a particular ballad, which she
said her Ury (who was yawning in a great chair) doted on ;
and at intervals she looked round at him, and reported to
Agnes that he was in raptures with the music. But she
hardly ever spoke — I question if she ever did — without mak-
ing some mention of him. It was evident to me that this was
the duty assigned to her.

This lasted until bedtime. To have seen the mother and
son, like two great bats hanging over the whole house, and
darkening it with their ugly forms, made me so uncomfortable,
that I would rather have remained down stairs, knitting and
all, than gone to bed. I hardly got any sleep. Next day the
knitting and watching began again, and lasted all day.

I had not an opportunity of speaking to Agnes, for ten min-
utes. I could barely show her my letter. * I proposed to her to
walk out with me ; but Mrs. Heep repeatedly complaining that
she was worse, Agnes charitably remained within, to bear her
company. Towards the twilight I went out by myself, mus-
ing on what I ought to do, and whether I was justified in
withholding from Agnes, any longer, what Uriah Heep had
told me in London ; for that began to trouble me again, very
much.

I had not walked out far enough to be quite clear of the
town, upon the Kamsgate road, where there was a good path,
when I was hailed, through the dusk, by somebody behind me.
The shambling figure, and the scanty great coat, were not to
be mistaken. I stopped, and Uriah Heep came up.

"Well?" said I.

" How fast you walk ! " said he. " My legs are pretty long,
but you-ve given 'em quite a job."

" Where are you going ? " said I.

" I am coming with you, Master Copperfield, if you'll allow
me the pleasure of a walk with an old acquaintance." Saying
this, with a jerk of his body, which might have been either
propitiatory or derisive, he fell into step beside me.

" Uriah ! " said I, as civilly as I could, after a silence.

" Master Copperfield ! " said Uriah.

u To tell you the truth (at which you will not be offended), T
came out to walk alone, because I have had so much company."



148 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

He looked at me sideways, and said, with his hardest grin,
" You mean mother."

" Why yes, I do," said I.

u Ah ! But you know we're so very umble," he returned.
"And having such a knowledge of our own umbleness, we
must really take care that we're not pushed to the wall by
them as isn't umble. All stratagems are fair in love, sir."

Eaising his great hands until they touched his chin, he
rubbed them softly, and softly chuckled; looking as like
a malevolent baboon, I thought, as anything human could
look.

" You see," he said, still hugging himself in that unpleasant
way, and shaking his head at me, "you're quite a dangerous
rival, Master Copperfield. You always was, you know."

" Do you set a watch upon Miss Wickfield, and make her
home no home, because of me ? " said I.

" Oh ! Master Copperfield ! Those are very arsh words," he
replied.

" Put my meaning into any words you like," said I. u You
know what it is, Uriah, as well as I do."

" Oh, no ! You must put it into words," he said. " Oh,
really ! I couldn't myself."

" Do you suppose," said I, constraining myself to be very
temperate and quiet with him, on account of Agnes, "that I
regard Miss Wickfield otherwise than as a very dear sister ? "

" Well, Master Copperfield," he replied, " you perceive I am
not bound to answer that question. You may not, you know.
But then, you see, you may ! "

Anything to equal the low cunning of his visage, and of his
shadowless eyes without the ghost of an eyelash, I never saw.

" Come then ! " said I. " For the sake of Miss Wickfield — "

"My Agnes!" he exclaimed, with a sickly, angular . contor-
tion of himself. "Would you be so good as call her Agnes,
Master Copperfield ! "

"For the sake of Agnes Wickfield — Heaven bless her ! "

" Thank you for that blessing, Master Copperfield ! " he
interposed.

"I will tell you what I should, under any other circum-
stances, as soon have thought of telling to — Jack Ketch,"





" To who, sir ? " said Uriah, stretching out his neck, and
shading his ear with his hand.

" To the hangman," I returned. " The most unlikely person
I could think of," — though his own face had suggested the
allusion quite as a natural sequence. " I am engaged to another
young lady. I hope that contents you."

" Upon your soul ? " said Uriah.

I was about indignantly to give my assertion the confirma-
tion he required, when he caught hold of my hand, and gave it
a squeeze.

" Oh, Master Copperfield," he said. " If you had only had
the condescension to return my confidence when I poured out
the fulness of my art, the night I put you so much out of the
way by sleeping before your sitting-room fire, I never should
have doubted you. As it is, I'm sure.Fll take off mother
directly, and only too appy. I know you'll excuse the pre-
cautions of affection, won't you ? What a pity, Master Cop-
perfield, that you didn't condescend to return my confidence !
Fm sure I gave you every opportunity. But you never have
condescended to me, as much as I could have wished. I know
you have never liked me, as I have liked you ! "

All this time he was squeezing my hand with his damp fishy
fingers, while I made every effort I decently could to get it
away. But I was quite unsuccessful. He drew it under the
sleeve of his mulberry-colored great coat, and I walked on,
almost upon compulsion, arm in arm with him.

" Shall we turn ? " said Uriah, by and by wheeling me face
about towards the town, on which the early moon was now
shining, silvering the distant windows.

" Before we leave the subject, you ought to understand,"
said I, breaking a pretty long silence, " that I believe Agnes
Wickfield to be as far above you, and as far removed from all
your aspirations, as that moon herself ! "

"Peaceful! Ain't she!" said Uriah. "Very! Now con-
fess, Master Copperfield, that you haven't liked me quite as
I have liked you. All along you've thought me too umble
now, I shouldn't wonder ? "

" I am not fond of professions of humility," I returned, " or
professions of anything else."



150 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" There now ! " said Uriah, looking flabby and lead-colored
in the moonlight. " Didn't I know it ! But how little you
think of the rightful umbleness of a person in my station,
Master Copperfield ! Father and me was both brought up at
a foundation school for boys; and mother, she was likewise
brought up at a public, sort of charitable, establishment. They
taught us all a deal of umbleness — not much else that I know
of, from morning to night. We was to be umble to this per-
son, and umble to that ; - and to pull off our caps here, and to
make bows there ; and always to know our place, and abase
ourselves before our betters. And we had such a lot of
betters ! Father got the monitor-medal by being umble. So
did I. Father got made a sexton by being umble. He had
the character, among the gentlefolks, of being such a well-
behaved man, that they were determined to bring him in. c Be
umble, Uriah/ says father to me, c and you'll get on. It was
what was always being dinned into you and me at school ; it's
what goes down best. Be umble/ says father, 'and you'll
do ! * And really it ain't done bad ! "

It was the first time it had ever occurred to me, that this
detestable cant of false humility might have originated out of
the Heep family. I had seen the harvest, but had never
thought of the seed.

" When I was quite a young boy/' said Uriah, " I got to
fcnow what umbleness did, and I took to it. I ate umble pie
with an appetite. I stopped at the umble point of my learn-
ing, and says I, ' Hold hard ! ' When you offered to teach me
latin, I knew better. 'People like to be above you/ says
father, ' keep yourself down.' I am very umble to the present
moment, Master Copperfield, but I've got a little power ! "

And he said all this — I knew, as I saw his face in the
moonlight — that I might understand he was resolved to
recompense himself by using his power. I had never doubted
his meanness, his craft, and malice ; but I fully comprehended
now, for the first time, what a base, unrelenting, and revenge-
ful spirit must have been engendered by this early, and this
long, suppression.

His account of himself was so far attended with an agree-
able result, that it led to his withdrawing his hand in order





that he might have another hug of himself under the chin.
Once apart from him, I was determined to keep apart ; and
we walked back, side by side, saying very little more by the
way. ■

Whether his spirits were elevated by the communication I
had made to him, or by his having indulged in this retrospect,
I don't know; but they were raised by some influence. He
talked more at dinner than was usual with him; asked his
mother (off duty from the moment of our re-entering the
house), whether he was not growing too old for a bachelor;
and once looked at Agnes so, that I would have given all I
had, for leave to knock him down.

When we three males were left alone after dinner, he got
into a more adventurous state. He had taken little or no
wine ; and I presume it was the mere insolence of triumph
that was upon him, flushed perhaps by the temptation my
presence furnished to its exhibition.

I had observed yesterday, that he tried to entice Mr. Wick-
field to drink ; and interpreting the look which Agnes had
given me as she went out, had limited myself to one glass, and
then proposed that we should follow her. I would have done
so again to-day ; but Uriah was too quick for me.

" We seldom see our present visitor, sir," he said, address-
ing Mr. Wickfield, sitting, such a contrast to him, at the end
of the table, " and I should propose to give him welcome in
another glass or two of wine, if you have no objections. Mr.
Copperfield, your elth and appiness ! "

I was obliged to make a show of taking the hand he
stretched across to me ; and then, with very different emotions,
I took the hand of the broken gentleman, his partner.

"Come, fellow partner," said Uriah, "if I may take the
liberty, — now, suppose you give us something or another
appropriate to Copperfield ! "

I pass over Mr. Wickfield's proposing my aunt, his pro-
posing Mr. Dick, his proposing Doctors 5 Commons, his pro-
posing Uriah, his drinking everything twice ; his consciousness
of his own weakness, the ineffectual effort that he made
against it ; the struggle between his shame in Uriah's deport-
ment, and his desire to conciliate him ; the manifest exultation



152 THE PEE SON AL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

with which Uriah twisted and turned, and held him up before
me. It made me sick at heart to see, and my hand recoils
from writing it.

" Come, fellow partner ! " said Uriah, at last, " J'll give you
another one, and I umbly ask for bumpers, seeing I intend to
make it the divinest of her sex."

Her father had his empty glass in his hand. I saw him set
it down, look at the picture she was so like, put his hand to
his forehead, and shrink back in his elbow-chair.

" Fm an umble individual to give you her elth," proceeded
Uriah, " but I admire — adore her."

No physical pain that her father's gray head could have
borne, I think, could have been more terrible to me, than the
mental endurance I saw compressed now within both his
hands.-

" Agnes," said Uriah, either not regarding him, or not
knowing what the nature of his action was^ "Agnes Wickfield
is, I am safe to say, the divinest of her sex. May I speak out,
among friends ? To be her father is a proud distinction, but
to be her usband — "

Spare me from ever again hearing such a cry, as that with
which her father rose up from the table !

" What's the matter ? " said Uriah, turning of a deadly
color. "You are not gone mad, after all, Mr. Wickfield, I
hope ? If I say, I've an ambition to make your Agnes my
Agnes, I have as good a right to it as another man. I have a
better right to it than any other man ! "

I had my arms round Mr. Wickfield, imploring him by
everything that I could think of, oftenest of all by his love for
Agnes, to calm himself a little. He was mad for the moment ;
tearing out his hair, beating his head, trying to force me from
him and to force himself from me, not answering a word, not
looking at or seeing any one; blindly striving for he knew
not what, his face all staring and distorted — a frightful
spectacle.

I conjured him, incoherently, but in the most impassioned
manner, not to abandon himself to this wildness, but to hear
me. I besought him to think of Agnes, to connect me with
A^gnes, to recollect how Agnes and I had grown up together,



OF DAVID COPPEEFIELD. 153

how I honored her and loved her, how she was his pride and
joy. I tried to bring her idea before him in any form ; I even
reproached him with not having firmness to spare her the
knowledge of such a scene of this. I may have effected some-
thing, or his wildness may have spent itself ; but by degrees
he struggled less, and began to look at me — strangely at first,
then with recognition in his eyes. At length he said, "I
know, Trot wood ! My darling child and you — I know ! But
look at him ! "

He pointed to Uriah, pale and glowering in a corner, evi-
dently very much out in his calculations, and taken by sur-
prise.

"Look at my torturer," he replied. "Before him I have
step by step abandoned name and reputation, peace and quiet,
house and home."

"I have kept your name and* reputation for you, and your
peace and quiet, and youi house and home too," said Uriah,
with a sulky, hurried, defeat d air of compromise. " Don't be
oolish, Mr. Wickfield. If I have gone a little beyond what
you were prepared for, I can go back, I suppose ? There's no
harm done."

" I looked for single motives in every one," said Mr. Wick-
field, " and I was satisfied I had bound him to me by motives
of interest. But -ee ^hal he is — oh, see what he is ! "

"You had better sto;> \im, Copperfield, if you can," cried
Uriah, with his long fore-finger pointing towards me. " He'll
say sortuthnr presently — mind you! — he'll be sorry to have
said afterwards, - you'll be i jrry to have heard ! "

" I'll say anything ! " cried Mr. Wickfield, with a desperate
air. " Why should I not be in all the world's power if I am
in yours!"

" Mind ! I tell you ! " said Uriah, continuing to warn me.
" If you don't stop his mouth, you're not his friend ! Why
shouldn't you be in all the world's power, Mr. Wickfield ?
Because you have got a daughter. You and me know what
we know, don't we ? Let sleeping dogs lie — who wants to
rouse 'em ? I don't. Can't you see I am as umble as I can
be ? I tell you, if I've gone too far, I'm sorry. What would
you have, sir ? "



154 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" Oh, Trotwood, Trotwood ! " exclaimed Mr. Wickfield,
wringing his hands. " What I have come down to be, since
I first saw you in this house ! I was on my downward way
then, but the dreary, dreary road I have travelled since !
Weak indulgence has ruined me. Indulgence in remembrance,
and indulgence in forgetfulness. My natural grief for my
child's mother turned to disease ; my natural love for my
child turned to disease. I have infected everything I touched.
I have brought misery on what I dearly love, I know — You
know ! I thought it possible that I could truly love one
creature in the world, and not love the rest; I thought it
possible that I could truly mourn for one creature gone out of
the world, and not have some part in the grief of all who
mourned. Thus the lessons of my life have been perverted !
I have preyed on my own morbid coward heart, and it has
preyed on me. Sordid in my grief, sordid in my love, sordid
in my miserable escape from the darker side of both, oh see
the ruin I am, and hate me, shun me ! "

He dropped into a chair, and weakly sobbed. The excite-
ment into which he had been roused was leaving him. Uriah
came out of his corner.

"I don't know all I have done, in my fatuity," said Mr.
Wickfield, putting out his hands, as if to deprecate my con-
demnation. " He knows best," meaning Uriah Heep, " for he
has always been at my elbow, whispering me. You see the
millstone that he is about my neck. You find him in my house,
you find him in my business. You heard him but a little
time ago. What need have I to say more ! "

" You haven't need to say so much, nor half so much, nor
anything at all," observed Uriah, half defiant, and half fawn-
ing. " You wouldn't have took it up so, if it hadn't been for
the wine. You'll think better of it to-morrow, sir. If I have
said too much, or more than I meant, what of it ? I haven't
stood by it ! "

The door opened, and Agnes, gliding in, without a vestige
of color in her face, put her arm round his neck, and steadily
said, " Papa, you are not well. Come with me ! " He laid
his head upon her shoulder, as if he were oppressed with
heavy shame, and went out with her. Her eyes met mine





for but an instant, yet I saw how much she knew of what had
passed.

" I didn't expect he'd cut up so rough, Master Copperfield,"
said Uriah. "But it's nothing. I'll be friends with him
to-morrow. It's for his good. I'm umbly anxious for his
good."

I gave him no answer, and went up stairs into the -quiet
room where Agnes had so often sat beside me at my books.
Nobody came near me until late at night. I took up a book
and tried to read. I heard the clock strike twelve, and was
still reading, without knowing what I read, when Agnes
touched me.

" You will be going early in the morning, Trotwood ! Let
us say good by, now ! "

She had been weeping, but her face then was so calm and
beautiful !

"Heaven bless you ! " she said, giving me her hand.

"Dearest Agnes!" I returned, "I see you ask me not to
speak of to-night — but is there nothing to be done ?"

u There is God to trust in ! " she replied.

" Can I do nothing — J, who come to you with my poor
sorrows ? "

"And make mine so much lighter," she replied. "Dear
Trotwood, no."

"Dear Agnes," I said, "it is presumptuous for me, who
am so poor in all in which you are so rich — goodness, reso-
lution, all noble qualities — to doubt or direct you; but you
know how much I love you, and how much I owe you. You
will never sacrifice yourself to a mistaken sense of duty ?
Agnes ? "

More agitated for a moment than I had ever seen her, she
took her hand from me, and moved a step back.

" Say you have no such thought, dear Agnes ! Much more
than sister ! Think of the priceless gift of such a heart as
yours, of such a love as yours ! "

Oh ! long, long afterwards, I saw that face rise up before
me, with its momentary look, not wondering, not accusing,
not regretting. Oh, long, long afterwards, I saw that look
subside, as it did now, into the lovely smile, with which she



156 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

told me she had no fear for herself — I need have none for
her — and parted from me by the name of Brother, and was
gone !

It was dark in the morning when I got upon the coach at
the inn door. The day was just breaking when we were
about to start, and then, as I sat thinking of her, came strug-
gling up the coach side, through the mingled day and night,
Uriah's head.

" Copperfield ! " said he, in a croaking whisper, as he hung
by the iron on the roof, "I thought you'd be- glad to hear
before you went off, that there are no squares broke between
us. I've been into his room already, and we've made it all
smooth. Why, though I'm umble, I'm useful to him, you
know; and he understands his interest when he isn't in
liquor ! What an agreeable man he is, after all, Master
Copperfield ! "

I obliged myself to say that I was glad he had made his
apology.

" Oh, to be sure ! " said Uriah. "■ When a person's umble,
you know, what's an apology ? So easy ! I say ! I suppose,"
with a jerk, "you have sometimes plucked a pear before it
was ripe, Master Copperfield ? "

" I suppose I have," I replied.

" I did that last night," said Uriah ; " but it'll ripen yet !
It only wants attending to. I can wait ! "

Profuse in his farewells, he got down again as the coachman
got up. For -anything I know, he was eating something to
keep the raw morning air out ; but, he nade motions with his
mouth as if the pear were ripe already, and he were smacking
his lips over it.







CHAPTER XL

THE WANDERER.

We had a very serious conversation in Buckingham Street
that night, about the domestic occurrences I have detailed in
the last chapter. My aunt was deeply interested in them, and
walked up and down the room with her arms folded, for
more than two hours afterwards. Whenever she was par-
ticularly discomposed, she always performed one of these
pedestrian feats ; and the amount of her discomposure might
always be estimated by the duration of her walk. On this
occasion she was so much disturbed in mind as to find it
necessary to open the bed-room door, and make a course for
herself, comprising the full extent of the bed-rooms from wall
to wall ; and while Mr. Dick and I sat quietly by the fire, she
kept passing in and out, along this measured track, at an
unchanging pace, with the regularity of a clock-pendulum.

When my aunt and I were left to ourselves by Mr. Dick's
going out to bed, I sat down to write my letter to the two
old ladies. By that time she was tired of walking, and sat
by the fire with her dress tucked up as usual. But instead of
sitting in her usual manner, holding her glass upon her knee,
she suffered it to stand neglected on the chimney-piece ; and,
resting her left elbow on her right arm, and her chin on her
left hand, looked thoughtfully at me. As often as I raised
my eyes from what I was about, I met hers. " I am in the
lovingest of tempers, my dear," she would assure me with a
nod, " but I am fidgetted and sorry ! "

I had been too busy to observe, until after she was gone to
bed, that she had left her night-mixture, as she always called
it, untasted on the chimney-piece. She came to her door, with
even more than her usual affection of manner, when I knocked
to acquaint he\ with this discovery; but only said, "I have



158 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

not the heart to take it, Trot, to-night," and shook her head,
and went in again.

She read my letter to the two old ladies, in the morning,
and approved of it. I posted it, and had nothing to do then,
but wait, as patiently as, I could, for the reply. I was still in
this state of expectation, and had been, for nearly a week j
whefi I left the Doctor's one snowy night, to walk home.

It had been a bitter day, and a cutting north-east wind had
blown for some time. The wind had gone down with the
light, and so the snow had come on. It was a heavy, settled
fall, I recollect, in great flakes ; and it lay thick. The noise
of wheels and tread of people were as hushed, as if the streets
had been strewn that depth with feathers.

My shortest way home — and I naturally took the shortest
way on such a night — was through Saint Martin's Lane.
Now, the church which gives its name to the lane, stood in a
less free situation at that time; there being no open space before
it, and the lane winding down to the Strand. As I passed the
steps of the portico, I encountered, at the corner, a woman's
face. It looked in mine, passed across the narrow lane, and
disappeared. I knew it. I had seen it somewhere. But I could
not remember where. I had some association with it, that
struck upon my heart directly; but I was thinking of any-
thing else when it came upon me, and was copfused.

On the steps of the church, there was the stooping figure of
a man, who had put down some burden on the smooth snow,
to adjust it; my seeing the face, and my seeing him, were
simultaneous. I don't think I had stopped in my surprise ;
but, in any case, as I went on, he rose, turned, and came down
towards me. I stood face to face with Mr. Peggotty !

Then I remembered the woman. It was Martha, to whom
Emily had given the money that night in the kitchen. Martha
Endell — side by side with whom, he would not have seen his
dear niece, Ham had told me, for all the treasures wrecked in
the sea.

We shook hands heartily. At first neither of us could
speak a word.

" Mas'r Davy ! " he said, gripping me tight, " it do my art
good to see you, sir. Well met, well met ! "



OF DAVID GOPPEBFIELD. 159

" Well met, my dear old friend ! " said L

" I had my thowts o ; coming to make inquiration for you,
sir, to-night," he sai<3, "but knowing as your aunt was living
along wi' you — for Fve been down yonder — Yarmouth way —
I was afeerd it was too late. I should have come early in the
morning, sir, afore going away."

"Again?" said!

" Yes, sir," he replied, patiently shaking his head, " Pm
away to-morrow."

" Where were you going now ? " I asked.

" Well ! " he replied, shaking the snow out of his long hair,
m I was a going to turn in somewheers."

In those days there was a side-entrance to the stable-yard
of the Golden Cross, the inn so memorable to me in connection
with his misfortune, nearly opposite to where we stood. I
pointed out the gateway, put my arm through his, and we
went across. Two or three public rooms opened out of the
stable-yard : and looking into one of them, and finding it
empty, and a good fire burning, I took him in there.

When I saw him in the light, I observed, not only that his
hair was long and ragged, but that his face was burnt dark by
the sun. He was grayer, the lines in his face and forehead
were deeper, and he had every appearance of having toiled
and wandered through all varieties of weather ; but he looked
very strong, and like a man upheld by steadfastness of purpose,
whom nothing could tire out. He shook the snow from his
hat and clothes, and brushed it away from his face, while I
was inwardly making these remarks. As he sat down opposite
to me at a table, with his back to the door by which we had
entered, he put out his rough hand again, and grasped mine
warmly.

" Fll tell you, Mas'r Davy," he said, — " wheer-all Pve been,
and what-all we've heerd. I've been fur, and we've heerd
little; but I'll tell you!"

I rang the bell for something hot to drink. He would have
nothing stronger than ale ; and while it was being brought,
and being warmed at the fire, he sat thinking. There was a
fine massive gravity in his face, I did not venture to disturb.

" When she was a child," he said, lifting up his head soon



160 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

after we were left alone, " she used to talk to me a deal about
the sea, and about them coasts where the sea got to be dark
blue, and to lay a shining and a shining in the sun. I
thowt, odd times, as her father being drownded, made her
think on it so much. I doen^t know, you see, but maybe
she believed — or hoped — he had drifted out to them parts,
where the flowers is always a blowing, and the country
bright."

" It is likely to have been a childish fancy," I replied.

" When she was — lost," said Mr. Peggotty, " I know'd in
my mind, as he would take her to them countries. I know'd
in my mind, as he'd have told her wonders of 'em, and how
she was to be a lady theer, and how he got her listen to him
first, along o' sech like. When we see his mother, I know'd
quite well as I was right. I went across-channel to France,
and landed theer, as if Pd fell down from the sky."

I saw the door move, and the snow drift in. I saw it move
a little more, and a hand softly interpose to keep it open.

" I found out an English gentleman, as was in authority,"
said Mr. Peggotty, " and told him I was a going to seek my
niece. He got me them papers as I wanted fur to carry me
through — I doen't rightly know how they're called — and he
would have give me money, but that I was thankful to have
no need on. I thank him kind, for all he done, I'm sure !
1 P ve wrote afore you/ he says to me, ( and I shall speak to
many as will come that way, and many will know you, fur
distant from here, when you're a travelling alone.' I told
him, best as I was able, what my gratitoode was, and went
away through France."

" Alone, and on foot ? " said I.

"Mostly a-foot," he rejoined; "sometimes in carts along
with people going to market ; sometimes in empty coaches.
Many mile a day a-foot, and often with some poor soldier or
another, travelling to see his friends. I couldn't talk to him,"
said Mr. Peggotty, " nor he to me ; but we was company for
one another, too, along the dusty roads."

I should have known that by his friendly tone.

"When I come to any town," he pursued, "I found the
inn, and waited about the yard till some one turned up (some



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 161

one mostly did) as know'd English. Then I told how that I
was on my way to seek my niece, and they told me what man-
ner of gentlefolks was in the house, and I waited to see any
as seemed like her, going in or out. When it warn't Em'ly,
I went on agen. By little and little, when I come to a new
village or that, among the poor people, I found they know'd
about me. They would set me down at their cottage doors,
and give me what-not fur to eat and drink, and show me
where to sleep ; and many a woman, Mas'r Davy, as has had
a daughter of about Ein'ly's age, Fve found a-waiting for me,
at Our Saviour's Cross outside the village, fur to do me similar
kindnesses. Some has had daughters as was dead. And God
only knows how good them mothers was to me ! "

It was Martha at the door. I saw her haggard, listening
face distinctly. My dread was lest he should turn his head,
and see her too.

"They would often put their children — particular their
little girls," said Mr. Peggotty, "upon my knee; and many a
time you might have seen me sitting at their doors, when
night was coming on, a'most as if they'd been my Darling's
children. Oh, my Darling ! "

Overpowered by sudden grief, he sobbed aloud. I laid my
trembling hand upon the hand he put before his face.
"Thankee, sir," he said, "doen't take no notice."

In a very little while he took his hand away and put it in
his breast, and went on with his story.

"They often walk with me," he said, "in the morning,
maybe a mile or two upon my road ; and when we parted, and
I said, 'I'm very thankful to you! God bless you!' they
always seemed to understand, and answered pleasant. At last
I come to the sea. It warn't hard, you may suppose, for a
seafaring man like me to work his way over to Italy. When
I got theer, I wandered on as I had done afore. The people
was just as good to me, and I should have gone from town to
town, maybe the country through, but that I got news of her
being seen among them Swiss mountains yonder. One as
know'd his servant see 'em there, all three, and told me how
they travelled, and where they was. I made for them moun-
tains, Mas'r Davy, day and night. Ever so fur as I went,

VOL. 11—11



162 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

ever so fur the mountains seemed to shift away from me.
But I come up with 'em, and I crossed 'eni. When I got nigh
the place as I had been told of, I began to think within my
own self, { What shall I do when I see her ? ' "

The listening face, insensible to the inclement night, still
drooped at the door, and the hands begged me — prayed me —
not to cast it forth.

"I never doubted her," said Mr; Peggotty, "No! 'Not a
bit ! On'y let her see my face — on'y let her heer my voice

— on'y let my stanning still afore her bring to her thoughts
the home she had fled away from, and the child she had been

— and if she had growed to be a royal lady, she'd have fell
down at my feet ! I know'd it well S Many a time in my
sleep had I heerd her cry out, ' Uncle ! ' and seen her fall like
death afore me. Many a time in my sleep had I raised her up,
and whispered to her, 'Em'ly, my dear, I am come fur to bring
forgiveness, and to take you home ! ' "

He stopped and shook his head, and went on with a sigh.

"He was nowt to me now. Em'ly was all. I bought a
country dress to put upon her ; and I know'd that, once found,
she would walk beside me over them stony roads, go where I
would, and never, never, leave me more. To put that dress
upon her, and to cast off what she wore — to take her on my
arm again, and wander towards home — to stop sometimes
upon the road, and heal her bruised feet and her worse-bruised-
heart — was. all that I thowt of now. I doen't believe I should
have done so much as look at him. But, Mas'r Davy, it warn't
to be — not yet ! I was too late, and they was gone. Wheer,
I couldn't learn. Some said heer, some said theer. I travelled
heer, and I travelled theer, but I found no Em'ly, and I
travelled home."

"How long ago ? " I asked.

" A matters' fower days," said Mr. Peggotty. " I sighted
the old boat arter dark, and the light a shining in the winder.
When I come nigh and looked in through the glass, I see the
faithful creetur Missis Gummidge sittin 3 by the fire, as we
had fixed upon, alone. I called out, ' Doen't be afeerd ! It's
Dan'l ! ' and I went in. I never could have thowt the old boat
would have been so strange ! "



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 163

From some pocket in his breast, he took out, with a very
careful hand, a small paper bundle containing two or three
letters or little packets, which he laid upon the table.

" This first one come," he said, selecting it from the rest,
" afore I had been gone a week. A fifty pound Bank note, in
a sheet of paper, directed to me, and put underneath the door
in the night. She tried to hide her writing, but she couldn't
hide it from Me ! "

He folded up the note again, with great patience and care,
in exactly the same form, and laid it on one side.

"This come to Missis Gummidge," he said, opening another,
"two or three months ago." After looking at it for some
moments, he gave it to me, and added in a low voice, " Be so
good as read it, sir."

I read as follows :

" Oh what will you feel when you see this writing, and know it comes
from my wicked hand ! But try, try — not for my sake, but for uncle's
goodness, try to let your heart soften to me, only for a little, little time !
Try, pray do, to relent towards a miserable girl, and write down on a bit
of paper whether he is well, and what he said about me before you left
off ever naming me among yourselves — and whether, of a night, when it
is my old time of coming home, you ever see him look as if he thought of
one he used to love so dear. Oh, my heart is breaking when I think about
it ! I am kneeling down to you, begging and praying you not to be as
hard with me as I deserve — as I well, well, know I deserve — but to be
so gentle and so good, as to write down something of him, and to send
it to me. You need not call me Little, you need not call me by the name
I have disgraced ; but oh, listen to my agony, and have mercy on me so
far as to write me some word of uncle, never, never to be seen in this
world by my eyes again I

" Dear, if your heart is hard towards me — justly hard, I know — but,
Listen, if it is hard, dear, ask him I have wronged the most — him whose
wife I was to have been — before you quite decide against my poor, poor
prayer ! If he should be so compassionate as to say that you might write
something for me to read — I think he would, oh, I think he would, if you
would only ask him, for he always was so brave and so forgiving — tell
him then (but not else), that when I hear the wind blowing at night,
I feel as if it was passing angrily from seeing him and uncle, and was
going up to God against me. Tell him that if I was to die to-morrow
(and oh, if I was fit, I would be so glad to die !) I would bless him and
uncle with my last words, and pray for his happy home with my last
breath!"



164 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

Some money was inclosed in this letter also. Five pounds.
It was untouched like the previous sum, and he refolded it in
the same way. Detailed instructions were added relative to
the address of a reply, which, although they betrayed the
intervention of several hands, and made it difficult to arrive
at any very probable conclusion in reference to her place of
concealment, made it at least not unlikely that she had written
from that spot where she was stated to have been seen.

" What answer was sent ? " I inquired of Mr. Peggotty.

" Missis Gummidge," he returned, "not being a good scholar,
sir, Ham kindly drawed it out, and she made a copy on it.
They told her I was gone to seek her, and what my parting
words was."

" Is that another letter in your hand ? " said I.

"It's money, sir," said Mr. Peggotty, unfolding it a little
way. " Ten pound, you see. And wrote inside, 6 Prom a true
friend/ like the first. But the first was put underneath the
door, and this come by the post, day afore yesterday. Pm
going to seek her at the post-mark."

He showed it to me. It was a town on the Upper Bhine.
He had found out, at Yarmouth, some foreign dealers who
knew that country, and they had drawn him a rude map on
paper, which he could very well understand. He laid it
between us on the table ; and, with his chin resting on one
hand, tracked his course upon it with the other.

I asked him how Ham was ? He shook his head.

" He works," he said, " as bold as a man can. His name's
as good, in all that part, as any man's is, anywheres in the
wureld. Any one's hand is ready to help him, you understand,
and his is ready to help them. He's never been heerd fur to
complain. But my sister's belief is ('twixt ourselves) as it
has cut him deep."

" Poor fellow, I can believe it ! "

" He ain't no care, Mas'r Davy," said Mr. Peggotty in a
solemn whisper — " keinder no care no-how for his life. When
a man's wanted for rough service in rough weather, he's theer.
When there's hard duty to be done with danger in it, he steps
forward afore all his mates. And yet he's as gentle as any
child. There ain't a child in Yarmouth that doen't know him."



OF I) AVID COPPERFIELD. 165

He gathered up the letters thoughtfully, smoothing them
with his hand ; put them into their little bundle ; and placed
it tenderly in his breast again. The face was gone from the
door. I still saw the snow drifting in ; but nothing else was
there.

" Well ! " he said, looking to his bag, " having seen you
to-night, Mas'r Davy (and that doos me good !) I shall away
betimes to-morrow morning. You have seen what Fve got
heer ; " putting his hand on where the little packet lay ; ci all
that troubles me is, to think that any harm might come to
ine, afore that money was give back. If I was to die, and it
was lost, or stole, or elseways made away with, and it was
never know'd by him but what Fd took it, I believe the
t'other wureld wouldn't hold me ! I believe I must come
back!"

He rose, and I rose too ; we grasped each other by the hand
again, before going out.

"- Fd go ten thousand mile," he said, " Fd go till I dropped
dead, to lay that money down afore him. If I do that, and
find my Em'ly, I'm content. If I doen't find her, maybe she'll
come to hear, sometime, as her loving uncle only ended his
search for her when he ended his life ; and if I know her, even
that will turn her home at last ! "

As we went out into the rigorous night, I saw the lonely
figure flit away before us. I turned him hastily on some
pretence, and held him in conversation until it was gone.

He spoke of a traveller's house on the Dover road, where
he knew he could find a clean, plain lodging for the night. I
went with him over Westminster Bridge, and parted from him
on the Surrey shore. Everything seemed, to my imagination,
to be hushed in reverence for him, as he resumed his solitary
journey through the snow.

I returned to the inn yard, and, impressed by my remem-
brance of the face, looked awfully around for it. It was not
there. The snow had covered our late footprints ; my new
track was the only one to be seen ; and even that began to
die away (it snowed so fast) as I looked back over my
shoulder.



166 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE



CHAPTER XII.
dora's aunts.






At last; an answer came from the two old ladies. They
presented their compliments to Mr. Copperfield, and informed
him that they had given his letter their best consideration,
"with a view to the happiness of both parties" — which I
thought rather an alarming expression, not only, because of
the use they had made of it in relation to the family difference
before-mentioned, but because I had (and have all my life)
observed that conventional phrases are a sort of fireworks,
easily let off, and liable to take a great variety of shapes and
colors not at all suggested by their original form. The
Misses Spenlow added that they begged to forbear expressing,
"through the medium of correspondence," an opinion on the
subject of Mr. Copperfield's communication ; but that if Mr.
Copperfield would do them the favor to call, upon a certain
day, (accompanied, if he thought proper, by a confidential
friend, ) they would be happy to hold some conversation on
the subject.

To this favor, Mr. Coppsffield immediately replied, with his
respectful compliments, that he would have the honor of
waiting on the Misses Spenlow, at the time appointed ; accom-
panied, in accordance with their kind permission, by his
friend Mr. Thomas Traddles of the Inner Temple. Having
despatched which missive, Mr. Copperfield fell into a condition
of strong nervous agitation; and so remained until the day
arrived.

It was a great augmentation of my uneasiness to be bereaved,
at this eventful crisis, of the inestimable services of Miss
Mills. But Mr. Mills, who was always doing something or
other to annoy me — or I felt as if he were, which was the
same thing — had brought his conduct to a climax, by taking
it into his head that he would go to India. Why should he



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 167

go to India, except to harass me ? To be sure he had nothing
to do with any other part of the world, and had a good deal
to do with that part ; being entirely in the Indian trade, what-
ever that was (I had floating dreams myself concerning golden
shawls and elephants' teeth) ; having been at Calcutta in his
youth; and designing now to go out there again, in the
capacity of resident partner. But this was nothing to me.
However, it was so much to him that for India he was bound,
and Julia with him ; and Julia went into the country to take
leave of her relations ; and the house was put into a perfect
suit of bills, announcing that it was to be let or sold, and
that the furniture (Mangle and all) was to be taken -at a val-
uation. So, here was another earthquake of which I became
the sport, before I had recovered from the shock of its pred-
ecessor!

I was in several minds how to dress myself on the important
day. Being divided between my desire to appear to advan-
tage, and my apprehensions of putting on anything that might
impair my severely practical character in the eyes of the
Misses Spenlow, I endeavored to hit a happy medium between
these two extremes ; my aunt approved the result ; and Mr.
Dick threw one of his shoes after Traddles and me, for luck,
as we went down stairs.

Excellent fellow as I knew Traddles to be, and warmly
attached to him as I was, I could not help wishing, on that
delicate occasion, that he had never contracted the habit of
brushing his hair so very upright. It gave him a surprised
look — not to say a hearth-broomy kind of expression — which,
my apprehensions whispered, might be fatal to us.

I took the liberty of mentioning it to Traddles, as we were
walking to Putney; and saying that if he would smooth it
down a little —

"My dear Copperfield," said Traddles, lifting off his hat,
and rubbing his hair all kinds of ways, " nothing would give
me greater pleasure. But it won't."

" Won't be smoothed down ? " said I.

"No," said Traddles. "Nothing will induce it. If I was to
carry a half-hundred weight upon it, all the way to Putney,
it would be up again the moment the weight was taken off.



168 THE PEBSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

You have no idea what obstinate hair mine is, Copperfield.
I am quite a fretful porcupine."

I was a little disappointed, I must confess, but thoroughly
charmed by his good-nature too. I told him how I esteemed
his good-nature ; and said that his hair must have taken all
the obstinacy out of his character, for he had none.

" Oh ! " returned Traddles, laughing, " I assure you, it's quite
an old story, my unfortunate hair. My uncle's wife couldn't
bear it. She said it exasperated her. It stood very much in my
way, too, when I first fell in love with Sophy. Very jnuch ! "

"Did she object to it?"

" Site didn't," rejoined Traddles; "but her eldest sister —
the one that's the Beauty — quite made game of it, I under-
stand. In fact, all the sisters laugh at it."

" Agreeable ! " said I.

"Yes," returned Traddles with perfect innocence, "it's a
joke for us. They pretend that Sophy has a lock of it in her
desk, and is obliged to shut it in a clasped book, to keep it
down. We laugh about it."

"By the by, my dear Traddles," said I, "your experience
may suggest something to me. When you became engaged
to the j r oung lady whom you have just mentioned, did you
make a regular proposal to her family ? Was there anything
like — what we are going through to-day, for instance?" I
added, nervously.

" Why," replied Traddles, on whose attentive face a thought-
ful shade had stolen, " it was rather a painful transaction, Cop-
perfield, in my case. You see, Sophy, being of so much use in
the family, none of them could endure the thought of her ever
being married. Indeed, they had quite settled among them-
selves that she never was to be married, and they called her
the old maid. Accordingly, when I mentioned it, with the
greatest precaution, to Mrs. Crewler — "

"The mamma ? " said I.

" The mamma," said Traddles — " Beverend Horace Crewler
— when J mentioned it with every possible precaution to Mrs.
Crewler, the effect upon her was such that she gave a scream
and became insensible. I couldn't approach the subject again,
for months."



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 169

" You did it at last ? " said I.

" Well, the Reverend Horace did," said Traddles. " He is
an excellent man, most exemplary in every way; and he
pointed out to her that she ought, as a Christian, to reconcile
herself to the sacrifice (especially as it was so uncertain), and
to bear no uncharitable feeling towards me. As to myself,
Copperfield, I give you my word, I felt a perfect bird of prey
towards the family."

" The sisters took your part, I hope, Traddles ? "

" Why, I can't say they did," he returned. " When we had
comparatively reconciled Mrs. Crewler to it, we had to break
it to Sarah. You recollect my mentioning Sarah, as the one
that has something the matter with her spine ? "

" Perfectly!"

" She clenched both her hands," said Traddles, looking at
me in dismay : " shut her eyes ; turned lead-color ; became
perfectly stiff ; and took nothing for two days, but toast-and-
water, administered with a teaspoon."

" What a very unpleasant girl, Traddles ! " I remarked.

"Oh, I beg your pardon, Copperfield!" said Traddles.
"She is a very charming girl, but she has a great deal of
feeling. In fact, they all have. Sophy told me afterwards,
that the self-reproach she underwent while she was in attend-
ance upon Sarah, no words could describe. I know it must
have been severe, by my own feelings, Copperfield; which
were like a criminal's. After Sarah was restored, we still had
to break it to the other eight; and \ L , produced various effects
upon them of a most pathetic nature. The two little ones,
whom Sophy educates, have only just left off de-testing me."

" At any rate, they are all reconciled to it now, I hope ? "
said I.

"Ye — yes, I should say they were, on the whole, resigned
to it," said Traddles, doubtfully. "The fact is, we avoid
mentioning the subject ; and my unsettled prospects and
indifferent circumstances are a great consolation to them.
There will be a deplorable scene, whenever we are married.
It will be much more like a funeral, than a wedding. And
they'll all hate me for taking her away ! "

His honest face, as he looked at me with a serio-comic shake



170 THE PERSONAL HISTOBY AND EXPERIENCE

of his head, impresses me more in the remembrance than it
did in the reality, for I was by this time in a state of such
excessive trepidation and wandering of mind, as to be quite
unable to fix my attention on anything. On our approaching
the house where the Misses Spenlow lived, I was at such a
discount in respect of my personal looks and presence of mind,
that Traddles proposed a gentle stimulant in the form of a
glass of ale. This having been administered at a neighboring
public-house, he conducted me, with tottering steps, to the
Misses Spenlow's door.

I had a vague sensation of being, as it were, on view, when
the maid opened it ; and of wavering, somehow, across a hall
with a weather-glass in it, into a quiet little drawing-room on
the ground-floor, commanding a neat garden. Also of sitting
down here, on a sofa, and seeing Traddles's hair start up, now
his hat was removed, like one of those obtrusive little figures
made of springs, that fly out of fictitious snuff-boxes when
the lid is taken off. Also of hearing an old-fashioned clock
ticking away on the chimney-piece, and trying to make it keep
time to the jerking of my heart, — which it wouldn't. Also of
looking round the. room for any sign of Dora, and seeing none.
Also of thinking that Jip once barked in the distance, and was
instantly choked by somebody. Ultimately I found myself
backing Traddles into the fireplace, and bowing in great con-
fusion to two dry little elderly ladies, dressed in black, and
each looking wonderfully like a preparation in chip or tan of
the late Mr. Spenlow.

"Pray," said one of the two little ladies, "be seated."
When I had done tumbling over Traddles, and had sat upon
something which was not a cat — my first seat was — I so far
recovered my sight, as to perceive that Mr. Spenlow had
evidently been the youngest of the family ; that there was a
disparity of six or eight years between the two sisters ; and
that the younger appeared to be the manager of the confer-
ence, inasmuch as she had my letter in her hand — so familiar
as it looked to me, and yet so odd ! — and was referring to it
through an eye-glass. They were dressed alike, but this sister
wore her dress with a more youthful air than the other ; and
perhaps had a trifle more frill, or tucker, or brooch, or bracelet,





or some little thing of that kind, which made her look more
lively. They were both upright in their carriage, formal,
precise, composed, and quiet. The sister who had not my let-
ter, had her arms crossed on her breast, and resting on each
other, like an Idol.

" Mr. Copperfield, I believe ? " said the sister who had got
my letter, addressing herself to Traddles.

This was a frightful beginning. Traddles had to indicate
that I was Mr. Copperfield, and I had to lay claim to myself,
and they had to divest themselves of a preconceived opinion
that Traddles was Mr. Copperfield, and altogether we were in
a nice condition. To improve it, we all distinctly heard Jip
give two short barks, and receive another choke.

" Mr. Copperfield ! " said the sister with the letter.

I did something — bowed, I suppose — and Was all atten-
tion, when the other sister struck in.

" My sister Lavinia," said she, " being conversant with mat-
ters of this nature, will state what we consider most calculated
to promote the happiness of both parties."

I discovered afterwards that Miss Lavinia was an authority
in affairs of the heart, by reason of there having anciently ex-
isted a certain Mr. Pidger, who played short whist, and was sup-
posed to have been enamored of her. My private opinion is,
that this was entirely a gratuitous assumption, and that Pidger
was altogether innocent of any such sentiments — to which he
had never given any sort of expression that I could ever hear of.
Both Miss Lavinia and Miss Clarissa had a superstition, how-
ever, that he would have declared his passion, if he had not
been cut short in his youth (at about sixty) by over-drinking
his constitution, and overdoing an attempt to set it right
again by swilling Bath water. They had a lurking suspicion
even, that he died of secret love ; though I must say there was
a picture of him in the house with a damask nose, which con-
cealment did not appear to have ever preyed upon.

"We will not," said Miss Lavinia, " enter on the past his-
tory of this matter. Our poor brother Francis's death has
cancelled that."

"We had not," said Miss Clarissa, "been in the habit of
frequent association with our brother Francis ; but there was



172 THE PEBSONAL HISTOBY AND EXPERIENCE

no decided division or disunion between us. Francis took his
road ; we took ours. We considered it conducive to the happi-
ness of all parties that it should be so. And it was so."

Each of the sisters leaned a little forward, to speak, shook
her head after speaking, and became upright again when
silent. Miss Clarissa never moved her arms. She sometimes
played tunes upon them with her fingers — minuets and
marches, I should think — but never moved them.

" Our niece's position, or supposed position, is much changed
by our brother Francis's death," said Miss Lavinia; "and
therefore we consider our brother's opinions as regarded her po-
sition as being changed too. We have no reason to doubt, Mr.
Copperfield, that you are a young gentleman possessed of good
qualities and honorable character ; or that you have an affec-
tion — or are fully persuaded that you have an affection —
for our niece."

I replied, as I usually did whenever I had a chance, that
nobody had ever loved anybody else as I loved Dora. Trad-
dies came to my assistance with a confirmatory murmur.

Miss Lavinia was going on to make some rejoinder, when
Miss Clarissa, who appeared to be incessantly beset by a
desire to refer to her brother Francis, struck in again :

"If Dora's mamma," she said, "when she married our
brother Francis, had at once said that there was not room for
the family at the dinner-table, it would have been better for
the happiness of all parties."

" Sister Clarissa," said Miss Lavinia. " Perhaps we needn't
mind that now."

"Sister Lavinia," said Miss Clarissa, "it belongs to the
subject. With your branch of the subject, on which alone
you are competent to speak, I should not think of interfering.
On this branch of the subject I have a voice and an opinion.
It would have been better for the happiness of all parties, if
Dora's mamma, when she married our brother Francis, had
mentioned plainly what her intentions were. We should then
have known what we had to expect. We should have said
' pray do not invite us, at any time ; ' and all possibility of
misunderstanding would have been avoided."

When Miss Clarissa had shaken her head, Miss Lavinia re-





sumed: again referring to my letter through her eye-glass.
They both had little bright round twinkling eyes, by the way,
which were like bird's eyes. They were not ; unlike birds,
altogether ; having a sharp, brisk, sudden manner, and a little
short, spruce way of adjusting themselves, like canaries.

Miss Lavinia, as I have said, resumed :

" You ask permission of my sister Clarissa and myself, Mr.
Copperfield, to visit here, as the accepted suitor of our niece."

"If our brother Francis," said Miss Clarissa, breaking out
again, if I may call anything so calm a breaking out, " wished
to surround himself with an atmosphere of Doctors' Commons,
and of Doctors' Commons only, what right or desire had we
to object ? None, I am sure. We have ever been far from
wishing to obtrude ourselves on any one. But why not say
so ? Let our brother Francis and his wife have their society.
Let my sister Lavinia and myself have our society. We can
find it for ourselves, I hope ! "

As this appeared to be addressed to Traddles and me, both
Traddles and I made s.ome sort of reply. Traddles's was inau-
dible. I think I observed, myself, that it was highly credit-
able to all concerned. I don't in the least know what I meant.

" Sister Lavinia," said Miss Clarissa, having now relieved
her mind, " you can go on, my dear."

Miss Lavinia proceeded :

" Mr. Copperfield, my sister Clarissa and I have been very
careful indeed in considering this letter: and we have not
considered it without finally showing it to our niece, and dis-
cussing it with our niece. We have no doubt that you think
you like her very much."

" Think, ma'am," I rapturously began, " oh ! — "

But Miss Clarissa giving me a look (just like a sharp
canary), as requesting .hat I would not interrupt the oracle,
I begged pardon.

" Affection," said Miss Lavinia, glancing at her sister for cor-
roboration, which she gave in the form of a little nod to every
clause, " mature affection, homage, devotion, does not easily ex-
press itself. Its voice is low. It is modest and retiring, it lies
in ambush, waits and waits. Such is the mature fruit. Some-
times a life glides away, and finds it still ripening in the shade."



174 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

Of course I did not understand then that this was an aMu-
sion to her supposed experience of the stricken Pidger ; but I
saw, from the gravity with which Miss Clarissa nodded her
head, that great weight was attached to these words.

"The light — for I call them, in comparison with such sen-
timents, the light — inclinations of very young people," pur-
sued Miss Lavinia, " are dust, compared to rocks. It is owing
to the difficulty of knowing whether they are likely to endure
or have any real foundation, that my sister Clarissa and
myself have been very undecided how to act, Mr. Copperfield,
and Mr. — "

"Traddles," said my friend, finding himself looked at.

" I beg pardon. Of the Inner Temple, I believe ? " said
Miss Clarissa, again glancing at my letter.

Traddles said " Exactly so," and became pretty red in the
face.

Now, although I had not received any express encourage-
ment as yet, I fancied that I saw in the two little sisters, and
particularly in Miss Lavinia, an intensified enjoyment of this
new and fruitful subject of domestic interest, a settling down
to make the most of it, a disposition to pet it, in which there
was a good bright ray of hope. I thought I perceived that
Miss Lavinia would have uncommon satisfaction in superin-
tending two young lovers, like Dora and me ; and that Miss
Clarissa would have hardly less satisfaction in seeing her
superintend us, and in chiming in with her own particular
department of the subject whenever that impulse was strong
upon her. This gave me courage to protest most vehemently
that I loved Dora better than I could tell, or any one believe ;
that all my friends knew how I loved her; that my aunt,
Agnes, Traddles, every one who know me, knew how I loved
her, and how earnest my love had made me. For the truth
of this, I appealed to Traddles. And Traddles, firing up as
if he were plunging into a Parliamentary Debate, really did
come out nobly : confirming me in good round terms, and in
a plain sensible practical manner, that evidently made a
favorable impression.

" I speak, if I may presume to say so, as one who has some
little experience of such things," said Traddles, " being myself



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 175

engaged to a young lady — one of ten, down in Devonshire —
and seeing no probability, at present, of our engagement com-
ing to a termination."

" You may be able to confirm what I have said, Mr. Trad-
dies," observed Miss Lavinia, evidently taking a new interest
in him, " of the affection that is modest and retiring ; that
waits and waits ? "

" Entirely, ma'am," said Traddles.

Miss Clarissa looked at Miss Lavinia, and shook her head
gravely. .Miss Lavinia looked consciously at Miss Clarissa,
and heaved a little sigh.

"Sister Lavinia," said Miss Clarissa, "take my smelling
bottle."

Miss Lavinia revived herself with a few whiffs of aromatic
vinegar — Traddles and I looking on with great solicitude the
while ; and then went on to say, rather faintly :

" My sister and myself have been in great doubt, Mr. Trad-
dles, what course we ought to take in reference to the likings,
or imaginary likings, of such very young people as your friend
Mr. Copperfield, and our niece."

"Our brother Francis's child," remarked Miss Clarissa.
" If our brother Francis's wife had found it convenient in her
life-time (though she had an unquestionable right to act as
she thought best) to invite the family to her dinner-table, we
might have known our brother Francis's child better at the
present moment. Sister Lavinia, proceed."

Miss Lavinia turned my letter, so as to bring the super-
scription towards herself, and referred through her eye-glass
to some orderly looking nctes she had made on that part of it.

" It seems to us," said she, " prudent, Mr. Traddles, to bring
these feelings to the test of our own observation. At present
Ave know nothing of them, and are not in a situation to judge
how much reality there may be in them. Therefore we are
inclined so far to accede to Mr. Copperfield's proposal, as to
admit his visits here."

"I shall never, dear ladies," I exclaimed, relieved of an
immense load of apprehension, "forget your kindness !"

"But," pursued Miss Lavinia, — "but, we would prefer to
regards those visits, Mr. Traddles, as made, at present, to us.



176 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE






We must guard ourselves from recognizing any positive en-
gagement between Mr. Copperfield and our niece, until we
have had an opportunity — "

" Until you have had an opportunity, sister Lavinia," said
Miss Clarissa.

"Be it so," assented Miss Lavinia, with a sigh, — "until I
have had an opportunity of observing them."

" Copperfield," said Traddles, turning to me, "you feel, I am
sure, that nothing could be more reasonable or considerate."

"Nothing ! " cried I. "I am deeply sensible of it."

"In this position of affairs," said Miss Lavinia, again
referring to her notes, "and admitting his visits on this
understanding only, we must require from Mr. Copperfield a
distinct assurance, on his word of ^honor, that no communicar
tion of any kind shall take place between him and our niece
without our knowledge. That no project whatever shall be
entertained with regard to our niece, without being first
submitted to us — "

"To you, sister Lavinia," Miss Clarissa interposed.

"Belt so, Clarissa!" assented Miss Lavinia resignedly —
" to me — -and receiving our concurrence. We must make this
a most express and serious stipulation, not to be broken on
any account. We wished Mr. Copperfield to be accompanied
by some confidential friend to-day," with an inclination of her
head towards Traddles, who bowed, "in order that there might
be no doubt or misconception on this subject. If Mr. Copper-
field, or if you, Mr. Traddles, feel the least scruple, in giving
this promise, I beg you to take time to consider it."

I exclaimed, in a state of high ecstatic fervor, that not a
moment's consideration could be necessary. I bound myself
by the required promise, in a most impassioned manner ; called
upon Traddles to witness it; and denounced myself as the
most atrocious of characters if I ever swerved from it in the
least degree.

"Stay!" said Miss Lavinia, holding up her hand; "we
resolved, before we had the pleasure of receiving you two
gentlemen, to leave you alone for a quarter of an hour, to con-
sider this point. You will allow us to retire."

It was in vain for me to say that no consideration was





necessary. They persisted in withdrawing for the specified
time. Accordingly, these little birds hopped out with great
dignity ; leaving me to receive the congratulations of Traddles,
and to feel as if I w r ere translated to regions of exquisite
happiness. Exactly at the expiration of the quarter of an
hour, they reappeared with no less dignity than they had
disappeared. They had gone rustling away as if their little
dresses were made of autumn leaves : and they came rustling
back, in like manner.

I then bound myself once more to the prescribed conditions.

" Sister Clarissa," said Miss Lavinia. " the rest is with you."
Miss Clarissa, unfolding her arms for the first time, took the
notes and glanced at them.

" We shall be happy," said Miss Clarissa, " to see Mr. Cop-
perfield to dinner, every Sunday, if it should suit his conven-
ience. Our hour is three."

I bowed.

" In the course of the week," said Miss Clarissa, " we shall
be happy to see Mr. Copperfield to tea. Our hour is half-past
six."

I bowed again. .

"Twice in the week," said Miss Clarissa, "but, as a rule,
not oftener."

I bowed again.

"Miss Trotwood," said Miss Clarissa, "mentioned in Mr.
Copperfield's letter, will perhaps call upon us. When visiting
is better for the happiness of all parties, we are glad to receive
visits, and return them. When it is better for the happiness
of all parties that no visiting should take place, (as in the
case of our brother Francis, and his establishment,) that is
quite different."

I intimated that my aunt would be proud and delighted to
make their acquaintance ; though I must say I was not quite
sure of their getting on very satisfactorily together. The con-
ditions being now closed, I expressed my acknowledgments in
the warmest manner; and, taking the hand, first of Miss
Clarissa, and then of Miss Lavinia, pressed it, in each case, to
my lips.

Miss Lavinia then arose, and begging Mr. Traddles to

VOL. II — 12



178 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

excuse us for a minute, requested me to follow her. I
obeyed, all in a tremble, and was conducted into another room.
There, I found my blessed darling stopping her ears behind
the door, with her dear little face against the wall ; and Jip in
the plate-warmer, with his head tied up in a towel.

Oh ! How beautiful she was in her black frock, and how she

sobbed and cried at first, and wouldn't come out from behind

the door ! How fond we were of one another, when she did

come out at last ; and what a state of bliss I was in, when we

took Jip out of the plate-warmer, and restored him to the

light, sneezing very much, and were all three reunited !

"My dearest Dora ! Now, -indeed, my own for ever ! "

" Oh dox't ! " pleaded Dora. " Please ! "

" Are you not my own for ever, Dora ? "

"Oh yes, of course I am!" cried Dora, "but I am so

frightened ! "

" Frightened, my own ? "

"Oh yes! I don't like him," said Dora. "Why don't he
go?"

"Who, my life?" •

" Your friend," said Dora. " It isn't any business of his.
What a stupid he must be ! "

" My love ! " (There never was anything so coaxing as her
childish ways.) " He is the best creature ! "

" Oh, but we don't want any best creatures ! " pouted Dora.
" My dear," I argued, " you will soon know him well, and
like him of all things. And here is my aunt coming soon ;
and you'll like her of all things too, when you know her."

" No, please don't bring her ! " said Dora, giving me a
horrified little kiss, and folding her hands. "Don't. I
know she's a naughty, mischief-making old thing ! Don't
let her come here, Doady ! " which was a corruption of David.
Remonstrance was of no use, then; so I laughed, and
admired, and was very much in love and very happy; and
she showed me Jip's new trick of standing on his hind legs
in a corner — which he did for about the space of a flash of
lightning, and then fell down — and I don't know how long
I should have stayed there, oblivious of Traddles, if Miss
Lavinia had not come in to take me away. Miss Lavinia was






OF DAVID C0PPEBF1ELD. 179

very fond of Dora (she told me Dora was exactly like what
she had been herself at her age — she must have altered a
good deal), and she treated Dora just as if she had been a
toy. I wanted to persuade Dora to come and see Traddles,
but on my -proposing it she ran off to her own room, and
locked herself in; so I went to Traddles without her, and
walked away with him on air.

"Nothing could be more satisfactory," said Traddles; "and
they are very agreeable old ladies, It am sure. I shouldn't
be at all surprised if you were to be married years before me,
Copperfield."

" Does your Sophy play on any instrument, Traddles ? " I
inquired, in the pride of my heart.

" She knows enough of the piano to teach it to her little
sisters," said Traddles.

" Does she sing at all ? " J asked.

"Why, she sings ballads, sometimes, to freshen up the
others a little when they're out of spirits," said Traddles.
" Nothing scientific."

" She doesn't sing to the guitar ? " said I.

" Oh dear no ! " said Traddles.

" Paint at all ? "

"Not at all," said Traddles.

I promised Traddles that he should hear Dora sing, and
see some of her flower-painting. He said he should like it
very much, and we went home arm in arm in great good
humor and delight. I encouraged him to talk about Sophy,
on the way ; which he did with a loving reliance on her that I
very much admired. I compared her in my mind with Dora,
with considerable inward satisfaction ; but I candidly admitted
to myself that she seemed to be an excellent kind of girl for
Traddles, too.

Of course my aunt was immediately made acquainted with
the successful issue of the conference, and with all that had
been said and done in the course of it. She was happy to see
me so happy, and promised to call on Dora's aunts without
loss of time. But she took such a long walk up and down
our rooms that night, while I was writing to Agnes, that I
began to think she meant to walk till morning.



180 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

My letter to Agnes was a fervent and grateful one, nar-
rating all the good effects that had resulted from my following
her advice. She wrote, by return of post, to me. Her letter
was hopeful, earnest, and cheerful. She was always cheerful
from that time.

I had my hands more full than ever, now. My daily jour-
neys to Highgate considered, Putney was a long way off ; and
I naturally wanted to go there as often as I could. The pro-
posed tea-drinkings being quite impracticable, I compounded
with Miss Lavinia for permission to visit every Saturday
afternoon, without detriment to my privileged Sundays. So,
the close of every week was a delicious time for me ; and I
got through the rest of the week by looking forward to it.

I was wonderfully relieved to find that my aunt and Dora's
aunts rubbed on, all things considered, much more smoothly
than I could have expected. My aunt made her promised
visit within a few days of the conference; and within a
few more days Dora's aunts called upon her, in due state
and form. Similar but more friendly exchanges took place
afterwards, usually at intervals of three or four weeks.
I know that my aunt distressed Dora's aunts very much, by
utterly setting at naught the dignity of fly-conveyance, and
walking out to Putney at extraordinary times, as shortly after
breakfast or just before tea ; likewise by wearing her bonnet
in any manner that happened to be comfortable to her head,
without at all deferring to the prejudices of civilization on
that subject. But Dora's aunts soon agreed to regard my aunt
as an eccentric and somewhat masculine lady, with a strong
understanding ; and although my aunt occasionally ruffled the
feathers of Dora's aunts, by expressing heretical opinions on
various points of ceremony, she loved me too well not to sacri-
fice some of her little peculiarities to the general harmony.

The only member of our small society, who positively
refused to adapt himself to circumstances, was Jip. He never
saw my aunt without immediately displaying every tooth in
his head, retiring under a chair, and growling incessantly:
with now and then a doleful howl, as if she really were too
much for his feelings. All kinds of treatment were tried with
aim, coaxing, scolding, slapping, bringing him to Buckingham



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 181

Street (where he instantly dashed at the two cats, to the terror
of all beholders) ; but he never could prevail upon himself to
bear my aunt's society. He would sometimes think he had
got the better of his objection, and be amiable for a few min-
utes ; and then would put up his snub nose, and howl to that
extent, that there was nothing for it but to blind him and put
him in the plate-warmer. At length, Dora regularly muffled
him in a towel and shut him up there, whenever my aunt was
reported at the door.

One thing troubled me much, after we had fallen into this
quiet train. It was, that Dora seemed by one consent to be
regarded like a pretty toy or plaything. My aunt, with whom
she gradually became familiar, always called her Little Blos-
som ; and the pleasure of Miss Lavinia' s life was to wait upon
her, curl her hair, make ornaments for her, and treat her like
a pet child. What Miss Lavinia did, her sister did as a mat-
ter of course. It was very odd to me ; but they all seemed to
treat Dora, in her degree, much as Dora treated Jip in his.

I made up my mind to speak to Dora about this ; and one
day when we were out walking (for we were licensed by Miss
Lavinia, after a while, to go out walking by ourselves), I said
to her that I wished she could get them to behave towards her
differently.

" Because you know, my darling," I remonstrated, " you are
not a child."

" There ! " said Dora. " Now you're going to be cross ! ?

" Cross, my love ? "

" I am sure they're very kind to me," said Dora, " and I am
very happy."

"Well ! But my dearest life ! " said I, "you might be very
happy, and yet be treated rationally." •

Dora gave me a reproachful look — the prettiest look! —
and then began to sob, saying if I didn't like her, why had I
ever wanted so much to be engaged to her ? And why didn't
I go away now, if I couldn't bear her ? "

What could I do but kiss away her tears, and tell her how I
doted on her, after that !

"I am sure I am very affectionate," said Dora; "you oughtn't
to be cruel to me, Doady ! "



182 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

"Cruel, niy precious love! As if I would — or could — be
cruel to you, for the world ! "

" Then don't find fault with me," said Dora, making a rose-
bud of her mouth ; " and Til be good."

I was charmed by her presently asking me, of her own
accord, to give her that cookery-book I had once spoken of,
and to show her how to keep accounts, as I had once promised
I would. I brought the volume with me on my next visit (I
got it prettily bound, first, to make it look less dry and more
inviting) ; and as we strolled about the Common, I showed
her an old house-keeping-book of my aunt's, and gave her a
set of tablets, and a pretty little pencil case, and box of leads,
to practise housekeeping with.

But the cookery-book made Dora's head ache, and the figures
made her cry. They wouldn't add up, she said. So she rubbed
them out, and dr6w little nosegays, and likenesses of me and
Jip, all over the tablets.

Then I playfully tried verbal instruction in domestic mat-
ters, as we walked about on a Saturday afternoon. Sometimes,
for example, when we passed a butcher's shop, I would say :

"Now suppose, my pet, that we were married, and you were
going to buy a shoulder of mutton for dinner, would you know
how f buy it?"

My pretty little Dora's face would fall, and she would make
her mo th into a bud again, as if she would very much prefer
to shut mine with a kiss.

" Would you know how to buy it, my darling ? " I would
repeat, perhaps, if I were very inflexible.

Dora would think a little, and then reply, perhaps, with
great triumph :

"Why, the butcher would know how to sell it, and what
need I know ? Oh, you silly boy ! "

So, when I once asked Dora, with an eye to the cookery-
book, what she would do, if we were married, and I were to
say I should like a nice Irish stew, she replied that she would
tell the servant to make it ; and then clapped her little hands
together across my arm, and laughed in such a charming man-
ner that she was more delightful than ever.

Consequently, the principal use to which the cookery-book





was devoted, was being put down in the corner for Jip to stand
upon. But Dora was so pleased, when she had trained him to
stand upon it without offering to come off, and at the same
time to hold the pencil case in his mouth, that I was very glad
I had bought it.

And we fell back on th& guitar-case, and the flower-painting,
and the songs about never leaving off dancing, Ta ra la ! and
were as happy as the week was long. I occasionally wished
I could venture to hint to Miss Lavinia, that she treated the
darling of my heart a little too much like a plaything ; and I
sometimes awoke, as it were, wondering to find that I had
fallen into the general fault, and treated her like a plaything
too — but not often.



184 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE




CHAPTER XIII.

MISCHIEF.

I feel as if it were not for me to record, even though this
manuscript is intended for no eyes but mine, how hard I
worked at that tremendous shorthand, and all improvement
appertaining to it, in my sense of responsibility to Dora and
her aunts. I will only add, to what I have already written of
my perseverance at this time of my life, and of a patient and
continuous energy which then began to be matured within me,
and which I know to be the strong part of my character, if it
have any strength at all, that there, on looking back, I find
the source of my success. I have been very fortunate in
worldly matters ; many men have worked much harder, and
not succeeded half so well ; but I never could have done what
I have done, without the habits of punctuality, order, and
diligence, without the determination to concentrate myself on
one object at a time, no matter how quickly its successor
should come upon its heels, which I then formed. Heaven
knows I write this in no spirit of self-laudation. The man
who reviews his own life, as I do mine, in going on here, from
page to page, had need to have been a good man indeed, if he
would be spared the sharp consciousness of many talents neg-
lected, many opportunities wasted, many erratic and perverted
feelings constantly at war within his breast, and defeating
him. I do not hold one natural gift, I dare say, that I have
not abused. My meaning simply is, that whatever I have
tried to do in life, I have tried with all my heart to do well ;
that whatever I have devoted myself to, I have devoted my-
self to completely ; that, in great aims and in small, I have
always been thoroughly in earnest. * I have ne^fer believed it
possible that any natural or improved ability can claim immu-
nity from the companionship of the steady, plain, hard-working
qualities, and hope to gain its end. There is no such thing as





such fulfilment on this earth. Some happy talent, and some
fortunate opportunity, may form the two sides of the ladder
on which some men mount, but the rounds of that ladder
must be made of stuff to stand wear and tear ; and there is no
substitute for thorough-going, ardent, and sincere earnestness.
Never to put one hand to anything, on which I could throw
my whole self ; and never to affect depreciation of my
work, whatever it was ; I find, now, to have .been my golden
rules.

How much of the practice I have just reduced to precept,
I owe to Agnes, I will not repeat here. My narrative pro-
ceeds to Agnes, with a thankful love.

She came on a visit of a fortnight to the Doctor's. Mr.
Wickfield was the Doctor's old friend, and the Doctor wished
to talk with him, and do him good. It had been matter of
conversation with Agnes when she was last in town, and this
visit was the result. She and her father came together. I
was not much surprised to hear from her that she had engaged
to find a lodging in the neighborhood for Mrs. Heep, whose
rheumatic complaint required change of air, and who would
be charmed to have it in such company. Neither was I sur-
prised when, on the very next day, Uriah, like a dutiful son,
brought his worthy mother to take possession.

" You see, Master Copperfield," said he, as he forced himself
upon my company for a turn in the Doctor's garden, " where
a person loves, a person is a little jealous — leastways, anxious
to keep an eye on the beloved one."

" Of whom are you jealous, now ? " said I.

" Thanks to you, Master Copperfield," he returned, " of no
one in particular just at present — no male person, at least."

" Do you mean that you are jealous of a female person ? "

He gave me a sidelong glance out of his sinister red eyes,
and laughed.

"Really, Master Copperfield," he said, " — I should say
Mister, but I know you'll excuse the abit I've got into —
you're so insinuating, that you draw me like a corkscrew!
Well, I don't mind telling you," putting his fish-like hand on
mine, "I'm not a lady's man in general, sir, and I never was,
with Mrs. Strong."



186 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

His eyes looked green now, as they watched mine with a
rascally cunning.

" What do you mean ? " said I.

"Why, though I am a lawyer, Master Copperfield," he
replied, with a dry grin, "I mean, just at present, what I say."

" And what do you mean by your look ? " I retorted, quietly.

" By my look ? Dear me, Copperfield, that's sharp practice !
What do I mean by my look ? "

" Yes," said I. « By your look."

He seemed very much amused, and laughed as heartily as
it was in his nature to laugh. After some scraping of his
chin with his hand, he went on to say, with his eyes cast
downward — still scraping, very slowly :

" When I was but a numble clerk, she always looked down
upon me. She was for ever having my Agnes backwards and
forwards at her ouse, and she was for ever being a friend to
you, Master Copperfield ; but I was too far beneath her myself,
to be noticed."

" Well ? " said I ; " suppose you were ! "

" — And beneath him, too," pursued Uriah, very distinctly,
and in a meditative tone of voice, as he continued to scrape
his chin.

"Don't you know the Doctor better," said I, "than to
suppose him conscious of your existence, when you were not
before him ? "

He directed his eyes at me in that sidelong glance again,
and he made his face very lantern-jawed, for the greater con-
venience of scraping, as he answered :

" Oh dear, I am not referring to the Doctor ! Oh no, poor
man ! I mean Mr. Maldon ! "

My heart quite died within me. All my old doubts and
apprehensions on that subject, all the Doctor's happiness and
peace, all the mingled possibilities of innocence and compro-
mise, that I could not unravel, I saw, in a moment, at the
mercy of this fellow's twisting.

" He never could come into the office, without ordering and
shoving me about," said Uriah. " One of your fine gentlemen
he was! I was very meek and umble — and I am. But I
didn't like that sort of thing — and I don't ! "





He left off scraping his chin, and sucked in his cheeks until
they seemed to meet inside ; keeping his sidelong glance upon
me all the while.

"She is one of your lovely women, she is," he pursued,
when he had slowly restored his face to its natural form ;
"and ready to be no friend to such as me, / know. She's
just the person as would put my Agnes up to higher sort of
game. Now, I ain't one of your lady's men, Master Copper-
field ; but I've had eyes in my ed, a pretty long time back.
We umble ones have got eyes, mostly speaking — and we look
out of 'em."

I endeavored to appear unconscious and not disquieted, but,
I saw in his face, with poor success.

" Now, I'm not a going to let myself be run down, Copper-
field," he continued, raising that part of his countenance,
where his red eyebrows would have been if he had had any,
with malignant triumph, " and I shall do what I can to put
a stop to this friendship. I don't approve of it. I don't mind
acknowledging to you that I've got rather a grudging disposi-
tion, and want to keep off all intruders. I ain't a going, if I
know it, to run the risk of being plotted against."

"You are always plotting, and delude yourself into the
belief that everybody else is doing the like, I think," said I.

" Perhaps so, Master Copperfield," he replied. " But I've
got a motive, as my fellow-partner used to say ; and I go at it
tooth and nail. I musn't be put upon, as a numble person, too
much. I can't allow people in my way. Really they must
come out of the cart, Master Copperfield ! "

" I don't understand you," said I.

"Don't you, though?" he returned with one of his jerks.
" I'm astonished at that, Master Copperfield, you being usually
so quick ! I'll try to be plainer, another time. — Is that Mr.
Maldon a-norseback, ringing at the gate, sir ? "

" It looks like him," I replied, as carelessly as I could.

Uriah stopped short, put his hands between his great knobs
of knees, and doubled himself up with laughter. With per-
fectly silent laughter. Not a sound escaped from him. I
was so repelled by his odious behavior, particularly by this
concluding instance, that I turned away without any cere-



188 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

mony ; and left hirn doubled up in the middle of the garden,
like a scarecrow in want of support.

It was not on that evening ; but, as I well remember, on the
next evening but one, which was a Saturday; that I took
Agnes to see Dora. I had arranged the visit beforehand,
with Miss Lavinia ; and Agnes was expected to tea.

I was in a flutter of pride and anxiety ; pride in my dear
little betrothed, and anxiety that Agnes should like her. All
the way to Putney, Agnes being inside the stage-coach, and I
outside, I pictured Dora to myself in every one of the pretty
looks I knew so well ; now making up my mind that I should
like her to look exactly as she looked at such a time, aild then
dou 1 ting whether I should not prefer her looking as shq
looked at such another time ; and almost worrying myself
into a fevo about it.

I was troubled by no doubt of her being very pretty, in any
case ; but it ieV out that I had never seen her look so well.
She was not in the drawing-room when I presented Agnes to
her little aunts, but was. shyly keeping out of the way. I
knew where to look for her, now; and sure enough I found
her stopping her ears again, behind the same dull old door.

At first she wouldn't come at all ; and then she pleaded for
five minutes by my watch. When at length she put her arm
through mine, to be taken to the drawing-room, her charming
little face was flushed, and had never been so pretty. But,
when we went into the room, and it turned pale, she was ten
thousand times prettier yet.

Dora was afraid of Agnes. She had told me that she knew
Agnes was "too clever." But when she saw her looking at
once so cheerful and so earnest,, and so thoughtful, and so
good, she gave a faint little cry of pleased surprise, and just
put her affectionate arms round Agnes's neck, and laid her
innocent cheek against her face.

I never was so happy. I never was so pleased as when I
saw those two sit down together, side by side. As when I
saw my little darling looking up so naturally to those cordial
eyes. As when I saw the tender, beautiful regard which
Agnes cast upon her.

Miss Lavinia and Miss Clarissa partook, in their way, of








my joy. It was the pleasantest tea-table in the world. Miss
Clarissa presided. I cut and handed the sweet seed-cake —
the little sisters had a bird-like fondness for picking up seeds
and pecking at sugar ; Miss Lavinia looked on with benignant
patronage, as if our happy love were all her work; and we
were -oerfectly contented with ourselves and one another.

The gentle cheerfulness of Agnes went to all their hearts.
Her quiet interest in everything that interested Dora; her
manner of making acquaintance with Jip (who responded
instantly); her pleasant way, when Dora was ashamed to
come over to her usual seat by me ; her modest grace and
ease, eliciting a crowd of blushing little marks of confidence
from Dora ; seemed to make our circle quite complete.

VI am so glad," said Dora, after tea, "that you like me.
I didn't think you would ; and I want, more than ever, to be
liked, now Julia Mills is gone."

I have omitted to mention it, by the by. Miss Mills had
sailed, and Dora and I had gone aboard a great East Indiaman
at Gravesend to see her ; and we had had preserved ginger, and
guava, and other delicacies of that sort for lunch ; and we had
left Miss Mills weeping on a camp-stool on the quarter-deck,
with a large new diary under her arm, in which the original
reflections awakened by the contemplation of Ocean were to be
recorded under lock and key.

Agnes said, she was afraid I must have given her an un-
promising character ; but Dora corrected that directly.

" Oh no ! " she said, shaking her curls at me ; " it was all praise.
He thinks so much of your opinion, that I was quite afraid of it."

"My good opinion cannot strengthen his attachment to
some people whom he knows," said Agnes, with a smile ; " it
is not worth their having."

"But please let me have it," said Dora, in her coaxing way,
" if you can ! "

We made merry about Dora's wanting to be liked, and Dora
said I was a goose, and she didn't like me at any rate, and
the short evening flew away on gossamer-wings. The time
was at hand when the coach was to call for us. I was stand-
ing alone before the fire, when Dora came stealing softly in,
to give me that usual precious little kiss before I went.



190 THE PEE SON AL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" Don't you think if I had had her for a friend a long time
ago, Doady," said Dora, her bright eyes shining very brightly,
and her little right hand idly busying itself with one of the
buttons of my coat, "I might have been more clever per-
haps ? "

" My love ! " said I, " what nonsense ! "

" Do you think it is nonsense ? " returned Dora, without
looking at me. " Are you sure it is ? "

" Of course lam!"

"I have forgotten," said Dora, still turning the button round
and round, " what relation Agnes is to you, you dear bad boy."

"No blood-relation," I replied; "but we were brought up
together, like brother and sister."

" I wonder why you ever fell in love with me ? " said Dora,
beginning on another button of my coat.

" Perhaps because I couldn't see you, and not love you,
Dora ! "

" Suppose you had never seen me at all," said Dora, going
to another button.

"Suppose we had never been born ! " said I, gaily.

I wondered what she was thinking about, as I glanced in
admiring silence at the little soft hand travelling up the row
of buttons on my coat, and at the clustering hair that lay
against my breast, and at the lashes of her downcast eyes,
slightly rising as they followed her idle fingers. At length
her eyes were lifted up to mine, and she stood on tiptoe to
give me, more thoughtfully than usual, that precious little kiss
— once, twice, three times — and went out of the room.

They all came back together within five minutes afterwards,
and Dora's unusual thoughtfulness was quite gone then. She
was laughingly resolved to put Jip through the whole of his
performances, before the coach came. They took some time
(not so much on account of their variety, as Jip's reluctance),
and were still unfinished when it was heard at the door.
There was a hurried but affectionate parting between Agnes
and herself ; and Dora was to write to Agnes (who was not
to mind her letters being foolish, she said), and Agnes was to
write to Dora ; and they had a second parting at the coach-
door, and a third when Dora, in spite of the remonstrances





of Miss Lavinia, would come running out once more to remind
Agnes at the coach-window about writing, and to shake her
curls at me on the box.

The stage-coach was to put us down near Covent Garden,
where we were to take another stage-coach for Highgate. I
was impatient for the short walk in the interval, that Agnes
might praise Dora to me. Ah ! what praise it was ! How
lovingly and fervently did it commend the pretty creature I
had won, with all her artless graces best displayed, to my
most gentle care ! How thoughtfully remind me, yet with no pre-
tence of doing so, of the trust in which I held the orphan child !

Never, never, had I loved Dora so deeply and truly as I
loved her that night. When we had again alighted, and were
walking in the starlight along the quiet road that led to the
Doctor's house, I told Agnes it was her doing.

" When you were sitting by her," said I, " you seemed to be
no less her guardian angel than mine ; and you seem so now,
Agnes."

" A poor angel," she returned, " but faithful."

The clear tone of her voice going straight to my heart, made
it natural to me to say :

"The cheerfulness that belongs to you, Agnes (and to no
one else that ever I have seen), is so restored, I have observed
to-day, that I have begun to hope you are happier at home ? "

" I am happier in myself," she said ; "I am quite cheerful
and light-hearted."

I glanced at the serene face looking upward, and thought it
was the stars that made it seem so noble.

" There has been no change at home," said Agnes, after a
few moments.

" No fresh reference," said I, ", to — I wouldn't distress you,
Agnes, but I cannot help asking — to what we spoke of, when
we parted last ? "

"No, none," she answered.

" I have thought so much about it."

" You must think less about it. Remember that I confide
in simple love and truth at last. Have no apprehensions for
me, Trotwood," she added, after a moment; "the step you
dread my taking, I shall never take."



192 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

Although I think I had never really feared it, in any season
of cool reflection, it was an unspeakable relief to me to have
this assurance from her own truthful lips. I told her so,
earnestly.

"And when this visit is over," said I, — "for we may not
be alone another time, — how long is it likely to be, my dear
Agnes, before you come to London again ? "

"Probably a long time," she replied; "I think it will be
best — for papa's sake — to remain at home. We are not likely
to meet often, for some time to come ; but I shall be a good
correspondent of Dora's, and we shall frequently hear of one
another that way."

We were now within the little court-yard of the Doctor's
cottage. It was growing late. There was a light in the win-
dow of Mrs. Strong's chamber, and Agnes, pointing to it, bade
me good night.

" Do not be troubled," she said, giving me her hand, "by
our misfortunes and anxieties. I can be happier in nothing
than in your happiness. If you can ever give me help, rely
upon it I will ask you for it. God bless you always !"

In her beaming smile, and in these last tones of her cheerful
voice, I seemed again to see and hear my little Dora in her
company. I stood awhile, looking through the porch at the
stars, with a heart full of love and gratitude, and then walked
slowly forth. I had engaged a bed at a decent alehouse close
by, and was going out at the gate, when, happening to turn
my head, I saw a light in the Doctor's study. A half-re-
proachful fancy came into my mind, that he had been working
at the Dictionary without my help. With the view of seeing
if this were so, and, in any case, of bidding him good night, if
he were yet sitting among his books, I turned back, and going
softly across the hall, and gently opening the door, looked in.

The first person whom I saw, to my surprise, by the sober
light of the shaded lamp, was Uriah. He was standing close
beside it, with one of his skeleton hands over his mouth, and
the other resting on the Doctor's table. The Doctor sat in his
study chair, covering his face with his hands. Mr. Wickfield,
sorely troubled and distressed, was leaning forward, irreso-
lutely touching the Doctor's arm.





For a Hionient ; I supposed that the Doctor was ill. I
hastily advanced a step under that impression, when I met
Uriah's eye, and saw what was the matter. I would have
withdrawn, but the Doctor made a jesture to detain me, and
I remained.

s "At any rate," observed Uriah, with a writhe of his
ungainly person, " we may keep the door shut. We needn't
make it known to all the town."

Saying which, he went on his toes to the door, which I had
left open, and carefully closed - it. He then came back, and
took up his former position. There was an obtrusive show of
compassionate zeal in his voice and manner, more intoler-
able — at least to me — than any demeanor he could have
assumed.

" I have felt it incumbent upon me, Master Copperfield,"
said Uriah, " to point out to Doctor Strong what you and me
have already talked about. You didn't exactly understand
me, though ! "

I gave him a look, but no other answer ; and, going to my
good old master, said a few words that I meant to be words of
comfort and encouragement. He put his hand upon my shoul-
der, as it had been his custom to do when I was quite a little
fellow, but did not lift his gray head.

" As you didn't understand me, Master Copperfield," resumed
Uriah in the same officious manner, "I may take the liberty of
umbly mentioning, being among friends, that I have called
Dr. Strong's attention to the goings-on of Mrs. Strong. It's
much against the grain with me, I assure you, Copperfield, to
be concerned in anything so unpleasant ; but really, as it is,
we're all mixing ourselves up with what oughtn't to be.
That was what my meaning was, sir, when you didn't under-
stand me."

I wonder now, when I recall his leer, that I did not collar
him, and try to shake the breath out of his body.

" I dare say I didn't make myself very clear," he went on,
" nor you neither. Naturally, we was both of us inclined to
give such a subject a wide berth. Hows'ever, at last I have
made up my mind to speak plain ; and I have mentioned to
Doctor Strong that — did you speak, sir ? "

VOL. II — 13



194 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

This was to the Doctor, who had moaned. The sound might
have touched any heart, I thought, but it had no effect upon
Uriah's.

" — mentioned to Doctor Strong," he proceeded, " that any
one may see that Mr. Maldon, and the lovely and agreeable
lady as is Doctor Strong's wife, are too sweet oh one another.
Really the time is come (we being at present all mixing our-
selves up with what oughtn't to be), when Doctor Strong must
be told that this was full as plain to everybody as the sun,
before Mr. Maldon went to India; that Mr. Maldon made
excuses to come back, for nothing else ; and that he's always
here, for nothing else. Wheij you come in, sir, I was just
putting it to my fellow partner," towards whom he turned,
" to say to Doctor Strong upon his word and honor, whether
he'd ever been of this opinion long ago, or not. Come, Mr.
Wickfield, sir ! Would you be so good as tell us ? Yes or no,
sir ? Come, partner ! "

" For God's sake, my dear Doctor," said Mr. Wickfield, again
laying his irresolute hand upon the Doctor's arm," don't attach
too much weight to any suspicions I may have entertained."

"There!" cried Uriah, shaking his head. "What a mel-
ancholy confirmation : ain't it ? Him ! Such an old friend !
Bless your soul, when I was nothing but a clerk in his office,
Copperfield, I've seen him twenty times, if I've seen him once,
quite in a taking about it — quite put out, you know (and very
proper in him as a father ; I'm sure I can't blame him), to
think that Miss Agnes was mixing herself up with what
oughtn't to be."

"My dear Strong," said Mr. Wickfield in a tremulous voice,
" my good friend, I needn't tell you that it has been my vice
to look for some one master motive in everybody, and to try
all actions by one narrow test. I may have fallen into such
doubts as I have had, through this mistake."

" You have had doubts, Wickfield," said the Doctor, without
lifting up his head. " You have had doubts."

" Speak up, fellow partner," urged Uriah.

" I had, at one time, certainly," said Mr. Wickfield. " I —
God forgive me — I thought you had."



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 195

" No, no, no ! " returned the Doctor, in a tone of most
pathetic grief."

" I thought, at one time," said Mr. Wickfield, " that you
wished to send Maldon abroad to effect a desirable separation."

" No, no, no ! " returned the Doctor. a To give Annie pleas-
ure, by making some provision for the companion of her child-
hood. Nothing else."

"So I found," said Mr. Wickfield. "I couldn't doubt it,
when you told me so. But I thought — I implore you to
remember the narrow construction which has been my beset-
ting sin — that, in a case where there was so much disparity in
point of years — "

" That's the way to put it, you see, Master Copperfield ! "
observed Uriah, with fawning and offensive pity.

" — a lady of such youth, and such attractions, however real
her respect for you, might have been influenced in marrying,
by worldly considerations only. I made no allowance for
innumerable feelings and circumstances that may have all
tended to good. For Heaven's sake remember that ! "

" How kind he puts it ! " said Uriah, shaking his head.

" Always observing her from one point of view," said Mr.
Wickfield ; " but by all that is dear to you, my old friend, I
entreat you to consider what it was ; I am forced to confess
now, having no escape — "

" No ! There's no way out of it, Mr. Wickfield, sir,"
observed Uriah, " when it's got to this."

" — that I did," said Mr. Wickfield, glancing helplessly
and distractedly at his partner, " that I did doubt her, and
think her wanting in her duty to you ; and that I did some-
times, if I must say all, feel averse to Agnes being in such a
familiar relation towards her, as to see what I saw, or in my
diseased theory fancied that I saw. I never mentioned this
to any one. I never meant it to be known to any one. And
though it is terrible to you to hear," said Mr. Wickfield, quite
subdued, "if you knew how terrible it is to me to tell, you
would feel compassion for me ! "

The Doctor, in the perfect goodness of his nature, put out
his hand. Mr. Wickfield held it for a little while in his, with
his head bowed down.



196 THE PERSONAL HISTOBY AND EXPERIENCE

" I am sure/ 5 said Uriah, writhing himself into the silence
like a Conger-eel, "that this is a subject full of unpleasant-
ness to everybody. But since we have got so far, I ought to
take the liberty of mentioning that Copperfield has noticed it

too."

I turned upon him, and asked him how he dared refer to

me !

" Oh ! it's very kind of you, Copperfield," returned Uriah,
undulating all over, " and we all know what an amiable char-
acter yours is ; but you know that the moment I spoke to you
the other night, you knew what I meant. You know you
knew what I meant, Copperfield. Don't deny it ! You deny
it with the best intentions ; but don't do it, Copperfield."

I saw the mild eye of the good old Doctor turned upon me
for a moment, and I felt that the confession of my old mis-
givings and remembrances was too plainly written in my face
to be overlooked. It was of no use raging. I could not undo
that. Say what I would, I could not unsay it.

We were silent again, and remained so, until the Doctor rose
and walked twice or thrice across the room. Presently he
returned to where his chair stood; and, leaning on the back of
it, and occasionally putting his handkerchief to his eyes, with
a simple honesty that did him more honor, to my thinking,
than any disguise he could have affected, said :

" I have been much to blame. I believe I have been very
much to blame. I have exposed one whom I hold in my heart,
to trials and aspersions — I call them aspersions, even to
have been conceived in anybody's inmost mind — of which she
never, but for me, could have been the object."

Uriah Heep gave a kind of snivel. I think to express
sympathy.

"Of which my Annie," said the Doctor, "never, but for
me, could have been the object. Gentlemen, I am old now,
as you know ; I do not feel, to-night, that I have much to
live for. But my life — my Life — upon the truth and honor
of the dear lady who has been the subject of this conversa-
tion!"

I do not think that the best embodiment of chivalry, the
realization of the handsomest and most romantic figure ever



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 197

imagined by painter, could have said this with a more impres-
sive and affecting dignity than the plain old Doctor did.

" But I am not prepared," he went on, " to deny — perhaps
I may have been, without knowing it, in some degree prepared
to admit — that I may have unwittingly ensnared that lady
into an unhappy marriage. I am a man quite unaccustomed
to observe ; and I cannot but believe that the observation of
several people, of different ages and positions, all too plainly
tending in one direction (and that so natural), is better than
mine."

I have often admired, as I have elsewhere described, his
benignant manner towards his youthful wife ; but the respect-
ful tenderness he manifested in every reference to her on this
occasion, and the almost reverential manner in which he put
away from him the lightest doubt of her integrity, exalted
him, in my eyes, beyond description.

"I married that lady," said the Doctor, "when she was
extremely young. I took her to myself when her character
was scarcely formed. So far as it was developed, it had been
my happiness to form it. I knew her father well. I knew
her well. I had taught her what I could, for the love of all
her beautiful and virtuous qualities. If I did her wrong ; as
I fear I did, in taking advantage (but I never meant it) of
her gratitude and her affection ; I ask pardon of that lady, in
my heart !"

He walked across the room, and came back to the same
place ; holding the chair with a grasp that trembled, like his
subdued voice, in its earnestness.

"I regarded myself as a refuge, for her, from the dangers •
and vicissitudes of life. I persuaded myself that, unequal
though we were in years, she would live tranquilly and con-
tentedly with me. I did not shut out of my consideration the
time when I should leave her free, and still young and still
beautiful, but with her judgment more matured — no, gentle-
men — upon my truth ! "

His homely figure seemed to be lightened up by his fidelity
and generosity. Every word he uttered had a force that no
other grace could have imparted to it.

" My life with this lady has been very happy. Until to-



198 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE






night, I have had uninterrupted occasion to bless the day on
which I did her great injustice."

His voice, more and more faltering in the utterance of these
words, stopped for a few moments ; then he went on :

"Once awakened from my dream — I have been a poor
dreamer, in one way or other, all my life — I see how natural
it is that she should have some regretful feeling towards her
old companion ^nd her equal. That she does regard him with
some innocent regret, with some blameless thoughts of what
might have been, but for me, is, I fear, too true. Much that I
have seen, but not noted, has come back upon me with new
meaning, during this last trying hour. But, beyond this, gen-
tlemen, the dear lady's name never must be coupled with a
word, a breath, of doubt."

For a little while, his eye kindled and his voice was firm ;
for a little while he was again silent. Presently, he pro-
ceeded as before :

"It only remains for me, to bear the knowledge of the un-
happiness I have occasioned, as submissively as I can. It is
she who should reproach ; not I. To save her from miscon-
struction, cruel misconstruction, that even my friends have
not been able to avoid, becomes my duty. The more retired
we live, the better I shall discharge it. And when the time
comes — may it come soon, if it be His merciful pleasure! —
when my death shall release her from constraint, I shall close
my eyes upon her honored face, with unbounded confidence
and love ; and leave her, with no sorrow then, to happier and
brighter days."

• I could not see him for the tears which his earnestness and
goodness, so adorned by, and so adorning, the perfect simplic-
ity of his manner, brought into my eyes. He had moved to
the door, when he added :

" Gentlemen, I have shown you my heart. I am sure you
will respect it. What we have said to-night is never to be
said more. Wickfield, give me an old friend's arm up stairs ! "

Mr. Wickfield hastened to him. Without interchanging a
word they went slowly out of the room together, Uriah look-
ing after them.

"Well, Master Copperfield!" said Uriah, meekly turning to



OF DAVID COPPEIIFIELD. 199

me. " The thing hasn't took quite the turn that might have
been expected, for the old Scholar — what an excellent man !
— is as blind as a brickbat; but this family's out of the cart,
I think!"

I needed but the sound of his voice to be so madly enraged
as I never was before, and never have been since.

" You villain," said I, " what do you mean by entrapping
me into your schemes ? How dare you appeal to me just
now, you false rascal, as if we had been in discussion to-
gether ? "

As we stood, front to front, I saw so plainly, in the stealthy
exultation of his face, what I already so plainly knew; I
mean that he forced his confidence upon me, expressly to
make me miserable, and had set a deliberate trap for me in
this very matter ; that I couldn't bear it. The whole of his
lank cheek was invitingly before me, and I struck it with my
open hand with that force that my fingers tingled as if I had
burnt them.

He caught the hand in his, and we stood in that connection,
looking at each other. We stood so, a long time ; long enough
for me to see the white marks of my fingers die out of the
deep red of his cheek, and leave it a deeper red.

" Copperfield," he said at length, in a breathless voice,
"have you taken leave of your senses ? "

"I have taken leave of you," said I, wresting my hand
away. "You dog, I'll know no more of you."

* Won't you ? ' said he, constrained by the pain of his
cheek to put his hand there. " Perhaps you won't be able to
help it. Isn't this ungrateful of you, now ? "

"I have shown you often enough," said I, "that I despise
you. I have shown you now, more plainly, that I do. Why
should I dread your doing your worst to all about you ? What
else do you ever do ? "

He perfectly understood this allusion to the considerations
that had hitherto restrained me in my communications with
him. I rather think that neither the blow, nor the allusion,
would have escaped me, but for the assurance I had had from
Agnes that night. It is no matter.

There was another long pause. His eyes, as he looked at



200 THE PEE SON AL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

me, seemed to take every shade of color that could make eyes

ugly.

" Copperfield," he said, removing his hand from his cheek,
u you have always gone against me. I know you always used
to be against me at Mr. Wickfield's."

a You may think what you like," said I, still in a towering
rage. u If it is not true, so much the worthier you."

"And yet I always liked you, Copperfield," he rejoined.

I deigned to make him no reply ; and, taking up my hat,
was going out to bed, when he came between me and the
door.

" Copperfield," he said, " there must be two parties to a
quarrel. I won't be one."

" You may go to the devil ! " said I.

" Don't say that ! " he replied. " I know you'll be sorry
afterwards. How can you make yourself so inferior to me, as
to show such a bad spirit ? But I forgive you."

" You forgive me!" I repeated disdainfully.

" I do, and you can't help yourself," replied Uriah. " To
think of your going and attacking me, that have always been
a friend to you ! But there can't be a quarrel without two
parties, and I won't be one. I will be a friend to you, in spite
of you. So you know what you've got to expect."

The necessity of carrying on this dialogue (his part in
which was very slow ; mine very quick) in a low tone, that
the house might not be disturbed at an unseasonable hour,
did not improve my temper ; though my passion was cooling
down. Merely telling him that I should expect from him
what I always had expected, and had never yet been disap-
pointed in, I opened the door upon him, as if he had been a
great walnut put there to be cracked, and went out of the
house. But he slept out of the house too, at his mother's
lodging, and before I had gone many hundred yards, came up
with me.

"You know, Copperfield," he said, in my ear (I did not
turn my head), " you're in quite a wrong position ; " which I
felt to be true, and that made me chafe the more ; " you can't
make this a brave thing, and you can't help being forgiven.
I don't intend to mention it to mother, nor to any living soul.



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 201

Phi determined to forgive you. But I do wonder that you
should lift your hand against a person that you knew to be so
umble ! "

I felt only less mean than he. He knew me better than I
knew myself. If he had retorted or openly exasperated me,
it would have been a relief and a justification; but he had
put me on a slow fire, on which I lay tormented half the
night.

In the morning when I came out, the early church bell was
ringing, and he was walking up and down with his mother.
He addressed me as if nothing had happened, and I could do
no less than reply. I had struck him hard enough to give him
the toothache, I suppose. At all events his face was tied up
in a black silk handkerchief, which, with his hat perched on
the top of it, was far from improving his appearance. I heard
that he went to a dentist's in London on the Monday morning,
and had a tooth out. I hope it was a double one.

The Doctor gave out that he was not quite well ; and he
remained alone, for a considerable part of every day, during
the remainder of the visit. Agnes and her father had been
gone a week, before we resumed our usual work. On the day
preceding its resumption, the Doctor gave me with his own
hands a folded note not sealed. It was addressed to myself ;
and laid an injunction on me, in a few affectionate words, never
to refer to the subject of that evening. I had confided it to
my aunt, but to no one else. It was not a subject I could dis-
cuss with Agnes, and Agnes certainly had not the least sus-
picion of what had passed.

Neither, I felt convinced, had Mrs. Strong then. Several
weeks elapsed before I saw the least change in her. It came
on slowly, like a cloud when there is no wind. At first, she
seemed to wonder at the gentle compassion with which the
Doctor spoke to her, and at his wish that she should have hen
mother with her, to relieve the dull monotony of her life.
Often, when we were at work, and she was sitting by, I would
see her pausing and looking at him with that memorable face.
Afterwards, I sometimes observed her rise, with her eyes full
of tears, and go out of the room. Gradually, an unhappy
shadow fell upon her beauty, and deepened every Jay. Mrs.



202 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

Markleham was a regular inmate of the cottage then ; but she
talked and talked and saw nothing.

As this change stole on Annie, once like sunshine in the
Doctor's house, the Doctor became older in appearance, and
more grave ; but the sweetness of his temper, the placid kind-
ness of his manner, and his benevolent solicitude for her, if
they were capable of any increase, were increased. I saw him
once, early on the morning of her birthday, when she came to
sit in the window while we were at work (which she had
always done, but now began to do with a timid and uncertain
air that I thought very touching), take her forehead between
his hands, kiss it, and go hurriedly away, too much moved to
remain. I saw her stand where he had- left her, like a statue;
and then bend down her head, and clasp her hands, and weep,
I cannot say how sorrowfully.

Sometimes, after that, I fancied that she tried to speak,
even to me, in intervals when we were left alone. But she
never uttered word. The Doctor always had some new pro-
ject for her participating in amusements away from home,
with her mother ; and Mrs. Markleham, who was very fond of
amusements, and very easily dissatisfied with anything else,
entered into them with great good will, and was loud in her
commendations. But Annie, in a spiritless unhappy way,
only went whither she was led, and seemed to have no care
for anything.

I did not know what to think. Neither did my aunt ; who
must have walked, at various times, a hundred miles in her
uncertainty. What was strangest of all was, that the only
real relief which seemed to make its way into the secret region
of this domestic unhappiness, made its way there in the person
of Mr. Dick.

What his thoughts were on the subject, or what his obser-
vation was, I am as unable to explain, as I daresay he would
have been to assist me in the task. But, as I have recorded
in the narrative of my school days, his veneration for the
Doctor was unbounded ; and there is a subtlety of perception
in real attachment, even when it is borne towards man by one
of the lower animals, which leaves the highest intellect behind.



OF DAVID COFPEBFIELD. 203

To this mind of the heart, if I may call it so, in Mr. Dick,
some bright ray of the truth shot straight.

He had proudly resumed his privilege, in many of his spare
hours, of walking up and down the garden with the Doctor ;
as he had been accustomed to pace up and down The Doctor's
Walk at Canterbury. But matters were no sooner in this
state, than he devoted all his spare time (and got up earlier
to make it more) to these perambulations. If he had never
been so happy as when the Doctor read that marvellous per-
formance, the Dictionary, to him ; he was now quite miserable
unless the Doctor pulled it out of his pocket, and began.
When the Doctor and I were engaged, he now fell into the
custom of walking up and down with Mrs. Strong, and helping
her to trim her favorite flowers, or weed the beds. I dare say
he rarely spoke a dozen words in an hour : but his quiet
interest, and his wistful face, found immediate response in
both their breasts ; each knew that the other liked him, and
that he loved both; and he became what no one else could be
— a link between them.

When I think of him, with his impenetrably wise face,
walking up and down with the Doctor, delighted to be battered
by the hard words in the Dictionary ; when I think of him
carrying huge watering-pots after Annie; kneeling down in
very paws of gloves, at patient microscopic work among the
little leaves ; expressing as no philosoper could have expressed,
in everything he did, a delicate desire to be her friend;
showering sympathy, trustfulness, and affection, out of every
hole in the watering-pot ; when I think of him never wander-
ing in that better mind of his to which unhappiness addressed
itself, never bringing the unfortunate King Charles into the
garden, never wavering in his grateful service, never diverted
from his knowledge that there was something wrong, or from
his wish to set it right — I really feel almost ashamed of hav-
ing known that he was not quite in his wits, taking account
of the utmost I have done with mine.

" Nobody but myself, Trot, knows what that man is ! " my
aunt would proudly remark, when we conversed about it.
"Dick will distinguish himself yet ! "

I must refer to one other topic before I close this chapter.



204 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE.

While the visit at the Doctor's was still in progress, I observed
that the postman brought two or three letters every morning
for Uriah Heep, who remained at Highgate until the rest
went back, it being a leisure time ; and that these were always
directed in a business-like manner by Mr. Micawber, who now
assumed a round legal hand. I was glad to infer, from these
slight premises, that Mr. Micawber was doing well ; and con-
sequently was much surprised to receive, about this time, the
following letter from his amiable wife.

" Caxterburv, Monday Evening.

" You will doubtless be surprised, my dear Mr. Copperfield,
to receive this communication. Still more so, by its contents.
Still more so, by the stipulation of implicit confidence which
I beg to impose. But my feelings as a wife and mother require
relief; and as I do not wish to consult my family (already
obnoxious to the feelings of Mr. Micawber), I know no one of
whom I can better ask advice than my friend and former lodger.

" You may be aware, my dear Mr. Copperfield, that between
myself and Mr. Micawber (whom I will never desert), there
has always been preserved a spirit of mutual confidence.
Mr. Micawber may have occasionally given a bill without con-
sulting me, or he may have misled me as to the period when
that obligation would become due. This has actually hap-
pened. But, in general, Mr. Micawber has had no secrets
from the bosom of affection — I allude to his wife — and has
invariably, on our retirement to rest, recalled the events of
the day.

"You will picture to yourself, my dear Mr. Copperfield,
what the poignancy of my feelings must be, when I inform
you that Mr. Micawber is entirely changed. He is reserved.
He is secret. His life is a mystery to the partner of his joys
and sorrows — I again allude to his wife — and if I should
assure you that beyond knowing that it is passed from morn-
ing till night at the office, I now know less of it than I do
of the man in the south, connected with whose mouth the
thoughtless children repeat an idle tale respecting cold plum
porridge, I should adopt a popular fallacy to express an actual
fact.



OF DAVID GOPPEBFIELD. 205

"But this is not all. Mr. Micawber is morose. He is
severe. He is estranged from our eldest son and daughter^ he
has no pride in his twins, he looks with an eye of coldness
even on the unoffending stranger who last became a member
of our circle. The pecuniary means of meeting our expenses,
kept down to the utmost farthing, are obtained from him with
great difficulty, and even under fearful threats that he will
Settle himself (the exact expression) ; and he inexorably
refuses to give any explanation whatever of this distracting
policy.

" This is hard to bear. This is heart-breaking. If you will
advise me, knowing my feeble powers such as they are, how
you think it will be best to exert them in a dilemma so un-
wonted, you will add another friendly obligation to the many
you have already rendered me. With loves from the children,
and a smile from the happily unconscious stranger, I remain,
dear Mr. Copperfield,

" Your afflicted,

"Emma Micawber."

I did not feel justified in giving a wife of Mrs. Micawber's
experience any other recommendation, than that she should
try to reclaim Mr. Micawber by patience and kindness (as I
knew she would in any case) ; but the letter set me thinking
about him very much.



206 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE



CHAPTER XIV.

ANOTHER RETROSPECT.

Once again, let me pause upon a memorable period of my life.
Let me stand aside, to see the phantoms of those days go by
me, accompanying the shadow of myself, in dim procession.

Weeks, months, seasons, pass along. They seem little more
than a summer day and a winter evening. Now, the Common
where I walk with Dora is all in bloom, a field of bright gold ;
and now the unseen heather lies in mounds and bunches under-
neath a covering of snow. In a breath, the river that flows
through our Sunday walks is sparkling in the summer sun, is
ruffled by the winter wind, or thickened with drifting heaps
of ice. Faster than ever river ran towards the sea, it flashes,
darkens, and rolls away.

Not a thread changes, in the house of the two little bird-like
ladies. The clock ticks over the fire-place, the weather-glass
hangs in the hall. Neither clock nor weather-glass is ever
right ; but we believe in both, devoutly.

I have come legally to man's estate. I have attained the
dignity of twenty-one. But this is a sort of dignity that may
be thrust upon one. Let me think what I have achieved.

I have tamed that savage stenographic mystery. I make a
respectable income by it. I am in high repute for my accom-
plishment in all pertaining to the art,, and am joined with
eleven others in reporting the debates in Parliament for a
Morning Newspaper. Night after night, I record predictions
that never come to pass, professions that are never fulfilled,
explanations that are only meant to mystify. I wallow in
words. Britannia, that unfortunate female, is always before
me, like a trussed fowl : skewered through and through with
office-pens, and bound hand and foot with red tape. I am suf-
ficiently behind the scenes to know the worth of political life.
I am quite an infidel about it, and shall never be converted.



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 207

My dear old Traddles has tried his hand at the same pur-
suit, but it is not in Traddles's way. He is perfectly good-
humored respecting his failure, and reminds me that he always
did consider himself slow. He has occasional employment on
the same newspaper, in getting up the facts of dry subjects, to
be written about and embellished by more fertile minds. He is
called to the bar ; and with admirable industry and self-denial
has scraped another hundred pounds together, to fee a con-
veyancer whose chambers he attends. A great deal of very hot
port wine was consumed at his call ; and, considering the figure,
I should think the Inner Temple must have made a profit by it.

I have come out in another way. I have taken with fear
and trembling to authorship. I wrote a little something, in
secret, and sent it to a magazine, and it was published in the
magazine. Since then, I have taken heart to write a good
many trifling pieces. Now, I am regularly paid for them.
Altogether, I am well off; when I tell my income on the
fingers of my left hand, I pass the third finger and take in the
fourth to the middle joint.

We have removed from Buckingham Street, to a pleasant
little cottage very near the one I looked at, when my enthu-
siasm first came on. My aunt, however (who has sold the
house at Dover, to good advantage), is not going to remain
here, but intends removing herself to a still more tiny cottage
close at hand. What does this portend ? My marriage ? Yes !

Yes ! I am going to be married to Dora ! Miss Lavinia
and Miss Clarissa have given their consent ; and if ever canary
birds were in a flutter, they are. Miss Lavinia, self-charged
with the superintendence of my darling's wardrobe, is constantly
cutting out brown-paper cuirasses, and differing in opinion
from a highly respectable young man, with a long bundle, and
a yard measure under his arm. A dressmaker, always stabbed
in the breast with a needle and thread, boards' and lodges in
the house; and seems to me, eating, drinking, or sleeping,
never to take her thimble off. They make a lay-figure of my
dear. They are always sending for her to come and try some-
thing on. We can't be happy together for five minutes in the
evening, but some intrusive female knocks at the door, and says,
" Oh, if you please, Miss Dora, would you step up stairs ! n



208 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

Miss Clarissa and my aunt roam all over London, to find out
articles of furniture for Dora and me to look at. It would be
better for them to buy the goods at once, without this cere-
mony of inspection ; for, when we go to see a kitchen fender
and meat-screen, Dora sees a Chinese house for Jip, with little
bells on the top, and prefers that. And it takes a long time
to accustom Jip to his new residence, after we have bought it ;
whenever he goes in or out, he makes all the little bells ring,
and is horribly frightened.

Peggotty comes up to make herself useful, and falls to work
immediately. Her department appears to be, to clean every-
thing over and over again. She rubs everything that can be
rubbed, until it shines, like her own honest forehead, with
perpetual friction. And now it is, that I begin to see her soli-
tary brother passing through the dark streets at night, and
looking, as he goes, among the wandering faces. I never
speak to him at such an hour. I know too well, as his grave
figure passes onward, what he seeks, and what he dreads.

Why does Traddles look so important when he calls upon
me this afternoon in the Commons — where I still occasionally
attend, for form's sake, when I have time ? The realization
of my boyish day-dreams is at hand. I am going to take out
the license.

It is a little document to do so much ; and Traddles contem-
plates it, as it lies upon my desk, half in admiration, half in
awe. There are the names in the sweet old visionary connec-
tion, David Copperfield and Dora Spenlow ; and there, in the
corner, is that Parental Institution, the Stamp Office, which is
so benignantly interested in the various transactions of human
life, looking down upon our Union; and there is the Arch-
bishop of Canterbury invoking a blessing on us in print, and
doing it as cheap as could possibly be expected.

Nevertheless, I am in a dream, a flustered, happy, hurried
dream. I can't believe that it is going to be ; and yet I can't
believe but that every one I pass in the street, must have some
kind of perception, that I am to be married the day after to-
morrow. The Surrogate knows me, when I go down to be
sworn 5 and disposes of me easily, as if there were a Masonic



OF DAVID COPPEEFIELD. 209

understanding between us. Traddles is not at all wanted, but
is in attendance as my general backer.

" I hope the next time you come here, my dear f ellow," I
say to Traddles, " it will be on the same errand for yourself.
And I hope it will be soon."

"Thank you for your good wishes, my dear Copperfield," he
replies. " I hope so too. It's a satisfaction to know that she'll
wait for me any length of time, and that she really is the dear-
est girl — "

" When are you to meet her at the coach ? " I ask.

" At seven," says Traddles, looking at his plain old silver
watch — the very watch he once took a wheel out of, at school,
to make a water-mill. " That is about Miss Wiekfield's time,
is it not ? "

" A little earlier. Her time is half-past eight."

"I assure you, my dear boy," says Traddles, "I am almost
as pleased as if I were going to be married myself, to think
that this event is coming to such a happy termination. And
really the great friendship and consideration of personally
associating Sophy with the joyful occasion, and inviting her
to be a bridesmaid in conjunction with Miss Wickfield, de-
mands my warmest thanks. I am extremely sensible of it."

I hear him, and shake hands with him ; and we talk, and
walk, and dine, and so on ; but I don't believe it. Nothing is
real.

Sophy arrives at the house of Dora's aunts, in due course.
She has the most agreeable of faces, — not absolutely beauti-
ful, but extraordinarily pleasant, — and is one of the most
genial, unaffected, frank, engaging creatures I have ever seen.
Traddles presents her to us with great pride; and rubs his
hands for ten minutes by the clock, with every individual hair
upon his head standing on tiptoe, when I congratulate him in
a corner on his choice.

I have brought Agnes from the Canterbury coach, and her
cheerful and beautiful face is among us for the second time.
Agnes has a great liking for Traddles, and it is capital to see
them meet, and to observe the glory of Traddles as he com-
mends the dearest girl in the world to her acquaintance.

Still I don't believe it. We have a delightful evening, and
vol. n — 14



210 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

are supremely happy : but I don't believe it yet. I can't col-
lect myself. I can't check off my happiness as it takes place.
I feel in a misty and unsettled kind of state ; as if I had got
up very early in the morning a week or two ago, and had never
been to bed since. I can't make out when yesterday was. I
seem to have been carrying the license about, in my pocket,
many months.

Next day, too, when we all go in a flock to see the house —
our house — Dora's and mine — I am quite unable to regard
myself as its master. I seem to be there, by permission of
somebody else. I half expect the real master to come home
presently, and say he is glad to see me. Such a beautiful
little house as it is, with everything so bright and new ; with
the flowers on the carpets looking as if freshly gathered, and
the green leaves on the paper as if they had just come out ;
with the spotless muslin curtains, and the blushing rose-
colored furniture, and Dora's garden hat with the blue ribbon
— do I remember, now, how I loved her in such another hat
when I first knew her ! — already hanging on its little peg ;
the guitar-case quite at home on its heels in a corner ; and
everybody tumbling over Jip's Pagoda, which is much too
big for the establishment.

Another happy evening, quite as unreal as all the rest of
it, and I steal into the usual room before going away. Dora
is not there. I suppose they have not done trying on yet.
Miss Lavinia peeps in, and tells me mysteriously that she will
not be long. She is rather long, notwithstanding : but by and
by I hear a rustling at the door, and some one taps.

I say, " Come in ! " but some one taps again.

I go to the door, wondering who it is ; there, I meet a pair
of bright eyes, and a blushing face ; they are Dora's eyes and
face, and Miss Lavinia has dressed her in to-morrow's dress,
bonnet and all, for me to see. I take my little wife to my
heart ; and Miss Lavinia gives a little scream because I tumble
the bonnet, and Dora laughs and cries at once, because I am
so pleased ; and I believe it less than ever.

" Do you think it pretty, Doady ? v says Dora.

Pretty ! I should rather think I did.

" And are you sure you like me very much ? " says Dora.



OF I) AVID COPPEEFIELB. 211

The topic is fraught with such danger to the bonnet, that
Miss Lavinia gives another little scream, and begs me to
understand that Dora is only to be looked at, and on no
account to be touched. So Dora stands in a delightful state
of confusion for a minute or two, to be admired ; and then
takes off her bonnet — looking so natural without it ! — and
runs away with it in her hand; and comes dancing down again
in her old familiar dress, and asks Jip if I have got a beau-
tiful little wife, and whether he'll forgive her for being
married, and kneels down to make him stand upon the
cookery-book, for the last time in her single life.

I go home, more incredulous than ever, to a lodging that I
have hard by ; and get up very early in the morning, to ride
to the Highgate road and fetch my aunt.

I have never seen my aunt in such state. She is dressed
in lavender-colored silk, and has a white bonnet on, and is
amazing. Janet has dressed her, and is there to look at me.
Peggotty is ready to go to church, intending to behold the
ceremony from the gallery. Mr. Dick, who is to give my
darling to me at the altar, has had his hair curled. Traddles,
whom I have taken up by appointment at the turnpike,
presents a dazzling combination of cream color and light blue ;
and both he and Mr. Dick have a general effect about them of
being all gloves.

No doubt I see this, because I know it is so; but I am
astray, and seem to see nothing. Nor do I believe anything
whatever. Still, as we drive along in an open carriage, this
fairy marriage is real enough to fill me with a sort of won-
dering pity for the unfortunate people who have no part in
it, but are sweeping out the shops, and going to their daily
occupations.

My aunt sits with my hand in hers all the way. When we
stop a little way short of the church, to put down Peggotty,
whom we have brought on the box, she gives it a squeeze, and
me a kiss.

" God bless you, Trot ! My own boy never could be dearer.
I think of poor dear Baby this morning."

" So do I. And of all I owe to you, dear aunt."

" Tut, child ! " says my aunt ; and gives her hand in over-



212 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

flowing cordiality to Traddles, who then gives his to Mr. Dick,
who then gives his to me, who then give mine to Traddles,
and then we come to the church door.

The church is calm enough, I am sure; but it might be
a steam-power loom in full action, for any sedative effect it
has on me. I am too far gone for that.

The rest is all a more or ]ess incoherent dream.

A dream of their coming in with Dora ; of the pew-opener
arranging us, like a drill-sergeant, before the altar rails; of
my wondering, even then, why pew-openers must always be
the most disagreeable females procurable, and whether there
is any religious dread of a disastrous infection of good humor
which renders it indispensable to set those vessels of vinegar
upon the road to Heaven.

Of the clergyman and clerk appearing ; of a few boatmen
and some other people strolling in ; of an ancient mariner
behind me, strongly flavoring the church with rum; of the
service beginning in a deep voice, and our all being vgry at-
tentive.

Of Miss Lavinia, who acts as a semi-auxiliary bridesmaid,
being the first to cry, and of her doing homage (as I take it)
to the memory of Pidger, in sobs ; of Miss Clarissa applying
a smelling-bottle ; of Agnes taking care of Dora ; of my aunt
endeavoring to represent herself as a model of sternness, with
tears rolling down her face; of little Dora trembling very
much, and making her responses in faint whispers.

Of our kneeling down together, side by side; of Dora's
trembling less and less, but always clasping Agnes by the
hand; of the service being got through, quietly and gravely;
of our all looking at each other in an April state of smiles
and tears, when it is over ; of my young wife being hysterical
in the vestry, and crying for her poor papa, her dear papa.

Of her soon cheering up again, and our signing the register
all round. Of my going into the gallery for Peggotty to bring
her to sign it ; of Peggotty's hugging me in a corner, and tell-
ing me she saw my own dear mother married ; of its being
over, and our going away.

Of my walking so proudly and lovingly down the aisle with
my sweet wife upon my arm, through a mist of half-seen





people, pulpits, monuments, pews, fonts, organs, and church-
windows, in which there flutter faint airs of association with
my childish church at home, so long ago

Of their whispering, as we pass, what a youthful couple we
are, and what a pretty little wife she is. Of our all being so
jnerry and talkative in the carriage going back. Of Sophy
telling us that when she saw Traddles (whom I had entrusted
with the license) asked for it, she almost fainted, having been
convinced that he would contrive to lose it, or to have his
pocket picked. Of Agnes laughing gaily ; and of Dora being
so fond of Agnes that she will not be separated from her, but
still keeps her hand.

Of there being a breakfast, with abundance of things, pretty
and substantial, to eat and drink, whereof I partake, as I
should do in any other dream, without the least perception of
their flavor ; eating and drinking, as I may say, nothing but
love and marriage, and no more believing in the viands than
in anything else.

Of my making a speech in the same dreamy fashion, without
having an idea of what I want to say, beyond such as may be
comprehended in the full conviction that I haven't said it.
Of our being very sociably and simply happy (always in a
dream though) ; and of Jip's having wedding cake, and its
not agreeing with him afterwards.

Of the pair of hired post-horses being ready, and of Dora's
going away to change her dress. Of my aunt and Miss Clarissa
remaining with us ; and our walking in the garden ; and my
aunt, who has made quite a speech at breakfast touching
Dora's aunts, being mightily amused with herself, but a little
proud of it too.

Of Dora's being ready, and of Miss Lavinia's hovering about
her, loth to lose the pretty toy that has given her so much
pleasant occupation. Of Dora's making a long series of sur-
prised discoveries that she has forgotten all sorts of little
things; and of everybody's running everywhere to fetch
them.

Of their all closing about Dora, when at last she begins to
say good by, looking, with their bright colors and ribbons,
like a bed of flowers. Of my darling being almost smothered



214 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

among the flowers, and coming out, laughing and crying both
together, to my jealous arms.

Of my wanting to carry Jip (.who is to go along with us),
and Dora's saying no, that she must carry him, or else he'll
think she don't like him any more, now she is married, and
will break his heart. Of our going, arm in arm, and Dora
stopping and looking back, and saying, "If I have ever been
cross or ungrateful to anybody, don't remember it ! " and
bursting into tears.

Of her waving her little hand, and our going away once
more. Of her once more stopping and looking back, and
hurrying to Agnes, and giving Agnes, above all the others,
her last kisses and farewells.

We drive away together, and I awake from the dream. I
believe it at last. It is my dear, dear, little wife beside me
whom I love so well !

"Are you happy How, you foolish boy?" says Dora, "and
sure you don't repent ? "

I have stood aside to see the phantoms of those days go by
me. They are gone, and I resume the journey of my story.



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 215



CHAPTER XV.

OUR HOUSEKEEPING.

It was a strange condition of things, the honey-moon being
over, and the bridesmaids gone home, when I found myself
sitting down in my own small house with Dora ; quite thrown
out of employment, as I may say, in respect of the delicious
old occupation of making love.

It seemed such an extraordinary thing to have Dora always
there. It was so unaccountable not to be obliged to go out to
see her, not to have any occasion to be tormenting myself
about her, not to have to write to her, not to be scheming
and devising opportunities of being alone with her. Some-
times of an evening, when I looked up from my writing, and
saw her seated opposite, I would lean back in my chair, and
think how queer it was that there we were, alone together
as a matter of course — nobody's business any more — all the
romance of our engagement put away upon a shelf, to rust
— no one to please but one another — one another to please,
for life.

When there was a debate, and I was kept out very late, it
seemed so strange to me, as I was walking home, to think
that Dora was at home ! It was such a wonderful thing, at
first, to have her coming softly down to talk to me as I ate my
supper. It was such a stupendous thing to know for certain
that she put her hair in papers. It was altogether such an
astonishing event to see her do it !

I doubt whether two young birds could have known less
about keeping house, than I and my pretty Dora did.^ We
had a servant, of course. She kept house for us. I have,
still a latent belief that she must have been Mrs. Crupp's
daughter in disguise, we had such an awful time of it with
Mary Anne.

Her name was Paragon. Her nature Avas represented to us,



216 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

when we engaged her, as being feebly expressed in her name.
She had a written character, as large as a proclamation ; and,
according to this document, could do everything of a domestic
nature that ever I heard of, and a great many things that I
never did hear of. She was a woman in the prime of life ; of
a severe countenance; and subject (particularly in the arms)
to a sort of perpetual measles or fiery rash, She had a cousin
in the Life Guards, with such long legs that he looked like
the afternoon shadow of somebody else. His shell-jacket was
as much too little for him as he was too big for the premises.
He made the cottage smaller than it need have been, by being
so very much out of proportion to it. Besides which, the
walls were not thick, and whenever he passed the evening at
our house, we always knew of it by hearing one continual
growl in the kitchen.

Our treasure was warranted sober and honest. I am there-
fore willing to believe that she was in a fit when we found her
under the boiler ; and that the deficient teaspoons were attrib-
utable to the dustman.

But she preyed upon our minds dreadfully. We felt our
inexperience, and were unable to help ourselves. We should
have been at her mercy, if she had had any ; but she was a
remorseless woman, and had none. She was the cause of our
first little quarrel.

" My dearest life," I said one day to Dora, " do you think
Mary Anne has any idea of time ? "

" Why, Doady ? " inquired Dora, looking up, innocently,
from her drawing.

" My love, because it's five, and we were to have dined at four."

Dora glanced wistfully at the clock, and hinted that she
thought it was too fast.

" On the contrary, my love," said I, referring to my watch,
" it's a few minutes too slow."

My little wife came and sat upon my knee, to coax me to
be quiet, and drew a line with her pencil down the middle of
my nose ; but I couldn't dine off that, though it was very
agreeable.

" Don't you think, my dear," said I, " it would be better for
you to remonstrate with Mary Anne ? "



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 217

"Oh no, please ! I couldn't, Doady ! " said Dora*

" Why not, my love ? " I gently asked.

" Oh, because I am such a little goose," said Dora, " and she
knows I am ! "

I thought this sentiment so incompatible with the establish-
ment of any system of check on Mary Anne, that I frowned
a little.

" Oh, what ugly wrinkles in my bad boy's forehead ! " said
Dora, and still being on my knee, she traced them with her
pencil ; putting it to her rosy lips to make it mark blacker,
and working at my forehead with ' a quaint little mockery of
being industrious, that quite delighted me in spite of myself.

"There's a good child," said Dora, "it makes its face so
much prettier to laugh."

" But, my love," said I.

" No, no ! please ! " cried Dora, with a kiss, " don't be a
naughty Blue Beard ! Don't be serious !"

" My precious wife," said I, "we must be serious sometimes.
Come ! Sit down on this chair, close beside me ! Give me
the pencil ! There ! Now let us talk sensibly. You know,
dear;" what a little hand it was to hold, and what a tiny
wedding-ring it was to see ! " You know, my love, it is not
exactly comfortable to have to go out without one's dinner.
Now, is it ? "

" N" — n — no ! " .replied Dora, faintly.

" My love, how you tremble ! "

"Because I know you're going to scold me," exclaimed
Dora, in a piteous voice.

" My sweet, I am only going to reason."

" Oh, but reasoning is worse than scolding ! " exclaimed Dora,
in despair. "I didn't marry to be reasoned with. If you
meant to reason with such a poor little thing as I am, you
ought to have told me so, you cruel boy ! "

I tried to pacify Dora, but she turned away her face, and
shook her curls from side to side, and said, " You cruel, cruel
boy ! " so many times, that I really did not exactly know what
to do : so I took a few turns up and down the room in my
uncertainty, and came back again.

" Dora, my darling ! "



218 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" No, I am not your darling. Because you must be sorry
that you married me, or else you wouldn't reason with me ! "
returned Dora.

I felt so injured by the inconsequential nature of this charge,
that it gave me courage to be grave.

" Now, my own Dora," said I, " you are very childish, and
are talking nonsense. You must remember, I am sure, that I
was obliged to go out yesterday when dinner was half over ;
and that, the day before, I was made quite unwell by being
obliged to eat underdone veal in a hurry ; to-day, I don't dine
at all — and I am afraid to say how long we waited for break-
fast — and then the water didn't boil. I don't mean to reproach
you, my dear, but this is not comfortable."

"Oh, you cruel, cruel boy, to say I am a disagreeable wife!"
cried Dora.

"Now, my dear Dora, you must know that I never said
that ! "

" You said I wasn't comfortable ! " said Dora.

" I said the housekeeping was not comfortable."

" It's exactly the same thing ! " cried Dora. And she evi-
dently thought so, for she wept most grievously.

I took another turn across the room, full of love for my
pretty wife, and distracted by self-accusatory inclinations to
knock my head against the door. I sat down again, and said :

" I am not blaming you, Dora. We have both a great deal
to learn. I am only trying to show you, my dear, that you
must — you really must" (I was resolved not to give this up)
— " accustom yourself to look after Mary Anne. Likewise to
act a little for yourself, and me."

" I wonder, I do, at your making such ungrateful speeches,"
sobbed Dora. "When you know that the other day, when you
said you would like a little bit of fish, I went out myself, miles
and miles, and ordered it, to surprise you."

"And it was very kind of you, my own darling," said I.
" I felt it so much that I wouldn't on any account have even
mentioned that you bought a Salmon — which was too much
for two. Or that it cost one pound six — which was more
than we can afford."



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 219

" You enjoyed it very much/' sobbed Dora. "And you said
I was a Mouse."

" And Til say so again, my love/' I returned, " a thousand
times ! "

But I had wounded Dora's soft little heart, and she was not
to be comforted. She was so pathetic in her sobbing and
bewailing, that I felt as if I had said I don't know what to
hurt hej\ I was obliged to hurry away ; I was kept out late ;
and I felt all night such pangs of remorse as made me miser-
able. I had the conscience of an assassin, and was haunted
by a vague sense of enormous wickedness.

It was two or three hours past midnight when I got home.
I found my aunt in our house, sitting up for me.

"Is anything the matter, aunt ? " said I, alarmed.

"Nothing, Trot," she replied. " Sit down, sit down. Little
Blossom has been rather out of spirits, and I have been keep-
ing her company. That's all."

I leaned my head upon my hand ; and felt more sorry and
downcast, as I sat looking at the fire, than I could have sup-
posed possible so soon after the fulfilment of my brightest
hopes. As I sat thinking, I happened to meet my aunt's eyes,
which were resting on my face. There was an anxious
expression in them, but it cleared directly.

"I assure you, aunt," said I, "I have been quite unhappy
myself all night, to think of Dora's being so. But I had no
other intention than to speak to her tenderly and lovingly
about our home-affairs."

My aunt nodded encouragement.

" You must have patience, Trot," said she.

"Of course. Heaven knows I don't mean to be unreason-
able, aunt ! "

"No, no," said my aunt. "But Little Blossom is a very
tender little blossom, and the wind must be gentle with her."

I thanked my good aunt, in my heart, for her tenderness
towards my wife ; and I was sure that she knew I did.

"Don't you think, aunt/' said I, after some further contem-
plation of the fire, " that you could advise and counsel Dora a
little, for our mutual advantage, now and then ? "



220 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" Trot," returned my aunt, with some emotion, " no ! Don't
ask me such a thing ! "

Her tone was so very earnest that I raised my eyes in sur-
prise.

" I look back on my life, child," said my aunt, " and I think
of some who are in their graves, with whom I might have been
on kinder terms. If I judged harshly of other people's mis-
takes in marriage, it may have been because I had bitter reason
to judge harshly of my own. Let that pass. I have been a
grumpy, frumpy, wayward sort of a woman, a good many
years. I am still, and I always shall be. But you and I have
done one another some good, Trot, — at all events, you have
done me good, my dear; and division must not come between
us, at this time of day."

" Division between us ! " cried I.

" Child, child ! " said my aunt, smoothing her dress, " how
soon it might come between us, or how unhappy I might
make our Little Blossom, if I meddled in anything, a prophet
couldn't say. I want our pet to like me, and be as gay as a
butterfly. Eemember your own home, in that second marriage ;
and never do both me and her the injury you have hinted at!"

I comprehended, at once, that my aunt was right; and I
comprehended the full extent of her generous feeling towards
my dear wife.

" These are early days, Trot," she pursued, " and Borne was
not built in a day, nor in a year. You have chosen freely for
yourself;" a cloud passed over her face for a moment, I
thought ; "and you have chosen a very pretty and a very affec-
tionate creature. It will be your duty, and it will be your
pleasure too — of course I know that; I am not delivering a
lecture — to estimate her (as you chose her) by the qualities
she has, and not by the qualities she may not have. The lat-
ter you must develop in her, if you can. And if you cannot,
child," here my aunt rubbed her nose, "you must just accus-
tom yourself to do without 'em. But remember, my dear,
your future is between you two. No one can assist you ; you
are to work it out for yourselves. This is marriage, Trot ;
and Heaven bless you both, in it, for a pair of babes in the
wood as you are ! "



OF DAVID GOPPERFIELD. 221

My aunt said this in a sprightly way, and gave me a kiss to
ratify the blessing.

u Now/' said she, " light my little lantern, and see me into
my bandbox by the garden path ; " for there was a communi-
cation between our cottages in that direction. " Give Betsey
Trotwood's love to Blossom, when you come back ; and what-
ever you do, Trot, never dream of setting Betsey up as a
scarecrow, for if I ever saw her in the glass, she's quite grim
enough and gaunt enough in her private capacity ! "

With this my aunt tied her head up in a handkerchief, with
which she was accustomed to make a bundle of it on such
occasions ; and I escorted her home. As she stood in her gar-
den, holding up her little lantern to light me back, I thought
her observation of me had an anxious air again ; but I was
too much occupied in pondering on what she had said, and too
much impressed — for the first time, in reality — by the con-
viction that Dora and I had indeed to work out our future
for ourselves, and that no one could assist us, to take much
notice of it.

Dora came stealing down in her little slippers, to meet me,
now that I was alone ; and cried upon my shoulder, and said I
had been hard-hearted and she had been naughty ; and I said
much the same thing in effect, I believe ; and we made it up,
and agreed that our first little difference was to be our last,
and that we were never to have another if we lived a hundred
years.

The next domestic trial we went through, was the Ordeal of
Servants. Mary Anne's cousin deserted into our coal-hole,
and was brought out, to our great amazement, by a piquet of
his companions in arms, who took him away handcuffed in a
procession that covered our front-garden with ignominy. This
nerved me to get rid of Mary Anne, who went so mildly, on
receipt of wages, that I was surprised, until I found out about
the teaspoons, and also about the little sums she had borrowed
in my name of the tradespeople without authority. After an
interval of Mrs. Kidgerbury — the oldest inhabitant of Kent-
ish Town, I believe, who went out charing, but was too feeble
to execute her conceptions of that art — we found another
treasure, who was one of the most amiable of women, but



222 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

who generally made a point of falling either .up or down the
kitchen stairs with the tray, and almost plunged into the par-
lor, as into a bath, with the tea-things. The ravages com-
mitted by this unfortunate, rendering her dismissal necessary,
she was succeeded (with intervals of Mrs. Kidgerbury) by a
long line of Incapables; terminating in a young person of
genteel appearance, who went to Greenwich Fair in Dora's
bonnet. After whom I remember nothing but an average
equality of failure.

Everybody we had anything to do with seemed to cheat us.
Our appearance in a shop was a signal for the damaged goods
to be brought out immediately. If we bought a lobster, it
was full of water. All our meat turned out to be tough, and
there was hardly any crust to our loaves. In search of the
principle on which joints ought to be roasted, to be roasted
enough, and not too much, I myself referred to the Cookery-
Book, and found it there established as the allowance of a
quarter of an hour to every pound, and say a quarter over. But
the principle always failed us by some curious fatality, and we
never could hit any medium between redness and cinders.

I had reason to believe that in accomplishing these failures
we incurred a far greater expense than if we had achieved a
series of triumphs. It appeared to me, on looking over the
tradesmen's books, as if we might have kept the basement
story paved with butter, such was the extensive scale of our
consumption of that article. I don't know whether the Excise
returns of the period may have exhibited any increase in the
demand for pepper ; but if our performances did not affect the
market, I should say several families must have left off using
it. And the most wonderful fact of all was, that we never had
anything in the house.

As to the washerwoman pawning the clothes, and coming
in a state of penitent intoxication to apologize, I suppose that
might have happened several times to anybody. Also the
chimney on fire, the parish engine, and perjury on the part of
the Beadle. But I apprehend that we were personally un-
fortunate in engaging a servant with a taste for cordials, who
swelled our running account for porter at the public-house by
such inexplicable items as " quartern rum shrub (Mrs. C.) ;;




tC- .'..' V '^v,---



--••'^:.'i





"Half-quartern gin and cloves (Mrs. C.)" " Glass rum and
peppermint (Mrs. C.)" — the parenthesis always referring to
Dora, who was supposed, it appeared on explanation, to have
imbibed the whole of these refreshments.
. One of our first feats in the housekeeping way was a little
dinner to Traddles. I met him in town, and asked him to
walk out with me that afternoon. He readily consenting, I
wrote to Dora, saying I would bring him home. It was
pleasant weather, and on the road we made my domestic hap-
piness the theme of conversation. Traddles was very full of
it ; and said, that, picturing himself with such a home, and
Sophy waiting and preparing for him, he could think of noth-
ing wanting to complete his bliss.

I could not have wished for a prettier little wife at the op-
posite end of the table, but I certainly could have wished
when Ave sat down, for a little more room. I did not know
how it was, but though there were only two of us, we were at
once always cramped for room, and yet had always room
enough to lose everything in. I suspect it may have been
because nothing had a place of its own, except Jip's pagoda,
which invariably blocked up the main thoroughfare. On the
present occasion, Traddles was so hemmed in by the pagoda
and the guitar-case) and Dora's flower-painting, and my writ-
ing-table, that I had serious doubts of the possibility of his
using his knife and fork; but he protested, with his own good
humor, " Oceans of room, Copperfield! I assure you, Oceans!"

There was another thing I could have wished, namely, that
Jip had never been encouraged to walk about the table-cloth
during dinner. I began to think there was something disor-
derly in his being there at all, even if he had not been in the
habit of putting his foot in the salt or the melted-butter. On
this occasion he seemed to think he was introduced expressly
to keep Traddles at bay; and he barked at my old friend, and
made short runs at his plate, with such undaunted pertinacity,
that he may be said to have engrossed the conversation.

However, as I knew how tender-hearted my dear Dora was,
and how sensitive she would be to any slight upon her favor-
ite, I hinted no objection. For similar reasons I made no
allusion to the skirmishing plates upon the floor ; or to the



224 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

disreputable appearance of the castors, which, were all at sixes
and sevens, and looked drunk ; or to the further blockade of
Traddles by wandering vegetable dishes and jugs. I could
not help wondering in my own mind, as I contemplated the
boiled leg of mutton before me, previous to carving it, how it
came to pass that our joints of meat were of such extraordi-
nary shapes — and whether our butcher contracted for all the
deformed sheep that came into the world ; but I kept my re-
flections to myself.

"My love," said I to Dora, "what have you got in that
dish?"

I could .not imagine why Dora had been making tempting
little faces at me, as if she wanted to kiss me.

" Oysters, dear," said Dora, timidly.

"Was that your thought ?" said I, delighted.

" Ye-yes, Doady," said Dora.

" There never was a happier one ! " I exclaimed, laying
down the carving knife and fork. " There is nothing Traddles
likes so much ! "

"Ye-yes, Doady," said Dora, "and so I bought a beautiful
little barrel of them, and the man said they were very good.
But I — I am afraid there's something the matter with them.
They don't seem right." Here Dora shook her head, and
diamonds twinkled in her eyes.

"They are only opened in both shells," said I. "Take the
top one off, my love."

"But it won't come off," said Dora, trying very hard, and
looking very much distressed.

"Do you know, Copperfield," said Traddles, cheerfully
examining the dish, " I think it is in consequence — they are
capital oysters, but I think it is in consequence — of their
never having been opened."

They never had been opened 5 and we had no oyster-knives
— and couldn't have used them if we had ; so we looked at the
oysters and ate the mutton. At least we ate as much of it as
was done, and made up with capers. If I had permitted him,
I am satisfied that Traddles would have made a perfect savage
of himself, and eaten a plateful of raw meat, to express enjoy-
ment of the repast ; but I would hear of no such immolation



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 225

on the altar of friendship ; and we had a course of bacon in-
stead ; there happening, by good fortune, to be cold bacon in
the larder.

My poor little wife was in such affliction when she thought
I should be annoyed, and in such a state of joy when she
found I was not, that the discomfiture I had subdued very soon
vanished, and we passed a happy evening ; Dora sitting with
her arm on my chair while Traddles and I discussed a glass of
wine, and taking every opportunity of whispering in my ear
that it was so good of me not to be a cruel, cross old boy. By
and by she made tea for us ; which it was so pretty to see her
do, as if she was busying herself with a set of doll's tea-things,
that I was not particular about the quality of the beverage.
Then Traddles and I played a game or two at cribbage ; and
Dora singing to the guitar the while, it seemed to me as if
our courtship and marriage were a tender dream of mine, and
the night when I first listened to her voice were not yet over.

When Traddles went away, and I came back into the parlor
from seeing him out, my wife planted her chair close to mine,
and sat down by my side.

" I am very sorry," she said. " Will you try to teach me,
Doady ? "

" I must teach myself first, Dora," said I. u I am as bad as
you, love."

" Ah ! But you can learn," she returned ; " and you are a
clever, clever man ! "

" Nonsense, Mouse ! " said I.

"I wish," resumed my wife, after a long silence, "that I
could have gone down into the country for a whole year, and
lived with Agnes ! "

Her hands were clasped upon my shoulder, and her chin
rested on them, and her blue eyes looked quietly into mine.

" Why so ? " I asked.

u I think she might have improved me, and I think I might
have learnt from fter," said Dora.

" All in good time, my love. Agnes has had her father to
take care of for these many years, you should remember. Even
when she was quite a child, she was the Agnes whom we
know," said T«

VOL. II — 16



226 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

"Will you call me a name I want you to call me ? " inquired
Dora, without moving.

" What is it ? " I asked with a smile.

"It's a stupid name/' she said, shaking her curls for a
moment. " Child-wife."

I laughingly asked my child-wife what her fanpy was in
desiring to be so called? She answered without moving,
otherwise than as the arm I twined about her may have
brought her blue eyes nearer to me:

"I don't mean, you silly fellow, that you should use the
name, instead of Dora. I only mean that you should think of
me that way. When you are going to be angry with me, say
to yourself, < it's only my child-wife ! ' When I am very dis-
appointing, say, 'I knew, a long time ago, that she would
make but a child-wife ! ' When you miss what I should like
to be, and I think can never be, say, * still my foolish child-
wife loves me ! ' For indeed I do."

I had not been serious with her ; having no idea, until now,
thkt she was serious herself. But her affectionate nature was
so happy in what I now said to her with my whole heart, that
her face became a laughing one before her glittering eyes were
dry. She was soon my child-wife indeed ; sitting down on the
floor outside the Chinese House, ringing all the little bells one
after another, to punish Jip for his recent bad behavior ;
while Jip lay blinking in the doorway with his head out, even
too lazy to be teased.

This appeal of Dora's made a strong impression on me. I
look back on the time I write of ; I invoke the innocent figure
that I dearly loved, to come out from the mists and shadows
of the past, and turn its gentle head towards me once again ;
and I can still declare that this one little speech was constantly
in my memory. I may not have used it to the best account ; I
was young and inexperienced ; but I never turned a deaf ear
to its artless pleading.

Dora told me, shortly afterwards, that she was going to be
a wonderful housekeeper. Accordingly, she polished the tab-
lets, pointed the pencil, bought an immense account-book, care-
fully stitched up with a needle and thread all the leaves of the
Cookery-Book which Jip had torn, and made quite a desperate



OF DAVID COPPEEFIELD. 227

little attempt " to be good," as she called it. But the figures
had the old obstinate propensity — they would not add up.
When she had entered two or three laborious items in the
account-book, Jip would walk over the page, wagging his tail,
and smear them all out. Her own little right-hand middle
finger got'* steeped to the very bone in ink ; and I think that
was the only decided result obtained.

Sometimes, of an evening, when I was at home and at work
— for I wrote a good deal now, and was beginning in a small
way to be known as a writer — I would lay down my pen, and
watch my child-wife trying to be good. First of all, she would
bring out the immense account-book, and lay.it down upon the
table, with a deep sigh. Then she would open it at the place
where Jip had made it illegible last night, and call Jip up to
look at his misdeeds. This would occasion a diversion in Jip's
favor, and some inking of his nose, perhaps, as a penalty.
Then she would tell Jip to lie down on the table instantly,
"like a lion" — which was one of his tricks, though I cannot
say the likeness was striking — and, if he were in an obedient
humor, he would obey. Then she would take up a pen, and
begin to write, and find a hair in it. Then she would take up
another pen, and begin to write, and find that it spluttered.
Then she would take up another pen, and begin to write, and
say in a low voice, " Oh, it's a talking pen, and will disturb
Doady ! " And then she would give it up as a bad job, and
put the account-book away, after pretending to crush the lion
with it.

Or, if she were in a very sedate and serious state of mind,
she would sit down with the tablets, and a little basket of bills
and other documents, which looked more like curl-papers than
anything else, and endeavor to get some result out of them.
After severely comparing one with another, and making entries
on the tablets, and blotting them out, and counting all the
fingers of her left hand over and over again, backwards and
forwards, she would be so vexed and discouraged, and would
look so unhappy, that it gave me pain to see her bright face
clouded — and for me! — and I would go softly to her, and
say:

"What's the matter, Dora?"



228 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

Dora would look up hopelessly, and- reply, " They won't
come right. They make my head ache so. And they won't
do anything I want ! "

Then I would say, " Now let us try together. Let me show
you, Dora."

Then I would commence a practical demonstration, to which
Dora would pay profound attention, perhaps for five minutes ;
when she would begin to be dreadfully tired, and would
lighten the subject by curling my hair, or trying the effect of
my face with my shirt collar turned down. If I tacitly
checked this playfulness, and persisted, she would look so
scared and disconsolate, as she became more and more be-
wildered, that the remembrance of her natural gaiety when I
first strayed into her path, and of her being my child-wife,
would come reproachfully upon me; and I would lay the
pencil down, and call for the guitar.

I had a great deal of work to do, and had many anxieties,
but the same considerations made me keep them to myself.
I am far from sure, now, that it was right to do this, but I did
it for my child-wife's sake. I search my breast, and I commit
its secrets, if I know them, without any reservation to this
paper. The old unhappy loss or want of something had, I am
conscious, some place in my heart ; but not to the embitter-
ment of my life. When I walked alone in the fine weather,
and thought of the summer days when all the air had been
filled with my boyish enchantment, I did miss something of
the realization of my dreams ; but I thought it was a softened
glory of the Past, which nothing could have thrown upon the
present time. I did feel, sometimes, for a little while, that I
could have wished my wife had been my counsellor : had had
more character and purpose, to sustain me and improve me
by ; had been endowed with power to fill up the void which
somewhere seemed to be about me ; but I felt as if this were
an unearthly consummation of my happiness, that never had
been meant to be, and never could have been.

I was a boyish husband as to years. I had known the soft-
ening influence of no other sorrows or experiences than those
recorded in these leaves. If I did any wrong, as I may have
done much, I did it in mistaken love, and in my want of wis-





doin. I write the exact truth. It would avail me nothing to
extenuate it now.

Thus it was that I took upon myself the toils and cares of
our life, and had no partner in them. We lived much as
before, in reference to our scrambling household arrangements ;
but I had got used to those, and Dora I was pleased to see
was seldom vexed now. She was bright, and cheerful in the
old childish way, loved me dearly, and was happy with her old
trifles.

When the debates were heavy — I mean as to length, not
quality, for in the last respect they were not often otherwise
— and I went home late, Dora would never rest when she
heard my footsteps, but would always come down stairs to
meet me. When my evenings were unoccupied by the pursuit
for which I had qualified myself with so much pains, and I
was engaged in writing at home, she would sit quietly near
me, however late the hour, and be so mute, that I would often
think she had dropped asleep. But generally, when I raised
my head, I saw her blue eyes looking at me with the quiet
attention of which I have already spoken.

" Oh, what a weary boy ! " said Dora one night when I met
her eyes as I was shutting up my desk.

" What a weary girl!" said I. "That's more to the purpose.
You must go to bed another time, my love. It's far too late
for you."

" No, don't send me to bed ! " pleaded Dora, coming to my
side. "Pray don't do that ! "

"DoraP'

To my amazement she was sobbing on my neck.

" Not well, my dear ! not happy ! "

"Yes ! quite well, and very happy !" said Dora. "But say
you'll let me stop, and see you write."

"Why, what a sight for such bright eyes at midnight ! " I
replied.

"Are they bright, though ? " returned Dora, laughing, "I'm
so glad they're bright."

"Little Vanity!" said I.

But it was not vanity ; it was only harmless delight in my
admiration. I knew that very well, before she told me so.



230 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" If you think them pretty, say I may always stop, and s^e
you write ! " said Dora. " Do you think them pretty ? "

"Very pretty."

" Then let me always stop and see you write."

" I am afraid that won't improve their brightness, Dora."

"Yes it will! Because, you clever boy, you'll not forget
me then, while you are full of silent fancies. Will you mind
it, if I say something very, very silly ? — more than usual ? **
inquired Dora, peeping over my shoulder into my face.

" What wonderful thing is that ? " said I.

"Please let me hold the pens?" said Dora. "I want to
have something to do with all those many hours when you are
so industrious. May I hold the pens ? "

The remembrance of her pretty joy when I said yes, brings
tears into my eyes. The next time I sat down to write, and
regularly afterwards, she sat in her old place, with a spare
bundle of pens at her side. Her triumph in this connection
with my work, and her delight when I wanted a new pen —
which I very often feigned to do — suggested to me a new
way of pleasing my child-wife. I occasionally made a pre-
tence of wanting a page or two of manuscript copied. Then
Dora was in her glory. The preparations she made for this
great work, the aprons she put on, the bibs she borrowed from
the kitchen to keep off the ink, the time she took, the innu-
merable stoppages she made to have a laugh with Jip as if he
understood it all, her conviction that her work was incomplete
unless she signed her name at the end, and the way in which
she would bring it to me, like a school-copy, and then, when I
praised it, clasp me round the neck, are touching recollections
to me, simple as they might appear to other men.

She took possession of the keys soon after this, and went
3ingling about the house with the whole bunch in a little
basket, tied to her slender waist. I seldom found that the
places to which they belonged were locked, or that they were
of any use except as a plaything for Jip — but Dora was
pleased, and that pleased me. She was quite satisfied that a
good deal was effected by this make-belief of housekeeping ;
and was as merry as if we had been keeping a baby-house, for
a joke.





So we went on. Dora was hardly less affectionate to my
aunt than to me, and often told her of the time when she was
afraid she was " a cross old thing." I never saw my aunt
unbend more systematically to any one. She courted Jip,
though Jip never responded ; listened, day after day, to the
guitar, though I am afraid she had no taste for music ; never
attacked the Incapables, though the temptation must have
been severe ; went wonderful distances on foot to purchase, as
surprises, any trifles that she found out Dora wanted; and
never came in by the garden, and missed her from the room,
but she would call out, at the foot of the stairs, in a voice that
sounded cheerfully all over the house :

"Where's Little Blossom 1"



232 THE PERSONAL HISTOBY AND EXPERIENCE



CHAPTER XVI.

MR. DICK FULFILS MY AUNT'S PREDICTIONS. -

It was some time now, since I had left the Doctor. Living
in his neighborhood, I saw him frequently ; and we all went
to his house on two or three occasions to dinner or tea. The
Old Soldier was in permanent quarters under the Doctor's
roof. She was exactly the same as ever, and the same immor-
tal butterflies hovered over her cap.

3<jike some other mothers, whom I have known in the course
of my life, Mrs. Markleham was far more fond of pleasure thaii
her daughter was. She required a great deal" of amusement,
and, like a deep old soldier, pretended, in consulting her own
inclinations, to be devoting herself to her child. The Doctor's
desire that Annie should be entertained, was therefore partic-
ularly acceptable to this excellent parent, who expressed un-
qualified approval of his discretion.

I have no doubt, indeed, that she probed the Doctor's
wound without knowing it. Meaning nothing but a certain
matured frivolity and selfishness, not always inseparable from
full-blown years, I think she confirmed him in his fear that he
was a constraint upon his young wife, and that there was no
congeniality of feeling between them, by so strongly commend-
ing his design of lightening the load of her life.

" My dear soul," she said to him one day when I was pres-
ent, " you know there is no doubt it would be a little- poky for
Annie to be always shut up here."

The Doctor nodded his benevolent head.

" When she comes to her mother's age," said Mrs. Markle-
ham, with a flourish of her fan, " then it'll be another thing.
You might put me into a Jail, with genteel society and a
rubber, and I should never care to come out. But I am not
Annie, you know ; and Annie is not her mother."

" Surely, surely," said the Doctor.





" You are the best of creatures — no, I beg your pardon ! "
for the Doctor made a gesture of deprecation, "I must say
before your face, as I always say behind your back, you are
the best of creatures ; but of course you don't — now do you ?
— enter into the same pursuits and fancies as Annie ? "

" No," said the Doctor, in a sorrowful tone.

" No, of course not," retorted the Old Soldier. " Take your
Dictionary, for example. "What a useful work a Dictionary
is ! What a necessary work ! The meanings of words ! With-
out Doctor Johnson, or somebody of that sort, we might have
been at this present moment calling an Italian-iron a bedstead.
But Ave can't expect a Dictionary — especially when it's mak-
ing — to interest Annie, can we ? "

The Doctor shook his head.

"And that's why I so much approve," said Mrs. Markleham,
tapping him on the shoulder with her shut-up fan, " of your
thoughtfulness. It shows that you don't expect, as •many
elderly people do expect, old heads on young shoulders. You
have studied Annie's character, and you understand it. That's
what I find so charming ! "

Even the calm and patient face of Doctor Strong expressed
some little sense of pain, I thought, under the infliction of
these compliments.

" Therefore, my dear Doctor," said the Soldier, giving him
several affectionate taps, " you may command me, at all times
and seasons. Now, do understand that I am entirely at your
service. I am ready to go with Annie to operas, concerts,
exhibitions, all kinds of places ; and you shall never find that
I am tired. Duty, my dear Doctor, before every consideration
in the universe ! "

She was as good as her word. She was one of those people
who can bear a great deal of pleasure, and she never flinched
in her perseverance in the cause. She seldom got hold of the
newspaper (which she settled herself down in the softest chair
in the house to read through an eye-glass, every day, for two
hours), but she found out something that she was certain
Annie would like to see. It was in vain for Annie to protest
that she was weary of such things. Her mother's remon-
strance always was, " Now, my dear Annie, I am sure you



234 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

know better ; and I must tell you, my love, that you are not
making a proper return for the kindness of Doctor Strong."

This was usually said in the Doctor's presence, and appeared
to me to constitute Annie's principal inducement for with-
drawing her objections when she made any. But in general
she resigned herself to her mother, and went where the Old
Soldier would.

It rarely happened now that Mr. Maldon accompanied
them. Sometimes my aunt and Dora were invited to do so,
and accepted the invitation. Sometimes Dora only was asked.
The time had been when I should have been uneasy in her
going ; but reflection on what had passed that former night
in the Doctor's study, had made a change in my mistrust.
I believed that the Doctor was right, and I had no worse
suspicions.

My aunt rubbed her nose sometimes when she happened to
be alone with me, and said she couldn't make it out; she
wished they were happier; she didn't think our military
friend (so she always called the Old Soldier) mended the
matter at all. My aunt further expressed her opinion, "that
if our military friend would cut off those butterflies, and give
'em to the chimney-sweepers for May-day, it would look like
the beginning of something sensible on her part."

But her abiding reliance was on Mr. Dick. That man had
evidently an idea in his head, she said ; and if he could only
once pen it up into a corner, which was his great difficulty, he
would distinguish himself in some extraordinary manner.

Unconscious of this prediction, Mr. Dick continued to
occupy precisely the same ground in reference to the Doctor
and to Mrs. Strong. He seemed neither to advance nor to
recede. He appeared to have settled into his original founda-
tion, like a building ; and I must confess that my faith in his
ever moving, was not much greater than if he had been a
building.

But one night, when I had been married some months, Mr.
Dick put his head into the parlor, where I was writing alone
(Dora having gone out with my aunt to take tea with the two
little birds), and said, with a significant cough :



OF DAVID COPPEEFIELD. 235

" You couldn't speak to me without inconveniencing your-
self, Trotwood, I am afraid ? "

" Certainly, Mr. Dick/' said I ; " come in ! "

" Trotwood," said Mr. Dick, laying his finger on the side of
his nose, after he had shaken hands with me. " Before I
sit down, I wish to make an observation. You know your
aunt ? "

" A little," I replied.

" She is the most wonderful woman in the world, sir ! "

After the delivery of this communication, which he shot
out of himself as if he were loaded with it, Mr. Dick sat down
with greater gravity than usual, and looked at me.

"Now, boy/' said Mr. Dick, "I am going to put a question
to you."

" As many as you please/' said I.

" What do you consider me, sir ? " asked Mr. Dick, folding
his arms.

" A dear old friend," said I.

"Thank you, Trotwood," returned Mr. Dick, laughing, and
reaching across in high glee to shake hands with me. " But
I mean, boy," resuming his gravity, "what do you consider
me in this respect ? " touching his forehead.

I was puzzled how to answer, but he helped me with a word.

"Weak ? " said Mr. Dick.

" Well," I replied, dubiously. " Eather so."

" Exactly ! " cried Mr. Dick, who seemed quite enchanted
by my reply. "That is, Trotwood, when they took some of
the trouble out of you-know-who's head, and put it you know
where, there was a — " Mr. Dick made his two hands
revolve very fast about each other a great number of times,
and tLen brought them into collision, and rolled them over
and over one another, to express confusion. "There was that
sort of thing done to me somehow ? Eh ?"

I nodded at him, and he nodded back again.

"In short, boy," said Mr. Dick, dropping his voice to a
whisper, "I am simple."

I would have qualified that conclusion, but he stopped me.

" Yes I am ! She pretends I am not. She won't hear of
it ; but I am. I know I am. If she hadn't stood my friend,



236 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

sir, I should have been shut up, to lead a dismal life these
many years. JBut I'll provide for her! I never spend the
copying money. I put it in a box. I have made a will. I'll
leave it all to her. She shall be rich — noble ! "

Mr. Dick took out his pocket-handkerchief, and wiped his
eyes. He then folded it up with great care, pressed it smooth
between his two hands, put it in his pocket, and seemed to
put my aunt away with it.

" jSTow you are a scholar, Trotwood," said Mr. Dick. " You
are a fine scholar. You know what ° learned man, what a
great man, the Doctor is. You know what honor he has
always done me. Not proud in his wisdom. Humble, humble
— condescending even to poor Dick, who is simple and knows
nothing. I have sent his name up, on a scrap of paper, to the
kite, along the string, when it has been in the sky, among the
larks. The kite has been glad to receive it, sir, and the sky
has been brighter with it."

I delighted him by saying, most heartily, that the Doctor
was deserving of our best respect and highest esteem.

"And his beautiful wife is a star," said Mr. Dick. "A
shining star. I have seen her shine, sir. But," bringing his
chair nearer and laying one hand upon my knee — "clouds,
sir — clouds."

I answered the solicitude which his face expressed, by con-
veying the same expression into my own, and shaking my head.

"What clouds ? " said Mr Dick.

He looked so wistfully into my face, and was so anxious to
understand, that I took great pains to answer him slowly and
distinctly, as I might have entered on an explanation to a
child.

"There is some unfortunate division between them," I
replied. " Some unhappy cause of separation. A secret. It
may be inseparable from the discrepancy in their years. It
may have grown up out of almost nothing."

Mr. Dick, who told off every sentence with a thoughtful
nod, paused when I had done, and sa considering, with his
eyes upon my face, and his hand upon my knee.

" Doctor ' not angry with . her, Trotwood ? " he said, after
some time.



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 237

"No. Devoted to her."

" Then, I have got it, boy ! " said Mr. Dick.

The sudden exultation with which he slapped me on the
knee, and leaned back in his chair, with his eyebrows lifted
up as high as he could possibly lift them, made me think him
farther out of his wits than ever. He became as suddenly
grave again, and leaning forward as before, said — first
respectfully taking out his pocket-handkerchief, as if it really
did represent my aunt :

"Most wonderful woman in the world, Trotwood. Why
has she done nothing to set things right ? "

"Too delicate and difficult a subject for such interference,"
I replied.

" Fine scholar," said Mr. Dick, touching me with his finger.
" Why has he done nothing ? "

" For the same reason," I returned.

" Then I have got it, boy ! " said Mr. Dick. And he stood
up before me, more exultingly than before, nodding his head,
and striking himself repeatedly upon the breast, until one
might have supposed that he had nearly nodded and struck all
the breath out of his body.

" A poor fellow with a craze, sir," said Mr. Dick, " a simple-
ton, a weak-minded person — present company, you know ! "
striking himself again, " may do what wonderful people may
not do. Fll bring them together, boy, Fll try. They'll not
blame me. They'll not object to me. They'll not mind what
/ do, if it's wrong. Fm only Mr. Dick. And who minds
Dick ? Dick's nobody ! Whoo ! " He blew a slight, con-
temptuous breath, as if he blew himself away.

It was fortunate he had proceeded so far with his mystery,
for we heard the coach stop at the little garden gate, which
brought my aunt and Dora home.

"Not a word, boy !" he pursued in a whisper; "leave all
the blame with Dick — simple Dick — mad Dick. I have been
thinking, sir, for some time, that I was getting it, and now I
have got it. After what you have said to me, I am sure I
have got it. All right ! "

Not another word did Mr. Dick utter on the subject; but he
made a very telegraph of himself for the next half-hour (to



238 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

the great disturbance of my aunt's mind), to enjoin inviolable
secrecy on me.

To my surprise I heard no more about it for some two or
three weeks, though I was sufficiently interested in the result
of his endeavors'; descrying a strange gleam of good sense —
I say nothing of good feeling, for that he always exhibited —
in the conclusion to which he had come. At last I began to
believe, that, in the flighty and unsettled state of his mind, he
had either forgotten his intention or abandoned it.

One fair evening, when Dora was not inclined to go out, my
aunt and I strolled up to the Doctor's cottage. It was autumn,
when there were no debates to vex the evening air; and I
remember how the leaves smelt like our garden at Blunder-
stone as we trod them under foot, and how the old, unhappy
feeling seemed to go by on the sighing wind.

It was twilight when we reached the cottage. Mrs. Strong
was just coming out of the garden, where Mr. Dick yet lin-
gered, busy with his knife, helping the gardener to point some
stakes. The Doctor was engaged with some one in his study ;
but the visitor would be gone directly, Mrs. Strong said, and
begged us to remain and see him. We went into the drawing-
room with her, and sat down by the darkening window. There
was never any ceremony about the visits of such old friends
and neighbors as we were.

We had not sat here many minutes, when Mrs. Markleham,
who usually contrived to be in a fuss about something, came
bustling in, with her newspaper in her hand, and said, out of
breath, " My goodness gracious, Annie, why didn't you tell me
there was some one in the study ! "

"My dear mamma," she quietly returned, "how Gould I
know that you desired the information ? "

" Desired the information ! " said Mrs. Markleham, sinking
on the sofa. " I never had such a turn in all my life ! "

"Have you been to the study, then, mamma ?" asked Annie.

" Been to the study, my dear ! " she returned emphatically.
" Indeed I have ! I came upon the amiable creature — if 3 r ou'll
imagine my feelings, Miss Trotwood and David — in the act
of making his will."

Her daughter looked round from the window quickly*



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 239

"In the act, my dear Annie," repeated Mrs. Markleham,
spreading the newspaper on her lap like a table-cloth, and
patting her hands upon it, " of making his last "Will and Testa-
ment. The foresight and affection of the dear ! I must tell
you how it was. I really must, in justice to the darling — for
he is nothing less ! — tell you how it was. Perhaps you know,
Miss Trot wood, that there is never a candle lighted in this
house, until one's eyes are literally falling out of one's head
with being stretched to read the paper. And that there is not
a chair in this house, in which a paper can be what I call
read, except one in the study. This took me to the study,
where I saw a light. I opened the door. In company with
the dear Doctor were two professional people, evidently con-
nected with the law, and they were all three standing at the
table; the darling Doctor pen in hand. 'This simply ex-
presses then/ said the Doctor — Annie, my love, attend to the
very words — c this simply expresses, then, gentlemen, the
confidence I have in Mrs. Strong, and gives her all uncondi-
tionally ? ' One of the professional people replied, i And gives
her all unconditionally.' Upon that, with the natural feelings
of a mother, I said, < Good God, I beg your pardon ! ' fell over
the door-step, and came away through the little back passage
where the pantry is."

Mrs. Strong opened the window, and went out into the
veranda, where she stood leaning against a pillar.

"But now isn't it, Miss Trotwood, isn't it, David, invigo-
rating," said Mrs. Markleham, mechanically following her
with her eyes, " to find a man at Doctor Strong's time of life,
with the strength of mind to do this kind of thing ? It only
shows how right I was. I said to Annie, when Doctor Strong
paid a very flattering visit to myself, and made her the subject
of a declaration and an offer, I said, ' My dear, there is no
doubt whatever, in my opinion, with reference to a suitable
provision for you, that Doctor Strong will do more than he
binds himself to do.' "

Here the bell rang, and we heard the sound of the visitors'
feet as they went out.

"It's all over, no doubt," said the Old Soldier, after listen-
ing ; "the dear creature has signed, sealed, and delivered,



240 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

and his mind's at rest. Well it may be ! What a mind !
Annie, my love, I am going to the study with my paper, for
I am a poor creature without news. Miss Trotwood, David,
pray come and see the Doctor."

I was conscious of Mr. Dick's standing in the shadow of
the room, shutting up his knife, when we accompanied her
to the study ; and of my aunt's rubbing her nose violently,
by the way, as a mild vent for her intolerance of our military
friend ; but who got first into the study, or how Mrs. Markle-
ham settled herself in a moment in her easy chair, or how my
aunt and I came to be left together near the door (unless her
eyes were quicker than mine, and she held me back), I have
forgotten if I ever knew. But this I know, — that we saw
the Doctor before he saw us, sitting at his table, among the
folio volumes in which he delighted, resting his head calmly
on his hand. That, in the same moment, we saw Mrs. Strong
glide in, pale and trembling. That Mr. Dick supported her on
his arm. That he laid his other hand upon the Doctor's arm,
causing him to look up with an abstracted air. That, as the
Doctor moved his head, his wife dropped down on one knee
at his feet, and, with her hands imploringly lifted, fixed upon
his face the memorable look I had never forgotten. That at
this sight Mrs. Markleham dropped the newspaper, and stared
more like a figure-head intended for a ship to be called The
Astonishment, than anything else I can think of.

The gentleness of the Doctor's manner and surprise, the
dignity that mingled with the supplicating attitude of his
wife, the amiable concern of Mr. Dick, and the earnestness
with which my aunt said to herself, " That man mad ! " (tri-
umphantly expressive of the. misery from which she had
saved him), I see and hear, rather than remember, as I write
about it.

" Doctor ! " said Mr. Dick. "What is it that's amiss ? Look
here ! "

" Annie !" cried the Doctor. "Not at my feet, my dear ! "

" Yes ! " she said. " I beg and pray that no one will leave
the room ! Oh, my husband and father, break this long si-
lence. Let us both know what it is that has come between
us!"





Mrs. Markleham, by this time recovering the power of
speech, and seeming to swell with family pride and motherly
indignation, here exclaimed, " Annie, get up immediately, and
don J t disgrace everybody belonging to you by humbling your-
self like that, unless you wish to see me go out of my mind on
the spot ! "

"Mamma!" returned Annie. " Waste no words on me, for
my appeal is to my husband, and even you are nothing here."

"Nothing!" exclaimed Mrs. Markleham. "Me, nothing!
The child has taken leave of her senses. Please to get me a
glass of water ! "

I was too attentive to the Doctor and his wife, to give any
heed to this request ; and it made no impression on anybody
else ; so Mrs. Markleham panted, stared, and fanned herself.

" Annie ! " said the Doctor, tenderly taking her in his
hands. "My dear! If any unavoidable change has come,
in the sequence of time, upon our married life, you are not to
blame. The fault is mine, and only mine. There is no
change in my affection, admiration, and respect. I wish to
make you happy. I truly love and honor you. Rise, Annie,
pray ! "

But she did not rise. After looking at him for a little
while, she sank down closer to him, laid her arm across his
knee, and dropping her head upon it, said :

"If I have any friend here, who can speak one word for
me, or for my husband in this matter ; if I have any friend
here, who can give a voice to any suspicion that my heart has
sometimes whispered to me; if I have any friend here, who
honors my husband, or has ever cared for me, and has any-
thing within his knowledge, no matter what it is, that may
help to mediate between us, I implore that friend to speak ! "

There was a profound silence. After a few moments of
painful hesitation, I broke the silence.

"Mrs. Strong," I said : "there is something within my
knowledge, which I have been earnestly entreated by Doctor
Strong to conceal, and have concealed until to-night. But I
believe the time has come when it would be mistaken faith
and delicacy to conceal it any longer, and when your appeal
absolves me from his injunction."

VOL. II — 16



242 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

She turned her face towards me for a moment, and I knew
that I was right. I could not have resisted its entreaty, if
the assurance that it gave me had been less convincing.

"Our future peace," she said, "may be in your hands. I
trust it confidently to your not suppressing anything. I know
beforehand that nothing "you, or any one, can tell me, will
show my husband's noble heart in any other light than one.
Howsoever it may seem to you to touch me, disregard that.
I will speak for myself, before him, and before God, after-
wards."

Thus earnestly besought, I made no reference to the Doctor
for his permission, but, without any other compromise of the
truth than a little softening of the coarseness of Uriah Heep,
related plainly what had passed in that same room that night.
The staring of Mrs. Markleham during the whole narration,
and the shrill, sharp interjections with which she occasionally
interrupted it, defy description.

When I had finished, Annie remained, for some few mo-
ments, silent, with her head bent down as I have described.
Then, she took the Doctor's hand (he was sitting in the same
attitude as when we had entered the room), and pressed it to
her breast, and kissed it. Mr. Dick softly raised her; and she
stood, when she began to speak, leaning on him, and looking
down upon her husband — from whom she never turned her
eyes.

" All that has ever been in my mind since I was married,"
she said in a low, submissive, tender voice, " I will lay bare
before you. I could not live and have one reservation, know-
ing what I know now."

"Nay, ^Annie," said the Doctor, mildly, "I have never
doubted you, my child. There is no need; indeed there is no
need, my dear."

"There is great need," she answered, in the same way, "that
I should open my whole heart before the soul of generosity
and truth, whom, year by year, and day by day, I have loved
and venerated more and more, as Heaven knows ! "

"Eeally," interrupted Mrs. Markleham, "if I have any
discretion at all — "





("Which you haven't, you Marplot," observed my aunt, in
an indignant whisper.)

" — I must be permitted to observe that it cannot be requi-
site to enter into these details."

" No one but my husband can judge of that, mamma," said
Annie, without removing her eyes from his face, "and he will
hear me. If I say anything to give you pain, mamma, forgive
me. I have borne pain first, often and long, myself."

" Upon my word ! " gasped Mrs. Markleham.

"When I was very young," said Annie, "quite a little
child, my first associations with knowledge of any kind were
inseparable from a patient xfiend and teacher — the friend of
my dead father — who was always dear to me. I can remem-
ber nothing that I know with ut remembering him. He
stored my mind with its first treasures, and stamped his
character upon * them all. They never could have been, I
think, as good as they have been to me, if I had taken them
from any other hands."

" Makes her mother nothing ! " exclaimed Mrs. Markleham.

" Not so, mamma," said Annie ; " but I make him what he
was. I must do that. As I grew up, he occupied the same
place still. I was proud of his interest: deeply, fondly,
gratefully attached to him. I looked up to him I can hardly
describe how — as a father, as a guide, as one whose pvaise
was different from all other praise, as one in whom I could
have trusted and confided, if I had doubted all the world.
You know, mamma, how young and inexperienced I was, when
you presented him before me, of a sudden, as a lover."

" I have mentioned the fact, fitty times at least, to every-
body here ! " said Mrs. Markleham,

("Then hold your tongue, for the Lord's sake, and don't
mention it any more !" muttered my aunt.)

" It was so great a change : so great a loss, I felt it at first,"
said Annie, still preserving the same look and tone, " that I
was agitated and distressed. I was but a girl ; and when so
great change came in the character in which I had so long
looked up to him, I think I was sorry. But nothing could
have made him what he used to be again ; and I was proud
that he should think me so worthy, and we were married."



244 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

« — At Saint Alphage, Canterbury," observed Mrs. Markle-
ham.

("Confound the woman!" said my aunt, "she wonH be
quiet ! ")

"I never thought," proceeded Annie, with a heightened
color, " of any worldly gain that my husband would bring to
me. My young heart had no room in its homage for any such
poor reference. Mamma, forgive me when I say that it was
you who first presented to my mind the thought that any one
could wrong me, and wrong him, by such a cruel suspicion."

" Me ! " cried Mrs. Markleham.

( a Ah! You, to be sure!" observed my aunt, "and you
can't fan it away, my military friend ! ")

" It was the first unhappiness of my new life," said Annie.
u It was the first occasion of every unhappy moment I have
known. Those moments have been more, of late, than I can
count ; but not — my generous husband ! — not for the reason
you suppose ; for in my heart there is not a thought, a recol-
lection, or a hope, that any power could separate from you."

She raised her eyes, and clasped her hands, and looked as
beautiful and true, I thought, as any Spirit. The Doctor
looked on her, henceforth, as steadfastly as she on him.

" Mamma is blameless," she went on, " of having ever urged
you for herself, and she is blameless in intention every way, I
am sure, — but when I saw how many importunate claims that
were no claims were pressed upon you in my name ; how you
were traded on in my name ; how generous you were, and how
Mr. Wickfield, who had your welfare very much at heart,
resented it ; the first sense of my exposure to the mean sus-
picion that my tenderness was bought — and sold to you, of all
men, on earth — fell upon me, like unmerited disgrace, in
which I forced you to participate. I cannot tell you what it
was — mamma cannot imagine what it was — to have this
dread and trouble always on my mind, yet know in my own
soul that on my marriage-day I crowned the love and honor of
my life."

"A specimen of the thanks one gets," cried Mrs. Markle-
ham, in tears, " for taking care of one's family ! I wish I was
a Turk!"



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 245

(" I wish, you were, with all my heart — and in your native
country ! " said my aunt.)

" It was at that time that mamma was most solicitous about
my cousin Maldon. I had liked him : " she spoke softly, but
without any hesitation: "very much. We had been little
lovers once. If circumstances had not happened otherwise, I
might have come to persuade myself that I really loved him,
and might have married him, and been most wretched. There
can be no disparity in marriage like unsuitability of mind and
purpose."

I pondered on these words, even while I was studiously
attending to what followed, as if they had some particular
interest, or some strange application that I could not divine.
" There can be no disparity in marriage like unsuitability of
mind and purpose" — "no disparity in marriage like unsuit-
ability of mind and purpose."

"There is nothing," said Annie, "that we have in common.
I have long found that there is nothing. If I were thankful
to my husband for no more, instead of for so much, I should
be thankful to him for having saved me from the first mistaken
impulse of my undisciplined heart."

She stood quite still, before the Doctor, and spoke with an
earnestness that thrilled me. Yet her voice was just as quiet
as before.

"When he was waiting to be the object of your munificence,
so freely bestowed for my sake, and when I was unhappy in the
mercenary shape I was made to wear, I thought it would have
become him better to have worked his own way on. I thought
that if I had been he, I would have tried to do it, at the cost
of almost any hardship. But I thought no worse of him, until
the night of his departure for India. That night I knew he
had a false and thankless heart. I saw a double meaning,
then, in Mr. Wickfield's scrutiny of me. I perceived, for the
first time, the dark suspicion that shadowed my life."

" Suspicion, Annie ! " said the Doctor. " No, no, no ! "

" In your mind there was none,* I know, my husband ! " she
returned. " And when I came to you, that night, to lay down
all my load of shame and grief, and knew that I had to tell,
that, underneath your roof, one of my own kindred, to whom



246 THE FEB SON AL HISTOBT AND EXPERIENCE

you had been a benefactor, for the love of me, had spoken -to
me words that should have found no utterance, even if I had
been the weak and mercenary wretch he thought me — my
mind revolted from the taint the very tale conveyed. It died
upon my lips, and from that hour till now has never passed
them." '

Mrs. Markleham, with a short groan, leaned back in her
easy -chair; and retired behind her fan, as if she were never
coming out any more.

" I have never, but in your presence, interchanged a word
with him from that time ; then, only when it has been neces-
sary for the avoidance of this explanation. Years have passed
since he knew from me, what his situation here was. The
kindnesses you have secretly done for his advancement, and
then disclosed to me, for my surprise and pleasure, have been,
you will believe, but aggravations of the unhappiness and
burden of my secret."

She sunk down gently at the Doctor's feet, though he did
his utmost to prevent her ; and said, looking up, tearfully,
into his face :

"Do not speak to me yet! Let me say a little more!
Right or wrong, if this were to be done again, I think I should
do just the same. You never can know what it was to be
devoted to you, with those old associations ; to find that any
one could be so hard as to suppose that the truth of my heart
was bartered away, and to be surrounded by appearances
confirming that belief. I was very young, and had no adviser.
Between mamma and me, in all relating to you, there was a
wide division. If I shrunk into myself, hiding the disrespect
I had undergone, it was because I honored you so much, and
so much wished that you should honor me !"

" Annie, my pure heart ! " said the Doctor, " my dear girl ! "

" A little more ! a very few words more ! I used to think
there were so many whom you might have married, who would
not have brought such charge and trouble on you, and who
would have made your home a worthier home. I used to be
afraid that I had better have remained your pupil, and almost
your child. I used to fear that I was so unsuited to your
learning and wisdom. If all this made me shrink within



OF DAVID COPPEEFIELD. 24t7

myself (as indeed it did), when I had that to tell, it was still
because I honored you so much, and hoped that you might
one day honor me."

" That day has shone this long time, Annie," said the Doc-
tor, " and can have but one long night, my dear."

" Another word ! I afterwards meant — steadfastly meant,
and purposed to myself — to bear the whole weight of know-
ing the unworthiness of one to whom you had been so good.
And now a last word, dearest and best of friends ! The cause
of the late change in you, which I have seen with so much
pain and sorrow, and have sometimes referred to my old
apprehension — at other times to lingering suppositions nearer
to the truth — has been made clear to-night ; and by an acci-
dent I have also come to know, to-night, the full measure of
your noble trust in me, even under that mistake. I do not
hope that any love and duty I may render in return, will ever
make me worthy of your priceless confidence ; but with all
this knowledge fresh upon me, I can lift my eyes to this dear
face, revered as a father's, loved as a husband's, sacred to me
in my childhood as a friend's, and solemnly declare that in
my lightest thought I have never wronged you ; never wav-
ered in the love and the fidelity I owe you ! "

She had her arms around the Doctor's neck, and he leant
his head down over her, mingling his gray hair with her dark
brown tresses.

" Oh, hold me to your heart, my husband ! Never cast me
out ! Do not think or speak of disparity between us, for there
is none, except in all my many imperfections. Every succeed-
ing year I have known this better, as I have esteemed you
more and more. Oh, take me to your heart, my husband, for
my love was founded on a rock, and it endures ! "

In the silence that ensued, my aunt walked gravely up to
Mr. Dick, without at all hurrying herself, and gave him a hug
and a sounding kiss. And it was very fortunate, with a view
to his credit, that she did so ; for I am confident that I
detected him at that moment in the act of making prepa-
rations to stand on one leg, as an appropriate expression of
delight.

" You are a very remarkable man, Dick ! " said my aunt,



248 THE PERSONAL HISTOBY AND EXPERIENCE

with an air of unqualified approbation ; " and never pretend
to be anything else, for I know better ! "

With that, my aunt pulled him by the sleeve, and nodded
to me ; and we three stole quietly out of the room, and came
away.

" That's a settler for our military friend, at any rate," said
my aunt, on the way home. "I should sleep the better for
that, if there was nothing else to be glad of ! "

" She was quite overcome, I am afraid," said Mr. Dick, with
great commiseration.

" What ! Did you ever see a crocodile overcome ? " in-
quired my aunt.

" I don't think I ever saw a crocodile," returned Mr. Dick,
mildly.

"There never would have been anything the matter, if it
hadn't been for that old Animal," said my aunt, with strong
emphasis. " It's very much to be wished that some mothers
would leave their daughters alone after marriage, and not be
so violently affectionate. They seem to think the only return
that can be made them for bringing an unfortunate young
woman into the world — God bless my soul, as if she asked to
be brought, or wanted to come ! — is full liberty to worry her
out of it again. What are you thinking of, Trot ? "

I was thinking of all that had been said. My mind was
still running on some of the expressions used. " There can
be no disparity in marriage like unsuitability of mind and
purpose." "The first mistaken impulse of an undisciplined
heart." " My love was founded on a rock." But we were at
home ; and the trodden leaves were lying underfoot, and the
autumn wind was blowing.







CHAPTER XVII.

INTELLIGENCE.

I must have been married, if I may trust to my imperfect
memory for dates, about a year or so, when one evening, as I
was returning from a solitary walk, thinking of the book I
was then writing — for my success had steadily increased with
my steady application, and I was engaged at that time upon
my first work of fiction — I came past Mrs. Steerf orth's house.
I had often passed it before, during my residence in that
neighborhood, though never when I could choose another road.
Howbeit, it did sometimes happen that it was not easy to find
another, without making a long circuit j and so I had passed
that way, upon the whole, pretty often.

I had never done more than glance at the house, as I went
by with a quickened step. It had been uniformly gloomy and
dull. None of the best rooms abutted on the road ; and the
narrow, heavily-framed, old-fashioned windows, never cheerful
under any circumstances, looked very dismal, close shut, and
with their blinds always drawn down. There was a covered
way across a little paved court, to an entrance that was never
used ; and there was one round staircase window, at odds with
all the rest, and the only one unshaded by a blind, which had
the same unoccupied blank look. I do not remember that I
ever saw a light in all the house. If I had been a casual
passer-by, I should have probably supposed that some child-
less person lay dead in it. If I had happily possessed no
knowledge of the place, and had seen it often in that change-
less state, I should have pleased my fancy with many ingenious
speculations, I dare say.

As it was, I thought as little of it as I might. But my
mind could not go by it and leave it, as my body did ; and it
usually awakened a long train of meditations. Coming before
me on this particular evening that I mention, mingled with



250 THE PERSONAL HISTOBY AND EXPERIENCE

the childish recollections and later fancies, the ghosts of half-
forined hopes, the broken shadows of disappointments dimly
seen and understood, the blending of experience and imagina-
tion, incidental to the occupation with which my thoughts had
been busy, it was more than commonly suggestive. I fell into
a brown study as I walked on, and a voice at my side made
me start.

It was a woman's voice, too. I was not long in recollecting
Mrs. Steerforth's little parlor-maid, who had formerly worn
blue ribbons in her cap. She had taken them out now, to
adapt herself, I suppose, to the altered character of the
house; and wore but one or two disconsolate bows of sober
brown.

"If you please, sir, would you have the goodness to walk
in, and speak to Miss Dartle ? "

"Has Miss Dartle sent you for me ? ff I inquired.

"Not to-night, sir, but it's just the same. Miss Dartle saw
you pass a night or two ago ; and I was to sit at work on the
staircase, and when I saw you pass agaiu, to ask you to step in
and speak to her."

I turned back, and inquired of my conductor, as we went
along, how Mrs. Steerforth was. She said her lady was but
poorly, and kept her own room a good deal.

When we arrived at the house, I was directed to Miss Dar-
tle in the garden, and left to make my presence known to her
myself. She was sitting on a seat at one end of a kind of
terrace, overlooking the great city. It was a sombre evening,
with a lurid light in the sky; and as I saw the prospect scowl-
ing in the distance, with here and there some larger object
starting up into the sullen glare, I fancied it was no inapt
companion to the memory of this fierce woman.

She saw me as I advanced, and rose for a moment to receive
me. I thought her, then, still more colorless and thin than
when I had seen her last ; the flashing eyes still brighter, and
the scar still plainer.

Our meeting was not cordial. We had parted angrily on
the last occasion ; and there was an air of disdain about her,
which she took no pains to conceal.

" I am told you wish to speak to me, Miss Dartle ; * said I,



OF DAVID C0PPERF1ELD. 251

standing near her, with, my hand upon the back of the seat,
and declining her gesturp of invitation to sit down.

"If you please," said she. "Pray has this girl been
found?"

"No."

" And yet she has run away ! "

I saw her thin lips working while she looked at me, as if
they were eager to load her with reproaches.

" Eun away ? " I repeated.

" Yes ! From him," she said with a laugh. " If she is not
found, perhaps she never will be found. She may be dead 1 "

The vaunting cruelty Avith which she met my glance, I never
saw expressed in any other face that ever I have seen.

"To wish her dead," said I, "may be the kindest wish that one
of her own sex could bestow upon her. I am glad that time
has softened you so much, Miss Dartle."

She condescended to make no reply, but, turning on me with
another scornful laugh, said :

" The friends of this excellent and much-injured young
lady are friends of yours. You are their champion, and
assert their rights. Do you wish to know what is known of
her?"

"Yes," saidl.

She rose with an ill-favored smile, and, taking a few steps
towards a wall of holly that was near at hand, dividing the
lawn from a kitchen-garden, said, in a louder voice, "Gome
here ! " — as if she were calling to some unclean beast.

" You will restrain any demonstrative championship or
vengeance in this place, of course, Mr. Copperfield ? " said
she, looking over her shoulder at me with the same expres-
sion.

I inclined my head, without knowing what she meant ; and
she said, " Come here ! " again ; and returned, followed by the
respectable Mr. Littimer, who, with undiminished respectabil-
ity, made me a bow, and took up his position behind her.
The air of wicked grace : of triumph, in which, strange to say,
there was yet something feminine and alluring : with which
she reclined upon the seat between us, and looked at me, was
worthy of a cruel Princess in a Legend.



252 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

"Now," said she, imperiously, without glancing at him, and
touching the old wound as it thrpbbed : perhaps, in this
instance, with pleasure rather than pain. " Tell Mr. Copper-
field about the flight."

"Mr. James and myself, ma'am — "

" Don't address yourself to me ! " she interrupted, with a
frown.

" Mr. James and myself, sir — "

"Nor to me, if you please," said I.

Mr. Littimer, without being at all discomposed, signified, by
a slight obeisance, that anything that was most agreeable to
us was most agreeable to him ; and began again :

" Mr. James and myself have been abroad with the young
woman, ever since she left Yarmouth under Mr. James's pro-
tection. We have been in a variety of places, and seen a deal
of foreign country. We have been in France, Switzerland,
Italy, in fact, almost all parts."

He looked at the back of the seat, as if he were addressing
himself to that ; and softly played upon it with his hands, as
if he were striking chords upon a dumb piano.

" Mr. James took quite uncommonly to the young woman ;
and was more settled, for a length of time, than I have known
him to be since I have been in his service. The young woman
was very improvable, and spoke the languages ; and wouldn't
have been known for the same country -person. I noticed that
she was much admired wherever we went."

Miss Dartle put her hand upon her side. I saw him steal a
glance at her, and slightly smile to himself.

" Very much admired, indeed, the young woman was. What
with her dress; what with the air and sun; what with being
made so much of ; what with this, that, and the other ; her
merits really attracted general notice."

He made a short pause. Her eyes wandered restlessly over
the distant prospect, and she bit her nether lip to stop that
busy mouth.

Taking his hands from the seat, and placing one of them
within the other, as he settled himself on one leg, Mr. Littimer
proceeded, with his eyes cast down, and his respectable head
a little advanced, and a little on one side :



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 253

" The young woman went on in this manner for some time,
being occasionally low in her spirits, until I think she began
to weary Mr. James by giving way to her low spirits and tem-
pers of that kind ; and things were not so comfortable. Mr.
James he began to be restless again. The more restless he
got, the worse she got ; and I must say, for myself, that I had
a very difficult time of it indeed between the two. . Still mat-
ters were patched up here, and made good there, over and over
again ; and altogether lasted, I am sure, for a longer time than
anybody could have expected."

Kecalling her eyes from the distance, she looked at me
again now, with her former air. Mr. Littimer, clearing his
throat behind his hand with a respectable short cough, changed
legs, and went on :

"At last, when there had been, upon the whole, a good
many words and reproaches, Mr. James he set off one morning
from the neighborhood of Naples, where we had a villa (the
young woman being very partial to the sea), and, under pre-
tence of coining back in a day or so, left it in charge with me
to break it out, that, for the general happiness of all concerned,
he was " — here an interruption of the short cough — " gone.
But Mr. James, I must say, certainly did behave extremely
honorable; for he proposed that the young woman should
marry a very respectable person, who was fully prepared to
overlook the past, and who was, at least, as good as anybody
the young woman could have aspired to in a regular way : her
connections being very common."

He changed legs again, and wetted his lips. I was con-
vinced that the scoundrel spoke of himself, and I saw my
conviction reflected in Miss Dartle's face.

" This I also had it in charge to communicate. I was will-
ing to do anything to relieve Mr. James from his difficulty,
and to restore harmony between himself and an affectionate
parent, who has undergone so much on his account. There-
fore I undertook the commission. The young woman's violence
when she came to, after I broke the fact of his departure, was
beyond all expectations. She was quite mad, and had to be
held by force ; or, if she couldn't have got to a knife, or got to
the sea, she'd have beaten her head against the marble floor."



254 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

Miss Dartle, leaning back upon the seat, with a light of
exultation in her face, seemed almost to caress the sounds this
fellow had uttered.

"But when I came to the second part of what had been
entrusted to me," said Mr. Littimer, rubbing his hands,
uneasily, "which anybody might have supposed would have
been, at all events, appreciated as a kind intention, then the
young woman came out in her true colors. A more outra-
geous person I never did see. Her conduct was surprisingly
bad. She had no more gratitude, no more feeling, no more
patience, no more reason in her, than a stock or a stone. If
I hadn't been upon my guard, I am convinced she would have
had my blood."

" I think the better of her for it," said I, indignantly.

Mr. Littimer ben 1 ; his head, as much as to say, " Indeed,
sir ? But you're young i " and resumed his narrative.

" It was necessary, in short, for a time, to take away every-
thing nigh her, that she could do herself, or anybody else, an
injury with, and to shut her up close. Notwithstanding
which, she got out in the night; -forced the lattice of a
window, that I had nailed up myself ; dropped on a vine that
was trailed below ; and never has been seen or heard of, to
my knowledge, since."

" She is dead, perhaps," said Miss Dartle, with a smile, as
if she could have spurned the body of the ruined girl.

"She may have drowned herself, miss," returned Mr.
Littimer, catching at an excuse for addressing himself to
somebody. "It's very possible. Or, she may have had
assistance from the boatmen, and the boatmen's wives and
children. Being given to low company, she was very much
in the habit of talking to them on the beach, Miss Dartle,
and sitting by their boats. I have known her to do it, when
Mr. James has been away, whole days. Mr. James was far
from pleased to find out once, that she had told the children
she was a boatman's daughter, and that in her own country,
long ago, she had roamed about the beach, like them."

Oh, Emily ! Unhappy beauty ! What a picture rose before
me of her sitting on the far-off shore, among the children like/
herself when she was innocent, listening to little voices such



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 255

as might have called her Mother had she been a poor man's
wife ; and to the great voice of the sea, with its eternal " Never
more ! "

"When it was clear that nothing could be done, 'Miss
Dartle — "

" Did I tell you not to speak to me ? " she said, with stern
contempt.

" You spoke to me, miss," he replied. " I beg your pardon.
But it's my service to obey."

" Do your service," she returned. " Finish your story, and
go!"

"When it was clear," he said, with infinite respectability,
and an obedient bow, " that she was not to be found, I went
to Mr. James, at the place where it had been agreed that I
should write to him, and informed him of what had occurred.
Words passed between us in consequence, and I felt it due to
my character to leave him. I could bear, and I have borne,
a great, deal from Mr. James; but he insulted me too far.
He hurt me. Knowing the unfortunate difference between
himself *and his mother, and what her anxiety of mind was
likely to be, I took the liberty of coming home to England,
and relating — "

" For money which I paid him," said Miss Dartle to me.

" Just so, ma'am — and relating what I knew. I am not
aware," said Mr. Littimer, after a moment's reflection, "that
there is anything else. I am at present out of employment,
and should be happy to meet with a respectable situation."

Miss Dartle glanced at me, as though she would inquire
if there were anything that I desired to ask. As there was
something which had occurred to my mind, I said in reply :

" I could wish to know from this — creature," I could not
bring myself to utter any more conciliatory word, " whether
they intercepted a letter that was written to her from home,
or whether he supposes that she received it."

He remained calm and silent, with his eyes fixed on the
ground, and the tip of every finger of his right hand delicately
poised against the tip of every finger of his left.

Miss Dartle turned her head disdainfully towards him.

" I beg your pardon, miss," he said, . awakening from his



256 THE PEBSONAL HISTOBY AND EXPEBIENCE

abstraction, "but, however submissive to you, I have my
position, though a servant. Mr. Copperfield and you, miss,
are different people. If Mr. Copperfield wishes to know any-
thing from me, I take the liberty of reminding Mr. Copperfield
that he can put a question to me. I have a character to
maintain."

After a momentary struggle with myself, I turned my eyes
upon him, and said, " You have heard my question. Consider
it addressed to yourself, if you choose. What answer do you
make ? "

" Sir," he rejoined, with an occasional separation and re-
union of those delicate tips, " my answer must be qualified ;
because, to betray Mr. James's confidence to his mother, and
to betray it to you, are two different actions. It is not prob-
able, I consider, that Mr. James would encourage the receipt
of letters likely to increase low spirits and unpleasantness :
but further than that, sir, I should wish to avoid going."

" Is that all ? " inquired Miss Dartle of me.

I indicated that I had nothing more to say. " Except," I
added, as I saw him moving off, "that I understand this
fellow's part in the wicked story, and that, as I shall make it
known to the honest man who has been her father from her
childhood, I would recommend him to avoid going too much
into public."

He had stopped the moment I began, and had listened with
his usual repose of manner.

"Thank you, sir. But you'll excuse me if I say, sir, that
there are neither slaves nor slave-drivers in this country, and
that people are not allowed to take the law into their own
hands. If they do, it is more to their own peril, I believe,
than to other people's. Consequently speaking, I am not at
all afraid of going wherever I may wish, sir."

With that, he made a polite bow ; and, with another to
Miss Dartle, went away through the arch in the wall of holly
by which he had come. Miss Dartle and I regarded each
other for a little while in silence ; her manner being exactly
what it was, when she had produced the man.

" He says besides," she observed, with a slow curling of
her lip, " that his master, as he hears, is coasting Spain ; and





this done, is away to gratify his seafaring tastes till he is
weary. But that is of no interest to you. Between these
two proud persons, mother and son, there is a wider breach
than before, and little hope of its healing, for they are one at
heart, and time makes each more obstinate and imperious.
Neither is this of any interest to you ; but it introduces what
I wish to say. This devil whom you make an angel of, I
mean this low girl whom he picked out of the tide-mud," with
her black eyes full upon me, and her passionate finger up,
" may be alive, — for I believe some common things are hard
to die. If she is, you will desire to have a pearl of such price
found and taken care of. We desire that, too ; that he may
not by any chance be made her prey again. So far, we are
united in one interest ; and that is why I, who would do her
any mischief that so coarse a wretch is capable of feeling,
have sent for you to hear what you have heard."

I saw, by the change in her face, that some one was advanc-
ing behind me. It was Mrs. Steerforth, who gave me her
hand more coldly than of yore, and with an augmentation of
her former stateliness of manner • but still, I perceived — and
I was touched by it — with an ineffaceable remembrance of my
old love for her son. She was greatly altered. Her fine figure
was far less upright, her handsome face was deeply marked,
and her hair was almost white. But when she sat down on the
seat, she was a handsome lady still; and well I knew the
bright eye with its lofty look, that had been a light in my
very dreams at school.

" Is Mr. Copperfield informed of everything, Eosa ? "

" Yes."

" And has he heard Littimer himself ? "

" Yes ; I have told him why you wished it."

" You are a good girl. I have had some slight correspond-
ence with your former friend, sir," addressing me, " but it has
not restored his sense of duty or natural obligation. There-
fore I have no other object in this, than what Rosa has men-
tioned. If, by the course which may relieve the mind of the
decent man you brought here (for whom I am sorry — I can
say no more), my son may be saved from again falling into
the snares of a designing enemy, well ! "
vol. n — 17



258 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

She drew herself up, and sat looking straight before her,
far away.

" Madam," I said respectfully, " I understand. I assure you
I am in no danger of putting any strained construction on
your motives. But I must say, even to you, having known
this injured family from childhood, that if you suppose the
girl, so deeply wronged, has not been cruelly deluded, and
would not rather die a hundred deaths than take a cup of
water from your son's hand now, you cherish a terrible mis-
take."

" Well, Rosa, well ! " said Mrs. Steerf orth, as the other was
about to interpose, "it is no matter. Let it be. You are
married, sir, I am told ? "

I answered that I had been some time married.

" And are doing well ? I hear little in the quiet life I lead,
but I understand you are beginning to be famous."

" I have been very fortunate," I said, " and find my name
connected with some praise."

" You have no mother ? " — in a softened voice.

"No."

" It is a pity," she returned, " She would have been proud
of you. Good night ! "

I took the hand she held out with a dignified, unbending
air, and it was as calm in mine as if her breast had been in
peace. Her pride could still its very pulses it appeared, and
draw the placid veil before her face, through which she sat
looking straight before her on the far distance.

As I moved away from them along the terrace, I could not
help observing how steadily they both sat gazing on the pros-
pect, and how it thickened and closed around them. Here
and there, some early lamps were seen to twinkle in the dis-
tant city ; and in the eastern quarter of the sky the lurid light
still hovered. But, from the greater part of the broad valley
interposed, a mist was rising like a sea, which, mingling with
the darkness, made it seem as if the gathering waters would
encompass them. I have reason to remember this, and think
of it with awe ; for before I looked upon those two again, a
stormy sea had risen to their feet.

Reflecting on what had been thus told me, I felt it right



OF DAVID COPPEEFIELD. 259

that it should be communicated to Mr. Peggotty. On the
following evening I went into London in quest of him. He
was always wandering about from place to place, with his one
object of recovering his niece before him; but was more in
London than elsewhere. Often and often, now, had I seen
him in the dead of night passing along the streets, searching,
among the few who loitered out of doors at those untimely
hours, for what he dreaded to find.

He kept a lodging over the little chandler's shop in Hun-
gerford Market, which I have had occasion to mention more
than once, and from which he first went forth upon his errand
of mercy. Hither I directed my walk. On making inquiry
for him, I learned from the people of the house that he had
not gone out yet, and I should find him in his room up stairs.

He was sitting reading by a window in which he kept a few
plants. The room was very neat and orderly. I saw in a
moment that it was always kept prepared for her reception,
and that he never went out but he thought it possible he might
bring her home. He had not heard my tap at the door, and
only raised his eyes when I laid my hand upon his shoulder.

" Mas'r Davy ! Thankee, sir ! thankee hearty, for this visit !
Sit ye down. You're kindly welcome, sir."

"Mr. Peggotty," said I, taking the chair he handed me,
"don't expect much ! I have heard some news."

"Of Em'ly!"

He put his hand, in a nervous manner, on his mouth, and
turned pale, as he fixed his eyes on mine.

"It gives no clue to where she is; but she is not with
him."

He sat down, looking intently at me, and listened in pro-
found silence to all I had to tell. I well remember the sense
of dignity, beauty even, with which the patient gravity of his
face impressed me, when, having gradually removed his eyes^
from mine, he sat looking downward, leaning his forehead on
his hand. He offered no interruption, but remained through-
out perfectly still. He seemed to pursue her figure through
the narrative, and to let every other shape go by him, as if it
were nothing.

When I had done, he shaded his face, and continued silent.



260 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

I looked out of the window for a little while, and occupied
myself with the plants.

"How do you fare to feel about it, Mas'r Davy ?" he in-
quired at length.

" I think that she is living," I replied.

"I doen't know. Maybe the first shock was too rough, and
in the wildness of her art — ! That there blue water as she
used to speak on. Could she have thowt o' that so many year,
because it was to be her grave ! "

He said this, musing, in a low, frightened voice ; and walked
across the little room.

"And yet," he added, "Mas'r Davy, I have felt so sure as
she was living — I have know'd, awake and sleeping, as it was
so trew that I should find her — I have been so led on by it,
and held up by it — that I doen't believe I can have been de-
ceived. No! Em'ly's alive ! "

He put his hand down firmly on the table, and set his sun-
burnt face into a resolute expression.

"My niece, Ein'ly, is alive, sir!" he said steadfastly. "I
doen't know wheer it comes from, or how 'tis, but I am told as
she's alive ! "

He looked almost like a man inspired, as he said it. I
waited for a few moments, until he could give me his undivided
attention ; and then proceeded to explain the precaution, that,
it had occurred to me last night, it would be wise to take.

"Now, my dear friend — " I began.

" Thankee, thankee, kind sir," he said, grasping my hand in
both of his.

" If she should make her way to London, which is likely —
for where could she lose herself so readily as in this vast city ;
and what would she wish to do, but lose and hide herself, if
she does not go home ? — "

" And she won't go home," he interposed, shaking his head
mournfully. " If she had left of her own accord, she might ;
not as 'twas, sir."

" If she should come here," said I, " I believe there is one
person, here, more likely to discover her than any other in the
world. Do you remember — hear what I say, with fortitude —
think of your great object ! — do you remember Martha ? "



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 261

« Of our town ? "

I needed no other answer than his face.

" Do you know that she is in London ? "

"I have seen her in the streets," he answered with a
shiver.

"But you don't know/' said I, "that Emily was charitable to
her, with Ham's help, long before she fled from home. Nor,
that, when we met one night, and spoke together in the room
yonder, over the way, she listened at the door."

" Mas'r Davy ? " he replied in astonishment. " That night
when it snew so hard ? "

" That night. I have never seen her since. I went back,
after parting from you, to speak to her, but she was gone. I
was unwilling to mention her to you then, and I am now ; but
she is the person of whom I speak, and with whom I think we
should communicate. Do you understand ? "

" Too well, sir," he replied. We had sunk our voices, almost
to a whisper, and continued to speak in that tone.

" You say you have seen her. Do you think that you could
find her ? I could only hope to do so by chance."

" I think, Mas'r Davy, I know wheer to look."

" It is dark. Being together, shall we go out now, and try
to find hfer to-night ? "

He assented, and prepared to accompany me. Without
appearing to observe what he was doing, I saw how carefully
he adjusted the little room, put a candle ready and the means
of lighting it, arranged the bed, and finally took out of a drawer
one of her dresses (I remember to have seen her wear it),
neatly folded with some other garments, and a bonnet, which
he placed upon a chair. He made no allusion to these clothes,
neither did I. There they had been waiting for her, many
and many a night, no doubt.

"The time was, Mas'r Davy," he said, as we came down
stairs, " when I thowt this girl, Martha, a'most like the dirt
underneath my Em'ly's feet. God forgive me, there's a differ-
ence now ! "

As we went along, partly to hold him in conversation, and
partly to satisfy myself, I asked him about Ham. He said,
almost in the same words as formerly, that Ham was jast the



262 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

same, H wearing away his life with kiender no care nohow
for't ; but never murmuring, and liked by all."

I asked him what he thought Ham's state of mind was, in
reference to the cause of their misfortunes ? Whether he
believed it was dangerous ? What he supposed, for example,
Ham would do, if he and Steerforth ever should encounter ?

". I doen't know, sir," he replied. (( I have thowt of it often-
times, but I can't arrize myself of it, no matters."

I recalled to his remembrance the morning after her depart-
ure, when we were all three on the beach. " Do you recollect,"
said I, " a certain wild way in which he looked out to sea, and
spoke about c the end of it ? ' "

" Sure I do ! " said he.

" What do you suppose he meant ? "

" Mas'r Davy/' he replied, " Fve put the question to myself
a mort o' times, and never found no answer. And theer's one
curious thing — that, though he is so pleasant, I wouldn't
fare to feel comfortable to try and get his mind upon 't. He
never said a wured to me as warn't as dootiful as dootiful
could be, and it ain't likely as he'd begin to speak any other
ways now ; but it's fur from being fleet water in his mind,
where them thowts lays. It's deep, sir, and I can't see
down."

". You are right," said I, " and that has sometimes made me
anxious."

" And me too, Mas'r Davy," he rejoined. " Even more so,
I do assure you, than his ventersome ways, though both be-
longs to the alteration in him. I doen't know as he'd do vio-
lence under any circumstances, but I hope as them two may
be kep asunders."

We had come, through Temple Bar, into the city. Con-
versing no more now, and walking at my side, he yielded him-
self up to the one aim of his devoted life, and went on, with
that hushed concentration of his faculties which would have
made his figure solitary in a multitude. We were not far from
Blackfriars Bridge, when he turned his head and pointed to a
solitary female figure flitting along the opposite side of the
street. I knew it, readily, to be the figure that we sought.

We crossed the road, and were pressing on towards her,



OF DAVID GOPPEBFIELD. 263

when it occurred to me that she might be more disposed to
feel a woman's interest in the lost girl, if we spoke to her in
a quieter place, aloof from the crowd, and where we should be
less observed. I advised my companion, therefore, that we
should not address her yet, but follow her ; consulting in this,
likewise, an indistinct desire I had, to know where she went.

He acquiescing, we followed at a distance: never losing
sight of her, but never caring to come very near, as she fre-
quently looked about. Once, she stopped to listen to a band
of music : and then we stopped too.

She went on a long way. Still we went on. It was evi-
dent, from the manner in which she held her course, that she
was going to some fixed destination ; and this, and her keep-
ing in the busy streets, and, I suppose the strange fascination
in the secrecy and mystery of so following any one, made me
adhere to my first purpose. At length she turned into a dull,
dark street, where the noise and crowd were lost ; and I said,
"We may speak to her now;" and, mending our pace, we
went after her.



264 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE



CHAPTER XVIII.

MARTHA.

We were now down in Westminster. We had turned back
to follow her, having encountered her coming towards us ; and
Westminster Abbey was the point at which she passed from
the lights and noise oi the leading streets. She proceeded so
quickly, when she got free of the two currents of passengers
setting towards and from the bridge, that, between this and
the advance she had of us when she struck off, we were in the
narrow water-side street by Millbarik before we came up with
her. At that moment she crossed the road, as if to avoid the
footsteps that she heard so close behind ; and, without looking
back, passed on even more rapidly.

A glimpse of the river through a dull gateway, where some
wagons were housed for the night, seemed to arrest my feet.
I touched my companion without speaking, and we both
forbore to cross after her, and both followed on that opposite
side of the way ; keeping as quietly as we could in the shadow
of the houses, but keeping very near her.

There was, and is when I write, at the end of that low-
lying street, a dilapidated little wooden building, probably an
obsolete old ferry-house. Its position is just at that point
where the street ceases, and the road begins to lie between a
row of houses and the river. As soon as she came here, and
saw the water, she stopped as if she had come to her destina-
tion ; and presently went slowly along by the brink of the
river, looking intently at it.

All the way here, I had supposed that she was going to
some house ; indeed, I had vaguely entertained the hope that
the house might be in some way associated with the lost girl.
But, that one dark glimpse of the river, through the gateway,
had instinctively prepared me for her going no farther.

The neighborhood was a dreary one at that time; as op-



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 265

pressive, sad, and solitary by night, as any about London.
There were neither wharves nor houses on the melancholy
waste of road near the great blank Prison. A sluggish ditch
deposited its mud at the prison walls. Coarse grass and rank
weeds straggled over all the marshy land in the vicinity. In
one part ; carcasses of houses, inauspiciously begun and never
finished, rotted away. In another,. the ground was cumbered
with rusty iron monsters of steam-boilers, wheels, cranks, pipes,
furnaces, paddles, anchors, diving-bells, windmill-sails, and I
know not what strange objects, accumulated by some specu-
lator, and grovelling in the dust, underneath which — having
sunk into the soil of their own weight in wet weather — they
had the appearence of vainly trying to hide themselves. The
clash and glare of sundry fiery Works upon the river side,
arose by night to disturb everything except the heavy and
unbroken smoke that poured out of their chimneys. Slimy
gaps and causeways, winding among old wooden piles, with a
sickly substance clinging to the latter, like green hair, and' the
rags of last year's handbills offering rewards for drowned men
fluttering above high-water mark, led down through the ooze
and slush to the ebb tide. There was a story that one of the
pits dug for the dead in the time of the Great Plague was
hereabout ; and a blighting influence seemed to have proceeded
from it over the whole place. Or else it looked as if it had
gradually decomposed into that night-mare condition, out of
the overflowings of the polluted stream.

As if she were a part of the refuse it had cast out, and left
to corruption and decay, the girl we had followed strayed
down to the river's brink, and stood in the midst of this night-
picture, lonely and still, looking at the water.

There were some boats and barges astrand in the mud, and
these enabled us to come within a few yards of her without
being seen. I then signed to Mr. Peggotty to remain where
he was, and emerged from their shade to speak to her. I did
not approach her solitary figure without trembling ; for this
gloomy end to her determined walk, and the way in which she
stood, almost within the cavernous shadow of the iron bridge,
looking at the lights crookedly reflected in the strong tide,
inspired a dread within me.



266 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

I think she was talking to herself. I am sure, although
absorbed in gazing at the water, that her shawl was off her
shoulders, and that she was muffling her hands in it, in an
unsettled and bewildered way, more like the action of a sleep-
walker than a waking person. I know, and never can forget,
that there was that in her wild manner which gave me no
assurance but that she would sink before my eyes, until I had
her arm within my grasp.

At the same moment I said " Martha ! "

She uttered a terrified scream, and struggled with me with
such strength that I doubt if I could have held her alone.
But a stronger hand than mine was laid upon her ; and when
she raised her frightened eyes and saw whose it was, she made
but one more effort and dropped down between us. We carried
her away from the water to where there were some dry stones,
and there laid her down, crying and moaning. In a little
while she sat among the stones, holding her wretched head
with both her hands.

" Oh, the river ! " she cried passionately. " Oh, the river ! "

" Hush, hush ! " said I. " Calm yourself."

But she still repeated the same words, continually exclaim-
ing, u Oh, the river ! " over and over again.

" I know it's like me ! " she exclaimed. " I know that I
belong to it. I know that it's the natural company of such as
I am ! It comes from country places, where there was once
no harm in it — and it creeps through the dismal streets,
defiled and miserable — and it goes away, like my life, to a
great sea, that is always troubled — and I feel that I must go
with it ! "

I have never known what despair was, except in the tone of
those words.

" I can't keep away from it. I can't forget it. It haunts me
day and night. It's the only thing in all the world that I am
fit for, or that's fit for me. Oh, the dreadful river ! "

The thought passed through my mind that in the face of my
companion, as he looked upon her without speech or motion, I
might have read his niece's history, if I had known nothing of
it. I never saw, in any painting or reality, horror and compas-
sion so impressively blended. He shook as if he would have





fallen; and his hand — I touched it with my own, for his
appearance alarmed me — was deadly cold.

" She is in a state of frenzy," I whispered to him. " She
will speak differently in a little time,"

I don't know what he would have said in answer. He
made some motion with his mouth, and seemed to think he
had spoken; but he had only pointed to her with his out-
stretched hand.

A new burst of crying came upon her now, in which she
once more hid her face among the stones, and lay before us,
a prostrate image of humiliation and ruin. Knowing that
this state must pass, before we could speak to her with any
hope, I ventured to restrain him when he would have raised
her, and we stood by in silence until she became more tranquil.

" Martha," said I then, leaning down, and helping her to
rise — she seemed to want to rise as if ; with the intention of
going away, but she was weak, and leaned against a boat.
" Do you know who this is, who is with me ? "

She said faintly, "Yes."

"Do you know that we have followed you a long way to-
night?"

She shook her head. She looked neither at him nor at me,
but stood in a humbled attitude, holding her bonnet and shawl
in one hand, without appearing conscious of them, and press-
ing the other, clenched, against her forehead.

" Are you composed enough," said I, " to speak on the sub-
ject which so interested you — I hope Heaven may remember
it ! — that snowy night ? "

Her sobs broke out afresh, and she murmured some inar-
ticulate thanks to me for not having driven her away from
the door.

" I want to say nothing for myself," she said, after a few
moments. "I am bad, I am lost. I have no hope at all.
But tell him, sir," she had shrunk away from him, -"if you
don't feel too hard to me to do it, that I never was in any way
the cause of his misfortune."

" It has never been attributed to you," I returned, earnestly
responding to her earnestness.

" It was you, if I don't deceive myself," she said, in a broken



268 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

voice, " that came into the kitchen, the night she took such
pity on me; was so gentle to me; didn't shrink away from
me like all the rest, and gave me such kind help ! Was it
you, sir ? "

" It was," said I.

" I should have been in the river long ago," she said, glanc-
ing at it with a terrible expression, " if any wrong to her had
been upon my mind. I never could have kept out of it a
single winter's night, if I had not been free of any share in
that ! "

"The cause of her flight is too well understood," I said.
"You are innocent of any part in it, we thoroughly believe, —
we know."

" Oh I might have been much the better for her, if I had
had a better heart!" exclaimed the girl, with most forlorn
regret ; " for she was always good to me ! She never spoke
a word to me but what was pleasant and right. Is it likely I
would try to make her what I am myself, knowing what I am
myself, so well ! When I lost everything that makes life
dear, the worst of all my thoughts was that I was parted for
ever from her ! "

Mr. Peggotty, standing with one hand on the gunwale of the
boat, and his eyes cast down, put his disengaged hand before
his face.

" And when I heard what had happened before that snowy
night, from some belonging to our town," cried Martha, "the
bitterest thought in all my mind was, that the people would
remember she once kept company with me, and would say I
had corrupted her ! When, Heaven knows, I would have died
to have brought back her good name ! "

Long unused to any self-control, the piercing agony of her
remorse and grief was terrible.

"To have died, would not have been much — what can I
say? — I would have lived !" she cried. "I would have lived
to be old, in the wretched streets — and to wander about,
avoided, in the dark — and to see the day break on the ghastly
line of houses, and remember how the same sun used to shine
into my room, and wake me once — I would have done even
that to save her ! "



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 269

Sinking on the stones, she took some in each hand, and
clenched them up, as if she would have ground them. She
writhed into some new posture constantly: stiffening her
arms, twisting them before her face, as though to shut out
from her eyes the little light there was, and drooping her
head, as if it were heavy with insupportable recollections.

" What shall I ever do ! " she said, fighting thus with her
despair. " How can I go on as I am, a solitary curse to myself,
a living disgrace to every one I come near ! " Suddenly she
turned to my companion. " Stamp upon me, kill me ! When
she was your pride, you would have thought I had done her
harm' if I had brushed against her in the street. You can't
believe — why should you ? — a syllable that comes out of my
lips. It would be a burning shame upon you, even now, if
she and I exchanged a word. I don't complain. I don't say
she and I are alike — I know there is a long, long way between
us. I only say, with all my guilt and wretchedness upon my
head, that I am grateful to her from my soul, and love her.
Oh don't think that all the power I had of loving anything, is
quite worn out ! Throw me away, as all the world does. Kill
me for being what I am, and having ever known her; but
don't think that of me ! "

He looked upon her, while she made this supplication, in
a wild distracted manner ; and, when she was silent, gently
raised her.

" Martha," said Mr. Peggotty, "God forbid as I should
judge you. Forbid as I, of all men, should do that, my girl !
You doen't know half the change that's come, in course of
time, upon me, when you think it likely. Well ! " he paused
a moment, then went on. " You doen't understand how 'tis
that this here gentleman and me has wished to speak to you.
You doen't understand what 'tis we has afore us. Listen
now ! "

His influence upon her was complete. She stood, shrink-
ingly, before him, as if she were afraid to meet his eyes ; but
her passionate sorrow was quite hushed and mute.

"If you heerd," said Mr. Peggotty, "owt of what passed
between Mas'r Davy and me, th' night when it snew so hard,
you know as I have been — wheer not — fur to seek my dear



270 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

niece. My dear niece," he repeated steadily. "Fur she's
more dear to me now, Martha, than ever she was dear afore."

She put her hands before her face ; but otherwise remained
quiet.

u I have heerd her tell," said Mr. Peggotty, a as you was
early left fatherless and motherless, with no friend fur to take,
in a rough seafaring-way, their place. Maybe you can guess
that if you'd had such a friend, you'd have got into a way of
being fond of him in course of time, and that my niece was
kiender daughter-like to me."

As she was silently trembling, he put her shawl carefully
about her, taking it up from the ground for that purpose.

" Whereby," said he, " I know, both as she would go- to the
wureld's furdest end with me, if she could once see me again ;
and that she would fly to the wureld's furdest end to keep off
seeing me. For though she ain't no call to doubt my love, and
doen't — and doen't," he repeated, with a quiet assurance of
the truth of what he said, " there's shame steps in, and keeps
betwixt us."

I read, in every word of his plain impressive way of deliv-
ering himself, new evidence of his having thought of this one
topic, in every feature it presented.

"According to our reckoning," he proceeded, "Mas'r Davy's
here, and mine, she is like, one day, to make her own poor
solitary course to London. We believe — Mas'r Davy, me,
and all of us — that you are as innocent of everything that
has befel her, as the unborn child. You've spoke of her being
pleasant, kind, and gentle to you. Bless her, I knew she was !
,1 knew she always was, to all. You're thankful to her, and
you love her. Help us all you can to find her, and may
Heaven reward you ! "

She looked at him hastily, and for the first time, as if she
were doubtful of what he had said.

" Will you trust me ? " she asked, in a low voice of aston-
ishment.

"Full and free ! " said Mr. Peggotty.

" To speak to her, if I should ever find her ; shelter her, if
I have any shelter to divide with her ; and then, without her





knowledge, come to you, and bring you to her ? " she asked
hurriedly.

We both replied together, " Yes ! "

She lifted up her eyes, and solemnly declared thatf she
would devote herself to this task, fervently and faithfully.
That she would never waver in it, never be diverted from it,
never relinquish it while there was any chance of hope. If
she were not true to it, might the object she now had in life,
which bound her to something devoid of evil, in its passing
away from her, leave her more forlorn and more despairing,
if that were possible, than she had been upon the river's
brink that night ; and then might all help, human and Divine,
renounce her evermore !

She did not raise her voice above her breath, or address us,
but said this to the night sky ; then stood profoundly quiet,
looking at the gloomy water.

We judged it expedient, now, to tell her all we knew ;
which I recounted at length. She listened with great atten-
tion, and* with a face that often changed, but had the same
purpose in all its varying expressions. Her eyes occasionally
filled with tears, but those she repressed. It seemed as if her
spirit were quite altered, and she could not be too quiet.

She asked, when all was told, where we were to be com-
municated with, if occasion should arise. Under a dull lamp
in the road, I wrote our two addresses on a leaf of my pocket-
book, which I tore out and gave to her, and which she put in
her poor bosom. I asked her where she lived herself. She
said, after a pause, in no place long. It were better not to
know.

Mr. Peggotty suggesting to me, in a whisper, what had
already occurred to myself, I took out my purse ; but I could
not prevail upon her to accept any money, nor could I exact
any promise from her that she would do so at another time.
I represented to her that Mr. Peggotty could not be called,
for one in his condition, poor; and that the idea of her
engaging in this search, while depending on her own resources,
shocked us both. She continued steadfast. In this particular,
his influence upon her was equally powerless with mine. She
gratefully thanked him, but remained inexorable.



272 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPEBIENCE

" There may be work to be got/' she said. "I'll try."

"At least take some assistance," I returned, " until you
have tried."

"I could not do what I have promised, for money," she
replied. "I could not take it, if I was starving. To give
me money would be to take away your trust, to take away the
object that you have given me, to take away the only certain
thing that saves me from the river."

" In the name of the great Judge," said I, "before whom
you and all of us must stand at his dread time, dismiss that
terrible idea ! We can all do some good, if we will."

She trembled, and her lip shook, and her face was paler, as
she answered :

"It has been put into your hearts, perhaps, to save a
wretched creature for repentance. I am afraid to think so ;
it seems too bold. If any good should come of me, I might
begin to hope; for nothing but harm has ever come of my
deeds yet. I am to be trusted, for the first time in a long
while, with my miserable life, on account of what you have
given me to try for. I know no more, and I can say no more."

Again she repressed the tears that had begun to flow ; and,
putting out her trembling hand, and touching Mr. Peggotty,
as if there was some healing virtue in him, went away along
the desolate road. She had been ill, probably for a long time.
I observed, upon that closer opportunity of observation, that
she was worn and haggard, and that her sunken eyes expressed
privation and endurance.

We followed her at a short distance, our way lying in the
same direction, until we came back into the lighted and popu-
lous streets. I had such implicit confidence in her declaration,
that I then put it to Mr. Peggotty, whether it would not seem,
in the onset, like distrusting her, to follow her any further.
He being of the same mind, and equally reliant on her, we
Buffered her to take her own road, and took ours, which was
towards Highgate. He accompanied me a good part of the
way ; and when we parted, with a prayer for the success of
this fresh effort, there was a new and thoughtful compassion
tn him that I was at no loss to interpret.

It was midnight when I arrived at home. I had reached



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 273

my own gate, and was standing listening for the deep bell of
Saint Paul's, the sound of which I thought had been borne
towards me among the multitude of striking clocks, when I
was rather surprised to see that the door of my aunt's cottage
was open, and that a faint light in the entry was shining out
across the road.

Thinking that my aunt might have relapsed into one of her
old alarms, and might be watching the progress of some imagi-
nary conflagration in the distance, I went to speak to her. It
was with very great surprise that I saw a man standing in her
little garden.

He had a glass and bottle in his hand, and was in the act
of drinking. I stopped short, among the thick foliage outside,
for the moon was up now, though obscured; and I recognized
the man whom I had once supposed to be a delusion of Mr.
Dick's, and had once encountered with my aunt in the streets
of the city.

He was eating as well as drinking, and seemed to eat with
a hungry appetite. He seemed curious regarding the cottage,
too, as if it were the first time he had seen it. After stooping
to put the bottle on the ground, he looked up at the windows,
and looked about ; though with a covert and impatient air, as
if he was anxious to be gone.

The light in the passage was obscured for a moment, and my
aunt came out. She was agitated, and told some money into
his hand. I heard it chink.

" What's the use of this ? " he demanded.

" I can spare no more," returned my aunt.

" Then I can't go," said he. " Here ! You may take it back ! "

"You bad man," returned my aunt, with great emotion;
" how can you use me so ? But why do I ask ? It is because
you know how weak I am ! What have I to do, to free
myself forever of your visits, but to abandon you to your
deserts ? "

" And why don't you abandon me to my deserts ? " said he.

"You ask me why!" returned my aunt. "What a heart
you must have ! "

He stood moodily rattling the money, and shaking his head,
until at length he said :

VOL. II — 18



274 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" Is this all you mean to give me, then ? "

" It is all I can give you," said my aunt. " You know I
have had losses, and am poorer than I used to be. I have
told you so. Having got it, why do you give me the pain of
looking at you for another moment, and seeing what you have
become ? "

" I have become shabby enough, if you mean that," he said.
" I lead the life of an owl."

" You stripped me of the greater part of all I ever had,"
said my aunt. "You closed my heart against the whole
world, years and years. You treated me falsely, ungratefully,
and cruelly. Go, and repent of it. Don't add new injuries to
the long, long list of injuries you have done me ! "

u Ay ! " he returned. " It's all very fine ! — Well ! I must
do the best I can, for the present, I suppose."

In spite of himself, he appeared abashed by my aunt's indig-
nant tears, and came slouching out of the garden. Taking two
or three quick steps, as if I had just come up, I met him at the
gate, and went in as he came out. We eyed one another nar-
rowly in passing, and with no favor.

"Aunt," said I, hurriedly. "This man alarming you again !
Let me speak to him. Who is he ? "

" Child," returned my aunt, taking my arm, " come in, and
don't speak to me for ten minutes."

We sat down in her little parlor. My aunt retired behind
the round green fan of former days, which was screwed on the
back of a chair, and occasionally wiped her eyes, for about a
quarter of an hour. Then she came out, and took a seat
beside me.

" Trot," said my aunt, calmly, " it's my husband."

" Your husband, aunt ? I thought he had been dead ! "

"Dead to me," returned my aunt, "but living."

I sat in silent amazement.

"Betsey Trotwood don't look a likely subject for the tender
passion," said my aunt, composedly, " but the time was, Trot,
when she believed in that man most entirely. When she loved
him, Trot, right well. When there was no proof of attachment
and affection that she would not have given him. He repaid
her by breaking her fortune, and nearly breaking her heart.





So she put all that sort of sentiment, once and for ever in a
grave, and filled it up, and flattened it down."

" My dear, good aunt ! "

" I left him/' my aunt proceeded, laying her hand as usual
on the back of mine, " generously. I may say at this distance
of time, Trot, that I left him generously. He had been so cruel
to me, that I might have effected a separation on easy terms
for myself 5 but I did not. He soon made ducks and drakes of
what I gave him, sank lower and lower, married another woman,
I believe, became an adventurer, a gambler, and a cheat. What
he is now, you see. But he was a fine-looking man when I mar-
ried him," said my aunt, with an echo of her old pride and ad-
miration in her tone 5 " and I believed him — I was a fool ! —
to be the soul of honor ! "

She gave my hand a squeeze, and shook her head.

"He is nothing to me now, Trot, — less than nothing. But,
sooner than have him punished for his offences (as he would
be if he prowled about in this country), I give him more
money than I can afford, at intervals when he reappears, to go
away. I was a fool when I married him ; and I am so far an
incurable fool on that subject, that, for the sake of what I once
believed him to be, I wouldn't have even this shadow of my
idle fancy hardly dealt with. For I was in earnest, Trot, if
ever a woman was."

My aunt dismissed the matter with a heavy sigh, and
smoothed her dress.

" There, my dear ! " she said. " Now, you know the begin-
ning, middle, and end, and all about it. We won't mention
the subject to one another any more ; neither, of course, will
you mention it to anybody else. This is my grumpy, frumpy
story, and we'll keep it to ourselves, Trot ! "



276 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE



CHAPTER XIX.

DOMESTIC.

I labored hard at my book, without allowing it to interfere
with the punctual discharge of my newspaper duties ; and it
came out and was very successful. I was not stunned by the
praise which sounded in my ears, notwithstanding that I was
keenly alive to it, and thought better of my own performance,
I have little doubt, than anybody else did. It has always
been in my observation of human nature, that a man who has
any good reason to believe in himself never flourishes himself
before the faces of other people in order that they may believe
in him. For this reason, I retained my modesty in every
self-respect ; and the more praise I got, the more I tried to
deserve.

It is not my purpose, in this record, though in all other
essentials it is my written memory, to pursue the history of
my own fictions. They express themselves, and I leave them
to themselves. When I refer to them, incidentally, it is only
as a part of my progress.

Having some foundation for believing, by this time, that
nature and accident had made me an author, I pursued my
vocation with confidence. Without such assurance I should
certainly have left it alone, and bestowed my energy on some
other endeavor. I should have tried to find out what nature and
accident really had made me, and to be that, and nothing else.

I had been writing, in the newspaper and elsewhere, so
prosperously, that when my new success was achieved, I con-
sidered myself reasonably entitled to escape from the dreary
debates. One joyful night, therefore, I noted down the music
of the parliamentary bagpipes for the last time, and I have
never heard it since ; though I still recognize the old drone
in the newspapers, without any substantial variation (except,
perhaps, that there is more of it) all the livelong session.





I now write of the time when I had been married, I suppose,
about a year and a half. After several varieties of experi-
ment, we had given up the housekeeping as a bad job. The
house kept itself, and we kept a page. The principal function
of this retainer was to quarrel with the cook; in which respect
he was a perfect Whittington, without his cat, or the remotest
chance of being made Lord Mayor.

He appears to me to have lived in a hail of saucepan-lids.
His whole existence was a scuffle. He would shriek for help
on the most improper occasions, — as when we had a little
dinner party, or a few friends in the evening, — and would
come tumbling out of the kitchen, with iron missiles flying
after him. We wanted to get rid of him, but he was very
much attached to us, and wouldn't go. He was a tearful boy,
and broke into such deplorable lamentations, when a cessation
of our connection was hinted at, that we were obliged to keep
him. He had no mother — no anything in the way of a rela-
tive, that I could discover, except a sister, who fled to America
the moment we had taken him off her hands ; and he became
quartered on us like a horrible young changeling. He had a
lively perception of his own unfortunate state, and was always
rubbing his eyes with the sleeve of his jacket, or stopping to
blow his nose on the extreme corner of a little pocket-hand-
kerchief, which he never would take completely out of his
pocket, but always economized and secreted.

This unlucky page, engaged in an evil hour at six pounds
ten per annum, was a source of continual trouble to me. I
watched him as he grew — and he grew like scarlet beans —
with painful apprehensions of the time when he would begin
bo shave ; even of the days when he would be bald or gray.
I saw no prospect of ever getting rid of him ; and, projecting
myself into the future, used to think what an inconvenience he
•would be when he was an old man.

• I never expected anything less, than this unfortunate's
manner of getting me out of my difficulty. He stole Dora's
watch, which, like everything else belonging to us, had no
particular place of its own; and, converting it into money,
.spent the produce (he was always a weak-minded boy) in
incessantly riding up and down between London and Uxbridge



278 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

outside the coach. He was taken to Bow Street, as well as I
remember, on the completion of his fifteenth journey ; when
four-and-sixpence, and a second-hand fife. which he couldn't
play, were found upon his person.

The surprise and its consequences would have been much
less disagreeable to me if he had not been penitent. But he
was very penitent indeed, and in a peculiar way — not in the
lump, but by instalments. For example : the day after that
on which I was obliged to appear against him, he made certain
revelations touching a hamper in the cellar, which we believed
to be full of wine, but which had nothing in it except bottles
and corks. We supposed he had now eased his mind, and told
the worst he knew of the cook; but, a day or two afterwards,
his conscience sustained a new twinge, and he disclosed how
she had a little girl, who, early every morning, took away our
bread ; and also how he himself had been suborned to main-
tain the milkman in coals. In two or three days more, I was
informed by the authorities of his having led to the discovery
of sirloins of beef among the kitchen-stuff, and sheets in the
rag-bag. A little while afterwards, he broke out in an entirely
new direction, and confessed to a knowledge of burglarious
intentions as to our premises, on the part of the pot-boy, who
was immediately taken up. I got to be so ashamed of being
such a victim, that I would have given him any money to hold
his tongue, or would have offered a round bribe for his being
permitted to run away. It was an aggravating circumstance
in the case that he had no idea of this, but conceived that he
was making me amends in every new discovery : not to say,
heaping obligations on my head.

At last I ran away myself, whenever I saw an emissary of
the police approaching with some new intelligence ; and lived
a stealthy life until he was tried and ordered to be transported.
Even then he couldn't be quiet, but was always writing us
letters ; and wanted so much to see Dora before he went away,
that Dora went to visit him, and fainted when she found her-
self inside the iron bars. In short, I had no peace of my life
until he was expatriated, and made (as I afterwards heard) a
shepherd of, " up the country " somewhere ; I have no geo-
graphical idea where.



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 279

All this led me into some serious reflections, and presented
our mistakes in a new aspect; as I could not help communi-
cating to Dora one evening, in spite of my tenderness for her.

" My love," said I, " it is very painful to me to think that
our want of system and management, involves not only our-
selves (which we have got used to), but other people."

"You have been silent for a long time, and now you are
going to be cross ! " said Dora.

"No my dear, indeed! Let me explain to you what I
mean."

" I think I don't want to know," said Dora.

"But I want you to know, my love. Put Jip down."

Dora put his nose to mine, and said " Boh ! " to drive my
seriousness away ; but, not succeeding, ordered him into his
Pagoda, and sat looking at me, with her hands folded, and a
most resigned little expression of countenance.

" The fact is, my dear," I began, " there is contagion in us.
We infect every one about us."

I might have gone on in this figurative manner, if Dora's
face had not admonished me that she was wondering with all
her might whether I was going to propose any new kind of
vaccination, or other medical remedy, for this unwholesome
state of ours. Therefore I checked myself, and made my
meaning plainer.

"It is not merely, my pet," said I, "that we lose money
and comfort, and even temper sometimes, by not learning to
be more careful ; but that we incur the serious responsibility
of spoiling every one who comes into our service, or has any
dealings with us. I begin to be afraid that the fault is not
entirely on one side, but that these people all turn out ill
because we don't turn out very well ourselves."

"Oh, what an accusation," exclaimed Dora, opening her
eyes wide, " to say that you ever saw me take gold watches !
Oh!"

"My dearest," I remonstrated, "don't talk preposterous
nonsense ! Who has made the least allusion to gold
watches ? "

"You did," returned Dora. "You know you did. You said
I hadn't turned out well, and compared me to him."



280 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

"To whom?" I asked.

"To the page," sobbed Dora. "Oh, you cruel fellow, to
compare your affectionate wife to a transported page ! Why
didn't you tell me your opinion of me before we were
married? Why didn't you say, you hard-hearted thing,
that you were convinced I was worse than a transported
page ? " Oh, what a dreadful opinion to have of me ! Oh,
my goodness ! "

" Now Dora, my love," I returned, gently trying to remove
the handkerchief she pressed to her eyes, "this is not only
very ridiculous of you, but very wrong. In the first place,
it's not true."

"You always said he was a story-teller," sobbed Dora.
" And now you say the same of me ! Oh, what shall I do !
What shall I do ! »

"My darling girl," I retorted, "I really must entreat you
to be reasonable, and listen to what I did say, and do say. My
dear Dora, unless we learn to do our duty to those whom we
employ, they will never learn to do their duty to us. I am
afraid we present opportunities to people to do wrong, that
never ought to be presented. Even if we were as lax as we
are, in all our arrangements, by choice — which we are not —
even if we liked it, and found it agreeable to be so — which we
don't — I am persuaded we should have no 'right to go on in
this way. We are positively corrupting people. We are
bound to think of that. I can't help thinking of it, Dora. It
is a reflection I am unable to dismiss, and it sometimes makes
me very uneasy. There, dear, that's all. Come now. Don't
be foolish ! "

Dora would not allow me, for a long time, to remove the
handkerchief. She sat sobbing and murmuring behind it,
that, if I was uneasy, why had I ever been married ? Why
hadn't I said, even the day before we went to church, that I
knew I should be uneasy, and I would rather not ? If I
couldn't bear her, why didn't I send her away to her aunts at
Putney, or to Julia Mills in India ? Julia would be glad to
see her, and would not call her a transported page; Julia
never had called her anything of the sort. In short, Dora
was so afflicted, and so afflicted me by being in that condition,





that I felt it was of no use repeating this kind of effort, though
never so mildly, and I must take some other course.

What other course was left to take ! To " form her mind ! "
This was a common phrase of words which had a fair and
promising sound, and I resolved to form Dora's mind.

I began immediately. When Dora was very childish, and
I would have infinitely preferred to humor her, I tried to
be grave — and disconcerted her, and myself too. I talked to
her on the subjects which, occupied my thoughts ; and I read
Shakespeare to her — and fatigued her to the last degree. I
accustomed myself to giving her, as it were quite casually,
little scraps of useful information, or sound opinion — and she
started from them when I let them off, as if they had been
crackers. No matter how incidentally or naturally I endeav-
ored to form my little wife's mind, I could not help seeing that
she always had an instinctive perception of what I was about,
and became a prey to the keenest apprehensions. In partic-
ular, it was clear to me, that she thought Shakespeare a terrible
fellow. The formation went on very slowly.

I pressed Traddles into the service without his knowledge ;
and whenever he came to see us, exploded my mines upon him
for the edification of Dora at second hand. The amount of
practical wisdom I bestowed upon Traddles in this manner
was immense, and of the best quality ; but it had no other
effect upon Dora than to depress her spirits, and make her
always nervous with the dread that it would be her turn next.
I found myself in the condition of a schoolmaster, a trap, a
pitfall; of always playing spider to Dora's fly, and always
pouncing out of my hole to her infinite disturbance.

Still, looking forward through this intermediate stage, to
the time when there should be a perfect sympathy between
Dora and me, and when I should have " formed her mind " to
my entire satisfaction, I persevered, even for months. Find-
ing at last, however, that, although I had been all this time a
very porcupine or hedgehog, bristling all over with determina-
tion, I had effected nothing, it began to occur to me that
perhaps Dora's mind was already formed.

On farther consideration this appeared so likely, that I
abandoned my scheme, which had had a more promising



282 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

appearance in words than in action ; resolving henceforth to
be satisfied with my child-wife, and to try to change her into
nothing else by any process. I was heartily tired of being
sagacious and prudent by myself, and of seeing my darling
under restraint ; so, I bought a pretty pair of ear-rings for her,
and a collar for Jip, and went home one day to make myself
agreeable.

Dora was delighted with the little presents, and kissed me
joyfully ; but, there was a shadow between us, however slight,
and I had made up my mind that it should not be there. If
there must be such a shadow anywhere, I would keep it for
the future in my own breast.

I sat down by my wife on the sofa, and put the ear-rings in
her ears ; and then I told her that I feared we had not been
quite as good company lately as we used to be, and that the fault
was mine. Which I sincerely felt, and which indeed it was.

" The truth is, Dora, my life," I said ; " I have been trying
to be wise."

"And to make me wise too," said Dora, timidly. "Haven't
you, Doady ? "

I nodded assent to the pretty inquiry of the raised eyebrows,
and kissed the parted lips.

" It's of not a bit of use," said Dora, shaking her head, until
the ear-rings rang again. "You know what a little thing
I am, and what I wanted you to call me from the first. If
you can't do so, I am afraid you'll never like me. Are you
sure you don't think, sometimes, it would have been better to
have — "

" Done what, my dear ? " For she made no effort to proceed.

" Nothing ! " said Dora.

" Nothing ? " I repeated.

She put her arms round my neck, and laughed, and called
herself by her favorite name of a goose, and hid her face on my
shoulder in such a profusion of curls that it was quite a task
to clear them away and see it.

"Don't I think it would have been better to have done
nothing, than to have tried to form my little wife's mind ? "
said I, laughing at myself. " Is that the question ? Yes,
indeed, I do."





" Is that what you have been trying ? " cried Dora. " Oh,
what a shocking boy ! "

" But I shall never try any more," said I. " For I love her
dearly as she is."

" Without a story — really ? " inquired Dora, creeping closer
to me.

"Why should I seek to change," said I, "what has been
so precious to me for so long ! You never can show better
than as your own natural self, my sweet Dora ; and we'll try
no conceited experiments, but go back to our old way, and be
happy."

" And be happy ! " returned Dora. " Yes ! All day ! And
you won't mind things going a tiny morsel wrong, some-
times?"

" No, no," said I. " We must do the best we can."

"And you won't tell me, any more, that we make other
people bad," coaxed Dora; "will you? Because you know
it's so dreadfully cross."

" No, no," said I.

"It's better for me to be stupid. than uncomfortable, isn't
it ? " said Dora.

" Better to be naturally Dora than anything else in the
world."

" In the world ! Ah Doady, it's a large place ! "

She shook her head, turned her delighted bright eyes up to
mine, kissed me, broke into a merry laugh, and sprang away
to put on Jip's new collar.

So ended my last attempt to make any change in Dora.
I had been unhappy in trying it ; I could not endure my own
solitary wisdom; I could not reconcile it with her former
appeal to me as my child-wife. I resolved to do what I could,
in a quiet way, to improve our proceedings myself; but I
foresaw that my utmost would be very little, or I must de-
generate into the spider again, and be forever lying in wait.

And the shadow I have mentioned, that was not to be
between us any more, but was to rest wholly on my own
heart ? How did that fall ?

The old unhappy feeling pervaded my life. It was deep-
ened, if it were changed at all; but it was as undefined as



284 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

ever, and addressed me like a strain of sorrowful music
faintly heard in the night. I loved my wife dearly, and I
was happy ; but the happiness I had vaguely anticipated, once,
was not the happiness I enjoyed, and there was always some-
thing wanting.

In fulfilment of the compact I have made with myself, to
reflect my mind on this paper, I again examine it, closely, and
bring its secrets to the light. What I missed, I still regarded
— I always regarded — as something that had been a dream
of my youthful fancy ; that was incapable of realization ; that
I was now discovering to be so, with some natural pain, as all
men did. But, that it would have been better for me if my wife
could have helped me more, and shared the many thoughts in
which I had no partner ; and that this might have been ; I knew.

Between these two irreconcilable conclusions : the one,
that what I felt, was general and unavoidable ; the other,
that it was particular to me, and might have been different ;
I balanced curiously, with no distinct sense of their opposition
to each other. When I thought of the airy dreams of youth
that are incapable of realization, I thought of the better state
preceding manhood that I had outgrown ; and then the con-
tented days with Agnes, in the dear old house, a^rose before
me, like spectres of the dead, that might have some renewal in
another world, but never never more could be reanimated here.

Sometimes, the speculation came into my thoughts, What
might have happened, or what would have happened, if Dora
and I had never known each other ? But, she was so in-
corporated with my existence, that it was the idlest of all
fancies, and would soon rise out of my reach and sight, like
gossamer floating in the air.

I always loved her. What I am describing, slumbered, and
half awoke, and slept again, in the innermost recesses of my
mind. There was no evidence of it in me ; I know of no
influence it had in anything I said or did. I bore the weight
of all our little cares, and all my projects ; Dora held the
pens ; and we both felt that our shares were adjusted as the
case required. She was truly fond of me, and proud of me ;
and when Agnes wrote a few earnest words in her letters to
Dora, of the pride and interest with which my old friends



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 285

heard of my growing reputation, and read my book as if they
heard me speaking its contents, Dora read them out to me
with tears of joy in her bright eyes, and said I was a dear
old clever, famous boy.

"The first mistaken impulse of an undisciplined heart/'
These words of Mrs. Strong's were constantly recurring to me,
at this time; were almost always present to my mind. I
awoke with them, often, in the night; I remember to have
even read them, in dreams, inscribed upon the walls of houses.
For I knew, now, that my own heart was undisciplined when
it first loved Dora; and that if it had been disciplined, it
never could have felt, when we were married, what it had
felt in its secret experience.

" There can be no disparity in marriage, like unsuitability
of mind and purpose." Those words I remembered too. I
had endeavored to adapt Dora to myself, and found it im-
practicable. It remained for me to adapt myself to Dora;
to share with her what I could, and be happy ; to bear on my
own shoulders what I must, and be happy still. This was the
discipline to which I tried to bring my heart, when I began to
think. It made my second year much happier than my first ;
and, what was better still, made Dora's life all sunshine.

But, as that year wore on, Dora was not strong. I had
hoped that lighter hands than mine would help to mould her
character, and that a baby- smile upon her breast might change
my child-wife to a woman. It was not to be. The spirit flut-
tered for a moment on the threshold of its little prison, and,
unconscious of captivity, took wing.

" When I can run about again, as I used to do, aunt," said
Dora, "I shall make Jip race. He is getting quite slow and lazy."

" I suspect, my dear," said my aunt, quietly working by her
side, " he has a worse disorder than that. Age, Dora."

" Do you think he is old ? " said Dora, astonished. " Oh,
how strange it seems that Jip should be old ! "

" It's a complaint we are all liable to, Little One, as we get
on in life," said my aunt, cheerfully ; " I don't feel more free
from it than I used to be, I assure you."

"But Jip," said Dora, looking at him with compassion,
" even little Jip ! Oh, poor fellow ! "



286 TEE PER SON AL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" I dare say he'll last a long time yet, Blossom," said my
aunt, patting Dora on the cheek, as she leaned out of her
couch to look at Jip, who responded by standing on his hind
legs, and baulking himself in various asthmatic attempts to
scramble up by the head and shoulders. "He must have a
piece of flannel in his house this winter, and I shouldn't won-
der if he came out quite fresh again, with the flowers in the
spring. Bless the little dog!" exclaimed my aunt, "if he had
as many lives as a cat, and was on the point of losing 'em all,
he'd bark at me with his last breath, I believe ! "

Dora had helped him up on the sofa ; where he really was
defying my aunt to such a furious extent, that he couldn't
keep straight, but barked himself sideways. The more my
aunt looked at him, the more he reproached her ; for, she had
lately taken to spectacles, and for some inscrutable reason he
considered the glasses personal.

Dora made him lie down by her, with a good deal of persua-
sion ; and when he was quiet, drew one of his long ears through
and through her hand, repeating thoughtfully, " Even little Jip !
Oh, poor fellow ! "

" His lungs are good enough," said my aunt gaily, " and his
dislikes are not at all feeble. He has a good many years be-
fore him, no doubt. But if you want a dog to race with,
Little Blossom, he has lived too well for that, and I'll give you
one."

"Thank you, aunt," said Dora, faintly. "But don't,
please ! "

" No ? " said my aunt, taking off her spectacles.

" I couldn't have any other dog but Jip," said Dora. " It
would be so unkind to Jip! Besides, I couldn't be such
friends with any other dog but Jip ; because he wouldn't have
known me before I was married, and wouldn't have barked at
Doady when he first came to our house. I couldn't care for
any other dog but Jip, I am afraid, aunt."

"To be sure!" said my aunt, patting her cheek again.
" You are right."

" You are not offended," said Dora. " Are you ? "

" Why, what a sensitive pet it is ! " cried my aunt, bending
over her affectionately. " To think that I could be offended ! "



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 287

"No, no, I didn't really think so," returned Dora; "but I
am a little tired, and it made me silly for a moment — I am
always a silly little thing, you know ; but it made me more
silly — to talk about Jip. He has known me in all that has
happened to me, haven't you, Jip ? And I couldn't bear to
slight him, because he was a little altered — could I, Jip ? "

Jip nestled closer to his mistress, and lazily licked her hand.

" You are not so old, Jip, are you, that you'll leave your
mistress yet," said Dora. " We may keep one another com-
pany, a little longer ! "

My pretty Dora ! When she came down to dinner on the
ensuing Sunday, and was so glad to see old Traddles (who al-
ways dined with us on Sunday), we thought she would be
" running about as she used to do," in a few days. But they
said, wait a few days more ; and then, wait a few days more ;
and still she neither ran nor walked. She looked very pretty,
and was very merry ; but the little feet that used to be so nim-
ble when they danced round Jip, were dull and motionless.

I began to carry her down stairs every morning, and up
stairs every night. She would clasp me round the neck and
laugh, the while, as if I did it for a wager. Jip would bark
and caper round us, and go on before, and look back on the
landing, breathing short, to see that we were coming. My
aunt, the best and most cheerful of nurses, would trudge after
us, a moving mass of shawls and pillows. Mr. Dick would
not have relinquished his post of candle-bearer to any one
alive. Traddles would be often at the bottom of the staircase,
looking on, and taking charge of sportive messages from Dora
to the dearest girl in the w r orld. We made quite a gay proces-
sion of it, and my child-wife was the gayest there.

But, sometimes, when I took her up, and felt that she was
lighter in my arms, a dead blank feeling came upon me, as if
I were approaching to some frozen region yet unseen, that
numbed my life. I avoided the recognition of this feeling by
any name, or by any communing with myself ; until one night,
when it was very strong upon me, and my aunt had left her
with a parting cry of u Good night, Little Blossom," I sat down
at my desk alone, and cried to think, what a fatal name it
was, and how the blossom withered in its bloom upon the tree !



288 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE



CHAPTER XX.

I AM INVOLVED IX MYSTERY.

I received one morning by the post, the following letter,
dated Canterbury, and addressed to me at Doctors' Commons,
which I read with some surprise :

" My dear Sir,

" Circumstances beyond my individual control have,
for a considerable lapse of time, effected a severance of that
intimacy which, in the limited opportunities conceded to me
in the midst of my professional duties, of contemplating the
scenes and events of the past, tinged by the prismatic hues of
memory, has ever afforded me, as it ever must continue to
afford, gratifying emotions of no common description. This
fact, my dear sir, combined with the distinguished elevation
to which your talents have raised you, deters me from pre-
suming to aspire to the liberty of addressing the companion of
my youth, by the familiar appellation of Copperfield ! It is
sufficient to know that the name to which I do myself the
honor to refer, will ever be treasured among the muniments
of our house (I allude to the archives connected with our
former lodgers, preserved by Mrs. Micawber), with sentiments
of personal esteem amounting to affection.

" It is not for one situated, through his original errors and
a fortuitous combination of unpropitious events, as is the
foundered Bark (if he may be allowed to assume so maritime
a denomination), who now takes up the pen to address you —
it is not, I repeat, for one so circumstanced, to adopt the lan-
guage of compliment, or of congratulation. That, he leaves
to abler and to purer hands.

" If your more important avocations should admit of your
ever tracing these imperfect characters thus far — which may
be, or may not be, as circumstances arise — you will naturally



OF DAVID COPPEEFIELD. 289

inquire by what object am I influenced, then, in inditing the
present missive ? Allow me to say that I fully defer to the
reasonable character of that inquiry, and proceed to develop
it; premising that it is not an object of a pecuniary nature.

"Without more directly referring to any latent ability that
may possibly exist on my part, of wielding the thunderbolt,
or directing the devouring and avenging flame in any quarter,
I may be permitted to observe, in passing, that my brightest
visions are for ever dispelled — that my peace is shattered
and my power of enjoyment destroyed — that my heart is
no longer in the right place — and that I no more walk erect
before my fellow man. The canker is in the flower. The cup
is bitter to the brim. The worm is at his work, and will soon
dispose of his victim. The sooner the better. But I will not
digress.

"Placed in a mental position of peculiar painfulness, beyond
the assuaging reach even of Mrs. Micawber's influence, though
exercised in the tripartite character of woman, wife, and mother,
it is my intention to fly from myself for a short period, and
devote a respite of eight-and-forty-hours to revisiting some
metropolitan scenes of past enjoyment. Among other havens
of domestic tranquillity and peace of mind, my feet will natu-
rally tend towards the King's Bench Prison. In stating that
I shall be (D.V.) on the outside of the south wall of that place
of incarceration on civil process, the day after to-morrow, at seven
in the evening, precisely, my object in this epistolary commu-
nication is accomplished.

" T do not feel warranted in soliciting my former friend Mr.
Copperfield, or my former friend Mr. Thomas Traddles of the
Inner Temple, if that gentleman is still existent and forth-
coming, to condescend to meet me, and renew (so far as may
be) our past relations of the olden time. I confine myself to
throwing out the observation, that, at the hour and place I have
indicated, may be found such ruined vestiges as yet

" Eemain,
"Of
"A

"Fallen Tower,

" WlLKIJSTS MlCAWBER.
VOL. II — 19



290 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

"P.S. It may be advisable to superadd to the above, the
statement that Mrs. Micawber is not in confidential possession
of my intentions."

I read the letter over several times. Making due allowance
for Mr. Micawber's lofty style of composition, and for the
extraordinary relish with which he sat down and wrote long
letters on all possible and impossible occasions, I still believed
that something important lay hidden at the bottom of this
roundabout communication. I put it down, to think about
it ; and took it up again, to read it once more ; and was still
pursuing it, when Traddles found me in the height of my per-
plexity. V

" My dear fellow," said I, " I never was better pleased to see
you. You come to give me the benefit of your sober judgment
at a most opportune time. I have received a very singular
letter, Traddles, from Mr. Micawber."

"No ? " cried Traddles. " You don't say so ? And I have
received one from Mrs. Micawber !"

With that, Traddles, who was flushed with walking, and
whose hair, under the combined effects of exercise and excite-
ment, stood on end as if he saw a cheerful ghost, produced his
letter and made an exchange with me. I watched him into
the heart of Mr. Micawber's letter, and returned the elevation
of eyebrows with which he said " c Wielding the thunderbolt,
or directing the devouring and avenging flame ! ' Bless me,
Copperfield ! " — and then entered on the perusal of Mrs.
Micawber's epistle.

It ran thus :

" My best regards to Mr. Thomas Traddles, and if he should
still remember one who formerly had the happiness of being
well acquainted with him, may I beg a few moments of his
leisure time ? I assure Mr. T. T. that I would not intrude
upon his kindness, were I in any other position than on the
confines of distraction.

" Though harrowing to myself to mention, the alienation of
Mr. Micawber (formerly so domesticated) from his wife and
family, is the cause of my addressing my unhappy appeal to





Mr. Traddles, and soliciting his best indulgence. Mr. T. can
form no adequate idea of the change in Mr. Micawber's con-
duct, of his wildness, of his violence. It has gradually aug-
mented, until it assumes the appearance of aberration of intel-
lect. Scarcely a day passes, I assure Mr. Traddles, on which
some paroxysm does not take place. Mr. T. will not require
me to depict my feelings, when I inform him that I have
become accustomed to hear Mr. Micawber assert that he has
sold himself to the D. Mystery and secrecy have long been
his principal characteristic, have long replaced unlimited con-
fidence. The slightest provocation, even being asked if there
is anything he would prefer for dinner, causes him to express
a wish for a separation. Last night on being childishly solic-
ited for twopence, to buy ' lemon-stunners ; — a local sweetmeat
— he presented an oyster-knife at the twins !

" I entreat Mr. Traddles to bear with me in entering into
these details. Without them, Mr. T. would indeed find it
difficult to form the faintest conception of my heart-rending
situation.

"May I now venture to confide to Mr. T. the purport of
my letter ? Will he now allow me to throw myself on his
friendly consideration ? Oh yes, for I know his heart !

" The quick eye of affection is not easily blinded, when of
the female sex. Mr. Micawber is going to London. Though
he studiously concealed his hand, this morning before break-
fast, in writing the direction-card which he attached to the
little brown valise of happier days, the eagle-glance of matri-
monial anxiety detected d, o, n, distinctly traced. The West-
End destination of the coach, is the Golden Cross. Dare I
fervently implore Mr. T. to see my misguided husband, and to
reason with him ? Dare I ask Mr. T. to endeavor to step in
between Mr. Micawber and his agonized family ? Oh no, for
that would be too much !

" If Mr. Copperfield should yet remember one unknown to
fame, will Mr. T. take charge of my unalterable regards and
similar entreaties ? In any case, he will have the benevolence
to consider this communication strictly private, and on no account
whatever to be alluded to, however distantly, in the presence of
Mr. Micawber. If Mr. T. should ever reply to it (which I



292 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

cannot bnt feel to be most improbable), a letter addressed to
M. E., Post Office, Canterbury, will be fraught with less pain-
ful consequences than any addressed immediately to one, who
subscribes herself, in extreme distress,

" Mr. Thomas Traddles's respectful friend and suppliant,

"Emma Micawber."

" What do you think of that letter ? " said Traddles, casting
his eyes upon me, when I had read it twice.

"What do you think of the other ? " said I. Eor he was
still reading it with knitted brows.

"I think that the two together, Copperfield," replied
Traddles, "mean more than Mr. and Mrs. Micawber usually
mean in their correspondence — but I don't know what. They
are both written in good faith, I have no doubt, and without
any collusion. Poor thing ! " he was now alluding to Mrs.
Micawber's letter, and we were standing side by side compar-
ing the two; "it will be a charity to write to her, at all
events, and tell her that we will not fail to see Mr. Micawber."

I acceded to this, the more readily, because I now reproached
myself with having treated her former letter rather lightly.
It had set me thinking a good deal at the time, as I have men-
tioned in its place ; but my absorption in my own affairs, my
experience of the family, and my hearing nothing more, had
gradually ended in my dismissing the subject. I had often
thought of the Micawbers, but chiefly to wonder what " pecun-
iary liabilities" they were establishing in Canterbury, and
to recall how shy Mr. Micawber was of me when he became
clerk to Uriah Heep.

However, I now wrote a comforting letter to Mrs. Micawber,
in our joint names, and we both signed it. As we walked
into town to post it, Traddles and I held a long conference,
and launched into a number of speculations, which I need not
repeat. We took my aunt into our counsels in the afternoon ;
but our only decided conclusion was, that we would be very
punctual in keeping Mr. Micawber's appointment.

Although we appeared at the stipulated place a quarter of
an hour before the time, we found Mr. Micawber already there.
He was standing with his arms folded, over against the wall,





looking at the spikes on the top, with a sentimental expres-
sion, as if they were the interlacing boughs of trees that had
shaded him in his youth.

When we accosted him, his manner was something more
confused, and something less genteel than of yore. He had
relinquished his legal suit of black for the purposes of this
excursion, and wore the old surtout and tights, but not quite
with the old air. He gradually picked up more and more of
it as we conversed with him ; but, his very eye-glass seemed
to hang less easily, and his shirt collar, though still of the old
formidable dimensions, rather drooped.

" Gentlemen ! " said Mr. Micawber, after the first salutations,
"you are friends in need, and friends indeed. Allow me to
offer my inquiries with reference to the physical welfare of
Mrs. Copperfield in esse, and Mrs. Traddles in posse, — pre-
suming, that is to say, that my friend Mr. Traddles is not
yet united to the object of his affections, for weal and for
woe."

We acknowledged his politeness, and made suitable replies.
He then directed our attention to the wall, and was beginning
"I assure you gentlemen," when I ventured to object to that
ceremonious form of address, and to beg that he would speak
to us in the old way.

"My dear Copperfield," he returned, pressing my hand,
"your cordiality overpowers me. This reception of a shattered
fragment of the Temple once called Man — if I may be per-
mitted so to express myself — bespeaks a heart that is an
honor to our common nature. I was about to observe that I
again behold the serene spot where some of the happiest hours
of my existence fleeted by."

"Made so, I am sure, by Mrs. Micawber," said I. "I hope
she is well ? "*

" Thank you," returned Mr. Micawber, whose face clouded
at this reference, "she is but so-so. And this," said Mr.
Micawber, nodding his head sorrowfully, "is the Bench!
Where, for the first time in many revolving years, the over-
whelming pressure of pecuniary liabilities was not proclaimed,
from day to day, by importunate voices declining to vacate
the passage ; where there was no knocker on the door for any



294 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

creditor to appeal to ; where personal service of process was
not required, and detainers were merely lodged at the gate !
Gentlemen/ 5 said Mr. Micawber, "when the shadow of that
ironwork on the summit of the brick structure has been re-
flected on the gravel of the Parade, I have seen my children
thread the mazes of the intricate pattern, avoiding the dark
marks. I have been familiar with every stone in the place.
If I betray weakness, you will know how to excuse me."

"We have all got on in life since then, Mr. Micawber,"
said I.

" Mr. Copperfield," returned Mr. Micawber, bitterly, u when
I was an inmate of that retreat I could look my fellow man in
the face, and punch his head if he offended me. My fellow
man and myself are no longer on those glorious terms ! "

Turning from the building in a downcast manner, Mr.
Micawber accepted my proffered arm on one side, and the
proffered arm of Traddles on the other, and walked away
between us.

" There are some landmarks," observed Mr. Micawber, look-
ing fondly back over his shoulder, " on the road to the tomb,
which, but for the impiety of the aspiration, a man would
wish never to have passed. Such is the Bench in my chequered
career."

" Oh, you are in low spirits, Mr. Micawber," said Traddles.

" I am, sir," interposed Mr. Micawber.

" I hope," said Traddles, " it is not because you have con-
ceived a dislike to the law — for I am a lawyer myself, you
know."

Mr. Micawber answered not a word.

" How is our friend Heep, Mr. Micawber," said I, after a
silence.

"My dear Copperfield," returned Mr. Micawber, bursting
into a state of much excitement, and turning pale, " if you ask
after my employer as your friend, I am sorry for it j if you
ask after him as my friend, I sardonically smile at it. In
whatever capacity you ask after my employer, I beg, without
offence to you, to limit my reply to this — that whatever his
state of health may be, his appearance is foxy : not to say
diabolical. You will allow me, as a private individual, to








decline pursuing a subject which has lashed me to the utmost
verge of desperation in my professional capacity."

I expressed my regret for having innocently touched upon
a theme that roused him so much. "May I ask," said I,
"without any hazard of repeating the mistake, how my old
friends Mr. and Miss Wickfield are ? "

"Miss Wickfield," said Mr. Micawber, now turning red,
" is, as she always is, a pattern, and a bright example. My
dear Copperfield, she is the only starry spot in a miserable
existence. My respect for that young lady, my admiration of
her character, my devotion to her for her love and truth, and
goodness ! — Take me," said Mr. Micawber, " down a turning,
for, upon my soul, in my present state of mind I am not equal
to this ! "

We wheeled him off into a narrow street, where he took out
his pocket-handkerchief, and stood with his back to a wall. If
I looked as gravely at him as Traddles did, he must have
found our company by no means inspiriting.

"It is my fate," said Mr. Micawber, unfeignedly sobbing,
but doing even that, with a shadow of the old expression of
doing something genteel ; " it is my fate, gentlemen, that the
finer feelings of our nature have become reproaches to me.
My homage to Miss Wickfield, is a flight of arrows in my
bosom. You had better leave me, if you please, to walk the
earth as a vagabond. The worm will settle my business in
double-quick time."

Without attending to this invocation, we stood by, until he
put up his pocket-handkerchief, pulled up his shirt-collar, and,
to delude any person in the neighborhood who might have
been observing him, hummed a tune with his hat very much
on one side. I then mentioned — not knowing what might be
lost if we lost sight of him yet — that it would give me great
pleasure to introduce him to my aunt, if he would ride out to
Highgate, where a bed was at his service.

" You shall make us a glass of your own punch, Mr. Micaw-
ber," said I, " and forget whatever you have on your mind, in
pleasanter reminiscences."

" Or, if confiding anything to friends will be more likely to



296 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE






relieve you, you shall impart it to us, Mr. Micawber," said
Trad dies, prudently.

" Gentlemen/' returned Mr. Micawber, " do with me as you
will ! I am a straw upon the service of the deep, and am
tossed in all directions by the elephants — I beg your pardon ;
I should have said the elements."

We walked on, arm-in-arm, again ; found the coach in the
act of starting ; and arrived at Highgate without encountering
any difficulties by the way. I was very uneasy and very
uncertain in my mind what to say or do for the best — so was
Traddles, evidently. Mr. Micawber was for the most part
plunged into deep gloom. He occasionally made an attempt
to smarten himself, and hum the fag-end of a tune ; but his
relapses into profound melancholy were only made the more
impressive by the mockery of a hat exceedingly on one side,
and a shirt-collar pulled up to his eyes.

We went to my aunt's house rather than to mine, because
of Dora's not being well. My aunt presented herself on
being sent for, and welcomed Mr. Micawber with gracious
cordiality. Mr. Micawber kissed her hand, retired to the
window, and pulling out his pocket-handkerchief, had a mental
wrestle with himself.

Mr. Dick was at home. He was by nature so exceedingly
compassionate of any one who seemed to be ill at ease, and
was so quick to find any such person out, that he shook hands
with Mr. Micawber, at least half-a-dozen times in five minutes.
To Mr. Micawber, in his trouble, this warmth, on the part of
a stranger, was so extremely touching, that he could only say,
on the occasion of each successive shake, " My dear sir, you
overpower me!" Which gratified Mr. Dick so much, that he
went at it again with greater vigor than before.

"The friendliness of this gentleman," said Mr. Micawber
to my aunt, " if you will allow me, ma'am, to cull a figure of
speech from the vocabulary of our coarser national sports —
floors me. To a man, who is struggling with a complicated
burden of perplexity and disquiet, such a reception is trying,
I assure you."

" My friend Mr. Dick," replied my aunt, proudly, " is not



common man."








"That I am convinced of," said Mr. Micawber. "My dear
sir ! " for Mr. Dick was shaking hands with him again ; "lam
deeply sensible of your cordiality ! "

" How do you find yourself ? " said Mr. Dick, with an
anxious look.

" Indifferent, my dear sir," returned Mr. Micawber, sighing.

" You must keep up your spirits," said Mr. Dick, " and
make yourself as comfortable as possible." .

Mr. Micawber was quite overcome by these friendly words,
and by finding Mr. Dick's hand again within his own. " It
has been my lot," he observed, "to meet, in the diversified
panorama of human existence, with an occasional oasis, but
never with one so green, so gushing, as the present ! "

At another time I should have been amused by this ; but I
felt that we were all constrained and uneasy, and I watched
Mr. Micawber so anxiously, in his vacillations between an
evident disposition to reveal something, and a counter-dispo-
sition to reveal nothing, that I was in a perfect fever. Trad-
dies, sitting on the edge of his chair, with his eyes wide open,
and his hair more emphatically erect than ever, stared by
turns at the ground and at Mr. Micawber, without so much as
attempting to put in a word. My aunt, though I saw that
her shrewdest observation was concentrated on her new guest,
had more useful possession of her wits than either of us;
for she held him in conversation, and made it necessary for
him to talk, whether he liked it or not.

" You are a very old friend of my nephew's, Mr. Micawber,"
said my aunt. " I wish I had had the pleasure of seeing you
before."

" Madam," returned Mr. Micawber, " I wish I had had the
honor of knowing you at an earlier period. I was not always
the wreck you at present behold."

" I hope Mrs. Micawber and your family are well, sir," said
my aunt.

Mr. Micawber inclined his head. "They are as well,
ma'am," he desperately observed, after a pause, "as Aliens
and Outcasts can ever hope to be."

" Lord bless you, sir ! " exclaimed my aunt in her abrupt
way. " What are you talking about ? "



298 THE PERSONAL HISTOBY AND EXPERIENCE

"The subsistence of my family, ma ; am/ ; returned Mr.
Micawber, " trembles in the balance. My employer — "

Here Mr. Micawber provokingly left off ; and began to peel
the lemons that had been under my directions set before him,
together with all the other appliances he used in making punch.

"Your employer, you know," said Mr. Dick, jogging his arm
as a gentle reminder.

"My good sir," returned Mr. Micawber, "you recall me. I
am obliged to you." They shook hands again. "My employer,
ma'am — Mr. Heep — once did me the favor to observe to me,
that if I were not in the receipt of the stipendiary emoluments
appertaining to my engagement with him, I should probably
be a mountebank about the country, swallowing a sword-blade,
and eating the devouring element. For anything that I can
perceive to the contrary, it is still probable that my children
may be reduced to seek a livelihood by personal contortion,
while Mrs. Micawber abets their unnatural feats, by playing
the barrel-organ."

Mr. Micawber, with a random but expressive flourish of his
knife, signified that these performances might be expected to
take place after he was no more ; then resumed his peeling
with a desperate air.

My aunt leaned her elbow on the little round table that she
usually kept beside her, and eyed him attentively. Notwith-
standing the aversion with which I regarded the idea of
entrapping him into any disclosure he was not prepared to
make voluntarily, I should have taken him up at this point,
but for the strange proceedings in which I saw T him engaged ;
whereof his putting the lemon-peel into the kettle, the sugar
into the snuffer-tray, the spirit into the empty jug, and confi-
dently attempting to pour boiling water out of a candlestick,
were among the most remarkable. I saw that a crisis was at
hand, and it came. He clattered all his means and implements
together, rose from his chair, pulled out his pocket-handker-
chief, and burst into tears.

" My dear Copperfield," said Mr. Micawber, behind his hand-
kerchief, "this is an occupation, of all others, requiring an
untroubled mind, and self-respect. I cannot perform it. It is
out of the question."



OF DAVID COPPEUFIELD. 299

" Mr. Micawber," said I, " what is the matter ? Pray speak
out. You are among friends."

"Among friends, sir!" repeated Mr. Micawber; and all he
had reserved came breaking out of him. " Good heavens, it is
principally because I am among friends that my state of mind
is what it is. What is the matter, gentlemen ? What is not
the matter? Villany is the matter; baseness is the matter;
deception, fraud, conspiracy, are the matter ; and the name of
the whole atrocious mass is — Heep ! "

My aunt clapped her hands, and we all started up as if we
were possessed.

" The struggle is over ! " said Mr. Micawber, violently
gesticulating with his pocket-handkerchief, and fairly striking
out from time to time with both arms, as if he were swimming
under superhuman difficulties. "I will lead this life no longer.
I am a wretched being, cut off from everything that makes life
tolerable. I have been under a Taboo in that infernal scoun-
drel's service. Give me back my wife, give me back my family,
substitute Micawber for the petty wretch who walks about in
the boots at present on my feet, and call upon me to swallow a
sword to-morrow, and Pll do it. With an appetite ! n

I never saw a man so hot in my life. I tried to calm him,
that we might come to something rational ; but he got hotter
and hotter, and wouldn't hear a word.

a Fll put my hand in no man's hand," said Mr. Micawber,
gasping, puffing, and sobbing, to that degree, that he was like
a man fighting with cold water, "until I have — blown to
fragments — the — a — detestable — serpent — Heep ! Fll par-
take of no one's hospitality, until I have — a — moved Mount
Vesuvius — to eruption — on — a — the abandoned rascal —
Heep ! Eef reshment — a — underneath this roof — particu-
larly punch — would — a — choke me — unless — I had — pre-
viously — choked the eyes — out of the head — a — of —
interminable cheat, and liar — Heep ! I — a — Fll know
nobody — and — a — say nothing — and — a — live nowhere —
until I have crushed — to — a — undiscoverable atoms — the
— transcendent and immortal hypocrite and perjurer — Heep ! "

I really had some fear of Mr. Micawber's dying on the spot.
The manner in which he struggled through these inarticulate



300 THE PEE SON AL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

sentences, and, whenever he found himself getting near the
name of Heep, fought his way on to it, dashed at it in a faint-
ing state, and brought it out with a vehemence little less than
marvellous, was frightful ; but now, when he sank into a chair,
steaming, and looked at us, with every possible color in his
face that had no business there, and an endless procession of
lumps following one another in hot haste up his throat,
whence they seemed to shoot into his forehead, he had the
appearance of being in the last extremity. I would have gone
to his assistance, but he waived me off, and wouldn't hear a
word.

" No, Copperfield ! — No communication — a — until — Miss
Wickfield — a — redress from wrongs inflicted by consummate
scoundrel — Heep!" (I am quite convinced he could not
have uttered three words, but for the amazing energy with
which this word inspired him A^hen he felt it coming.) " Invio-
lable secret — a — from the whole world — a — no exceptions

— this day week — a — at breakfast time — a — everybody
present — including aunt — a — and extremely friendly gentle-
man — to be at the hotel at Canterbury — a — where — Mrs.
Micawber and myself — Auld Lang Syne in chorus — and — a

— will expose intolerable ruffian — Heep ! No more to say — a

— or listen to persuasion — go immediately — not capable —
a — bear society — upon the track of devoted and doomed
traitor — Heep ! "

With this last repetition of the magic word that had kept
him going at all, and in which he surpassed all his previous
efforts, Mr. Micawber rushed out of the house ; leaving us in
a state of excitement, hope, and wonder, that reduced us to a
condition little better than his own. But even then his
passion for writing letters was too strong to be resisted ; for
while we were yet in the height of our excitement, hope, and
wonder, the following pastoral note was brought to me from a
neighboring tavern, at which he had called to write it : —

" Most secret and confidential.^
"My dear Sir,

"I beg to be allowed to convey, through you, my
apologies to your excellent aunt for my late excitement. An



OF DAVID GOPPEBFIELD. 301

explosion of a smouldering volcano long suppressed, was the
result of an internal contest more easily conceived than
described.

"I trust I rendered tolerably intelligible my appointment,
for the morning of this day week, at the house of public
entertainment at Canterbury, where Mrs. Micawber and myself
had once the honor of uniting our voices to yours, in the well-
known strain of the Immortal exciseman nurtured beyond the
Tweed.

" The duty done, and act of reparation performed, which can
alone enable me to contemplate my fellow mortal, I shall be
known no more. I shall simply require to be deposited in
that place of universal resort, where

" ' Each in his narrow cell for ever laid,

" ' The rude forefathers of the hamlet sleep/

" — With the plain Inscription,

"Wilkins Micawber."



302 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE






CHAPTER XXI.

MR. PEGGOTTY's DREAM COMES TRUE.

By this time, some months had passed since our interview
on the bank of the river with Martha. I had never seen her
since, but she had communicated with Mr. Peggotty on several
occasions. Nothing had come of her zealous intervention ;
nor could I infer, from what he told me, that any clue had
ever been obtained, for a moment, to Emily's fate. I confess
that I began to despair of her recovery, and gradually to sink
deeper and deeper into the belief that she was dead.

His conviction remained unchanged. So far as I know —
and I believe his honest heart was transparent to me — he
never wavered again, in his solemn certainty of finding her.
His patience never tired. And, although I trembled for the
agony it might one day be to him to have his strong assurance
shivered at a blow, there was something so religious in it, so
affectingly expressive of its anchor being in the purest depths
of his fine nature, that the respect and honor in which I held
him were exalted every day.

His was not a lazy trustfulness that hoped, and 'did no more.
He had been a man of sturdy action all his life, and he knew r
that in all things wherein he wanted help he must do his own
part faithfully, and help himself. I have known him set out
in the night, on a misgiving that the light might not be, by
some accident, in the window of the old boat; and walk to
Yarmouth. I have known him, on reading something in the
newspaper, that might apply to her, take up his stick, and go
forth on a journey of three or four score miles. He made his
way by sea to Naples, and back, after hearing the narrative
to which Miss Dartle had assisted me. All his journeys were
ruggedly performed ; for he was always steadfast in a purpose
of saving money for Emily's sake, when she should be found.





In all this long pursuit, I never heard him repine; I never
heard him say he was fatigued, or out of heart.

Dora had often seen him since our marriage, and was quite
fond of him. I fancy his figure before me now, standing near
her sofa, with his rough cap in his hand, and the blue eyes of
my child-wife raised, with a timid wonder, to his face. Some-
times of an evening, about twilight, when he came to talk
with me, I would induce him to smoke his pipe in the garden,
as we slowly paced to and fro together ; and then, the picture
of his deserted home, and the comfortable air it used to have in
my childish eyes of an evening when the fire was burning, and
the wind moaning round it, came most vividly into my mind.

One evening, at this hour, he told me that he had found
Martha waiting near his lodging on the preceding night when
he came out, and that she had asked him not to leave London
on any account, until he should have seen her again.

"Did she tell you -why ? " I inquired.

" I asked her, Mas'r Davy," he replied, " but it is but few
words as she ever says, and she on'y got my promise and so
went away."

" Did she say when you might expect to see her again ? "
I demanded.

" jSTo, Mas'r Davy," he returned, drawing his hand thought-
fully down his face. " I asked that too ; but it was more (she
said) than she could tell."

As I had long forborne to encourage him with hopes that
hung on threads, I made no other comment on this information
than that I supposed he would see her soon. Such specula-
tions as it engendered within me I kept to myself, and those
were faint enough.

I was walking alone in the garden, one evening, about a
fortnight afterwards. I remember that evening well. It was
the second in Mr. Micawber's week of suspense. There had
been rain all day, and there was a damp feeling in the air.
The leaves were thick upon the trees, and heavy with wet ;
but the rain had ceased, though the sky was still dark ; and
the hopeful birds were singing cheerfully. As I walked to
and fro in the garden, and the twilight began to close around
me, their little voices were hushed ; and that peculiar silence



304 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

which belongs to such an evening in the country when the
lightest trees are quite still, save for the occasional droppings
from their boughs, prevailed.

There was a little green perspective of trellis-work and ivy
at the side of our cottage, through which I could see, from the
garden where I was walking, into the road before the house.
I happened to turn my eyes towards this place, as I was think-
ing of many things ; and I saw a figure beyond, dressed in a
plain cloak. It was bending eagerly towards me, and beckoning.

"Martha!" said I, going to it.

"Can you come with me?" she inquired, in an agitated
whisper. "I have been to him, and he is not at home. I
wrote down where he was to come, and left it on his table
with my own hand. They said he would not be out long. I
have tidings for him. Can you come directly ? "

My answer was to pass out at the gate immediately. She
made a hasty gesture with her hand, as if to entreat my pa-
tience and my silence, and turned towards London, whence,
as her dress betokened, she had come expeditiously on foot.

I asked her if that were not our destination? On her
motioning Yes, with the same hasty gesture as before, I
stopped an empty coach that was coming by, and we got into
it. When I asked her where the coachman was to drive, she
answered "Anywhere near Golden Square! And quick!" —
then shrunk into a corner, with one trembling hand before
her face, and the other making the former gesture, as if she
could not bear a voice.

Now much disturbed, and dazzled with conflicting gleams
of hope and dread, I looked at her for some explanation.
But, seeing how strongly she desired to remain quiet, and
feeling that it was my own natural inclination too, at such a
time, I did not attempt to. break the silence. We proceeded
without a word being spoken. Sometimes she glanced out of
the window, as though she thought we were going slowly,
though indeed we were going fast; but otherwise remained
exactly as at first.

We alighted at one of the entrances to the Square she had
mentioned, where I directed the coach to wait, not knowing
but that we might have some occasion for it. She laid her





hand on my arm, and hurried me on to one of the sombre
streets, of which there are several in that part, where the
houses were once fair dwellings in the occupation of single
families, but have, and had, long degenerated into poor lodg-
ings let off in rooms. Entering at the open door of one of
these, and releasing my arm, she beckoned me to follow her
up the common staircase, which was like a tributary channel
to the street.

The house swarmed with inmates. As we went up, doors
of rooms were opened and people's heads put out; and we
passed other people on the stairs, who were coming down.
In glancing up from the outside, before we entered, I had
seen women and children lolling at the windows over flower-
pots ; and we seemed to have attracted their curiosity, ft>r
these were principally the observers who looked out of their
doors. It was a broad panelled staircase, with massive
balustrades of some dark wood ; cornices above the doors,
ornamented with carved fruit and flowers ; and broad seats in
the windows. But all these tokens of past grandeur were
miserably decayed and dirty ; rot, damp, and age, had weak-
ened the flooring, which in many places was unsound and
even unsafe. Some attempts had been made, I noticed, to
infuse new blood into this dwindling frame, by repairing the
costly old wood-work here and there with common deal ; but
it was like the marriage of a reduced old noble to a plebeian
pauper, and each party to the ill-assorted union shrunk away
from the other. Several of the back windows on the staircase
had been darkened or wholly blocked up. In those that re-
mained, there was scarcely any glass ; and, through the crum-
bling frames by which the bad air seemed always to come in,
and never to go out, I saw, through other glassless windows,
into other houses in a similar condition, and looked giddily
down into a wretched yard, which was the common dust-heap
of the mansion.

We proceeded to the top-story of the house. Two or three
times, by the way, I thought I observed in the indistinct light
the skirts of a female figure going up before us. As we
turned to ascend the last flight of stairs between us and
the roof, we caught a full view of this figure, pausing for a
vol. ii — 20



306 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

moment^ at a door. Then it turned the handle, and went
in.

" What's this ! " said Martha, in a whisper. " She has
gone into my room. I don't know her ! "
• I knew her. I had recognized her with amazement, for
Miss Dartle.

I said something to the effect that it was a lady whom I
had seen before, in a few words, to my conductress ; and had
scarcely done so when we heard her voice in the room, though
not, from where we stood, what she was saying. Martha, with
an astonished look, repeated her former action, and softly
led me up the stairs ; and then, by a little back door which
seemed to have no lock, and which she pushed open with a
touch, into a small empty garret with a low sloping roof : little
better than a cupboard. Between this, and the room she had
called hers, there was a small door of communication, standing
partly open. Here we stopped, breathless with our ascent,
and she placed her hand lightly on my lips. I could only see,
of the room beyond, that it was pretty large 5 that there was
a bed in it; and that there were some common pictures of ships
upon the walls. I could not see Miss Dartle or the person
whom we had heard her address. Certainly, my companion
could not, for my position was the best.

A dead silence prevailed for some moments. Martha kept
one hand on my lips, and raised the other in a listening atti-
tude.

"It matters little to me her not being at home/ 3 said Eosa
Dartle, haughtily, " I know nothing of her. It is you I come
to see."

" Me ? " replied a soft voice.

At the sound of it, a thrill went through my frame. For it
was Emily's !

"Yes," returned Miss Dartle, "I have come to look at you.
What? You are not ashamed of the face that has done sa
much ? "

The resolute and unrelenting hatred of her tone, its cold
stern sharpness, and its mastered rage, presented her before
me, as if I had seen her standing in the light. I saw the flashing
black eyes, and the passion-wasted figure ; and I saw the scar,



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 307

with its white track cutting through her lips, quivering and
throbbing as she spoke.

"I have come to see," she said, "James Steerforth's fancy ;
the girl who ran away with him, and is the town-talk of the
commonest people of her native place; the bold, flaunting,
practised companion of persons like James Steerforth. I want
to know what such a thing is like."

There was a rustle, as if the unhappy girl, on whom she
heaped these taunts, ran towards the door, and the speaker
swiftly interposed herself before it. It was succeeded by a
moment's pause.

When Miss Dartle spoke again, it was through her set teeth,
and with a stamp upon the ground.

" Stay there ! " she said, " or HI proclaim you to the house,
and the whole street ! If you try to evade me, HI stop you, if
it's by the hair, and raise the very stones against you ! "

A frightened murmur was the only reply that reached my
ears. A silence succeeded. I did not know what to do.
Much as I desired to put an end to the interview, I felt that I
had no right to present myself ; that it was for Mr. Peggotty
alone to see her and recover her. Would he never come ? I
thought impatiently.

" So ! " said Eosa Dartle, with a contemptuous laugh,
" I see her at last ! Why, he was a poor creature to be
taken by that delicate mock-modesty, and that hanging
head!" *

" Oh, for Heaven's sake, spare me ! " exclaimed Emily. " Who-
ever you are, you know my pitiable story, and for Heaven's sake
spare me, if you would be spared yourself ! "

"If I would be spared!" returned the other fiercely ; "what
is there in common between us, do you think ? "

" Nothing but our sex," said Emily, with a burst of tears.

"And that," said Eosa Dartle, "is so strong a claim, preferred
by one so infamous, that if I had any feeling in my breast but
scorn and abhorrence of you, it would freeze it up. Our sex !
You are an honor to our sex ! "

"I have deserved this," cried Emily, "but it's dreadful. Dear,
dear lady, think what I have suffered, and how I am fallen !
Oh, Martha, come back ! Oh, home, home ! "



308 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

Miss Dartle placed herself in a chair, within view of the door,
and looked downward, as if Emily were crouching on the floor
before her. Being now between me and the light, I could see
her curled lip, and her cruel eyes intently fixed on one place,
with a greedy triumph.

"Listen to what I say ! " she said; " and reserve your false
arts for your dupes. Do you hope to move me by your tears ?
No more than you could charm me by your smiles, you pur-
chased slave."

" Oh, have some mercy on me ! " cried Emily. " Show me
some compassion, or I shall die mad ! "

"It would be no great penance," said Kosa Dartle, "for your
crimes. Do you know what you have done ? Do you ever
think of the home you have laid waste ? n

" Oh, is there ever, night or day, when I don't think of it ! "
cried Emily; and now I could just see her, on her knees,
with her head thrown back, her pale face looking upward, her
hands wildly clasped and held out, and her hair streaming
about her. " Has there ever been a single minute, waking or
sleeping, when it hasn't been before me, just as it used to be
in the lost days when I turned my back upon it for ever and
for ever ! Oh, home, home ! Oh, dear, dear uncle, if you* ever
could have known the agony your love would cause me when
I fell away from good, you never would have shown it to me
so constant, much as you felt it ; but would have been angry
to me, at least once in my life, that I might have had some
comfort ! I have none, none, no comfort upon earth, for all
of them were always fond of me ! " She dropped on her face,
before the imperious figure in the chair, with an imploring
effort to clasp the skirt of her dress.

Kosa Dartle sat looking down upon her, as inflexible as a
figure of brass. Her lips were tightly compressed, as if she
knew that she must keep a strong constraint upon herself — I
write what I sincerely believe — or she would be tempted to
strike the beautiful form with her foot. I saw her, distinctly,
and the whole power of her face and character seemed forced
into that expression. Would he never come ?

" The miserable vanity of these earth-worms ! " she said,
when she had so far controlled the angry heavings of her



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 309

breast, that she could trust herself to speak. "Your home!
Do you imagine that I bestow a thought on it, or suppose you
could do any harm to that low place, which money would not
pay for, and handsomely ? Your home ! You were a part of
the trade of your home, and were bought and sold like any
other vendible thing your people dealt in."

" Oh, not that ! " cried Emily. u Say anything of me ; but
don't visit my disgrace and shame, more than I have done, on
folks who are as honorable as you ! Have some respect for
them, as you are a lady, if you have no mercy for me."

" I speak," she said, not deigning to take any heed of this
appeal, and drawing away her dress from the contamination
of Emily's touch, "I speak of his home — where I live. Here,"
she said, stretching out her hand with her contemptuous laugh,
and looking down upon the prostrate girl, " is a worthy cause
of division between lady-mother and gentleman-son ; of grief
in a house where she wouldn't have been admitted as a kitchen-
girl; of anger, and repining, and reproach. This piece of pol-
lution, picked up from the water-side, to be made much of for
an hour, and then tossed back to her original place ! "

" No ! no ! " cried Emily, clasping her hands together.
"When he first came into my way — that the day had never
dawned upon me, and he had met me being carried to my
grave ! — I had been brought up as virtuous as you or any
lady, and was going to be the wife of as good a man as you
or any lady in the world can ever marry. If you live in his
home and know him, you know perhaps, what his power with
a weak, vain girl might be. I don't defend myself, but I know
well, and he knows well, or he will know when he comes to
die, and his mind is troubled with it, that he used all his
power to deceive me, and that I believed him, trusted him,
and loved him ! "

Eosa Dartle sprang up from her seat; recoiled; and in
recoiling struck at her, with a face of such malignity, so dark-
ened and disfigured by passion, that I had almost thrown
myself between them. The blow, which had no aim, fell upon
the air. As she now stood panting, looking at her with the
utmost detestation that she was capable of expressing, and
trembling from head to foot with rage and scorn, I thought



310 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

I had never seen such a sight, and never could see such

another.

" You love him ? You ? " she cried, with her clenched hand,
quivering as if it only wanted a weapon to stab the object of
her wrath.

Emily had shrunk out of my view. There was no reply.

"And tell that to me," she added, "with your shameful
lips ? Why don't they whip these creatures ! If I could order
it to be done, I would have this girl whipped to death."

And so she would, I have no doubt. I would not have
trusted her with the rack itself, while that furious look lasted.

She slowly, very slowly, broke into a laugh, and pointed at
Emily with her hand, as if she were a sight of shame for gods
and men.

" She love ! " she said. " That carrion ! And he ever cared
for her, she'd tell me ? Ha, ha ! The liars that these traders
are V >

Her mockery was worse than her undisguised rage. Of the
two, I would have much preferred to be the object of the
latter. But, when she suffered it to break loose, it was only
for a moment. She had chained it up again, and, however it
might tear her within, she subdued it to herself.

" I am here, you pure fountain of love," she said, " to see
— as I began by telling you — what such a thing as you was
like. I was curious. I am satisfied. Also to tell you, that
you had best seek that home of yours, with all speed, and
hide your head among those excellent people who are expect-
ing you, and whom your money will console. When it's all
gone, you can believe, and trust, and love again, you know!
I thought you a broken toy that had lasted its time ; a worth-
less spangle that was tarnished, and thrown away. But, find-
ing you true gold, a very lady, and an ill-used innocent, with
a fresh heart full of love and trustfulness — which you look
like, and is quite consistent with your story ! — I have some-
thing more to say. Attend to it ; for what I say, Fll do. Do
you hear me, you fairy spirit ? What I say, I mean to do ! "

Her rage got the better of her again, for a moment ; but it
passed over her face like a spasm, and left her smiling.

" Hide yourself," she pursued, " if not at home, somewhere.



OF DAVII) COPPEKFIELD. 311

Let it be somewhere beyond reach ; in some obscure life or,

better still, in some obscure death. I wonder, if your loving
heart will not break, you have found no way of helping it to
be still ! I have heard of such means sometimes. I believe
they may be easily found."

A low crying on the part of Emily, interrupted her here.
She stopped, and listened to it as if it were music.

" I am of a strange nature, perhaps," Eosa Dartle went on ;
" but I can't breathe freely in the air you breathe. I find it
sickly. Therefore, I will have it cleared ; I will have it puri-
fied of you. If you live here to-morrow, Til have your story
and your character proclaimed on the common stair. There
are decent women in the house, I am told ; and it is a pity
such a light as you should be among them, and concealed. If,
leaving here, you seek any refuge in this town in any charac-
ter but your true one (which you are welcome to bear, without
molestation from me) ; the same service shall be done you, if
I hear of your retreat. Being assisted by a gentleman who
not long ago aspired to the favor of your hand, I am sanguine
as to that."

Would he never, never come ? How long was I to bear
this ? How long could I bear it ?

" Oh me, oh me ! " exclaimed the wretched Emily, in a tone
that might have touched the hardest heart, I should have
thought ; but there was no relenting in Eosa Dartle's smile.
"What, what, shall I do!"

" Do ? " returned the other. " Live happy in your own
reflections ! Consecrate your existence to the recollection of
James Steerf orth's tenderness — he would have made you his
serving-man^ wife, would he not ? — or to feeling grateful to
the upright and deserving creature who would have taken you
as his gift. Or, if those proud remembrances, and the con-
sciousness of your own virtues, and the honorable position to
which they have raised you in the eyes of everything that
wears the human shape, will not sustain you, marry that good
man, and be happy in his condescension. If this will not do
either, die ! " There are doorways and dust-heaps for such
deaths, and such despair — find one, and take your flight to
Heaven ! "



312 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

I heard a distant foot upon the stairs. I knew it, I was cer-
tain. It was his, thank God !

She moved slowly from before the door when she said this,
and passed out of my sight.

"But mark!" she added, slowly and sternly, opening the
other door to go away, "I am resolved, for reasons that I
have and hatreds that I entertain, to cast you out, unless you
withdraw from my reach altogether, or drop your pretty mask.
This is what I had to say ; and what I say, I mean to do ! "

The foot upon the stairs came nearer — nearer — passed her
as she went down — rushed into the room !

"Uncle!"

A fearful cry followed the word. I paused a moment, and
looking in, saw him supporting her insensible figure in his
arms. He gazed for a few seconds in the face ; then stooped
to kiss it — oh, how tenderly ! — and drew a handkerchief be-
fore it.

" Mas'r Davy," he said, in a low tremulous voice, when it
was covered, "I thank my Heavenly Father as my dream's
come true ! I thank Him hearty for having guided of me, in
His own ways, to my darling ! "

With those words he took her up in his arms ; and, with
the veiled face lying on his bosom, and addressed towards his
own, carried her, motionless and unconscious, down the stairs.




cc

h

</>

ui

o
o

<

U
O







CHAPTER XXII.

THE BEGINNING OF A LONGER JOURNEY.

It was yet early in the morning of the following day, when,
as I was walking in my garden with my aunt (who took little
other exercise now, being so much in attendance on my dear
Dora), I was told that Mr. Peggotty desired to speak with
me. He came into the garden to meet me half-way, on my
going towards the gate ; and bared his head as it was always
his custom to do when he saw my aunt, for >vhom he had a
high respect. I had been telling her all that had happened
over-night. Without saying a word, she walked up with a
cordial face, shook hands with him, and patted him on the
arm. It was so expressively done, that she had no need to
say a word. Mr. Peggotty understood her quite as well as if
she had said a thousand.

" Fll go in now, Trot," said my aunt, " and look after Little
Blossom, who will be getting up presently."

"Not along of my being heer, ma'am, I hope?" said Mr.
Peggotty. " Unless my wits is gone a bahd's neezing " — by
which Mr. Peggotty meant to say, bird's nesting — "this
morning, 'tis along of me as you're a going to quit us ? "

"You have something to say, my good friend," returned my
aunt, " and will do better without me."

" By your leave, ma'am," returned Mr. Peggotty, " I should
take it kind, per vising you doen't mind my clicketten, if you'd
bide heer."

"Would you?" said my aunt, with short good-nature.
" Then 1 am sure I will ! "

So, she drew her arm through Mr. Peggotty's, and walked
with him to a leafy little summer-house there was at the bot-
tom of the garden, where she sat down on a bench, and I
beside her. There was a seat for Mr. Peggotty too, but he
preferred to stand, leaning his hand on the small rustic table.



314 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

As he stood, looking at his cap for a little while before begin-
ning to speak, I could not help observing what power and
force of character his sinewy hand expressed, and what a good
and trusty companion it was to his honest brow and iron-gray
hair.

"I took my dear child away last night," Mr. Peggotty
began, as he raised his eyes to ours, "to my lodging, wheer I
have a long time been expecting of her and preparing fur her.
It was hours afore she knowed me right ; and when she did,
she kneeled down at my feet, and kiender said to me, as if it
was her prayers, how it all come to be. You may believe me,
when I heerd her voice, as I had heerd at home so playful —
and see her humbled, as it might be, in the dust our Saviour
wrote in with his blessed hand — I felt a wownd go to my 'art,
in the midst of all its thankfulness."

He drew his sleeve across his face, without any pretence of
concealing why ; and then cleared his voice.

" It warn't for long as I felt that ; for she was found. I
had on'y to think as she was found, and it was gone. I doen't
know why I do so much as mention of it now, Fm sure. I
didn't have it in my mind a minute ago, to say a word about
myself ; but it come up so natural, that I yielded to it afore I
was aweer."

"You are a self-denying soul," said my aunt, "and will
have your reward."

Mr. Peggotty, with the shadows of the leaves playing
athwart his face, made a surprised inclination of the head
towards my aunt, as an acknowledgment of her good opinion ;
then, took up the thread he had relinquished.

"When my Em'ly took flight," he said, in stern wrath for
the moment, " from the house wheer she was made a prisoner
by that theer spotted snake as Mas'r Davy see, — and his
story's trew, and may God confound him ! — she took flight in
the night. It was a dark night, with a many stars a shining.
She was wild. She ran along the sea beach, believing the old
boat was theer ; and calling out to us to turn away our faces,
for she was a coming by. She heerd herself a crying out, like as
if it was another person ; and cut herself on them sharp-pinted
stones and rocks, and felt it no more than if she had been rock



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 315

herself. Ever so fur she rim, and there was fire afore her
eyes and roarings in her ears. Of a sudden — or so she thowt,
you unnerstand — the day broke, wet and windy, and she was
lying b'low a heap of stone upon the shore, and a woman was
a speaking to her, saying, in the language of that country,
what was it as had gone so much amiss ? "

He saw everything he related. It passed before him, as he
spoke, so vividly, that, in the intensity of his earnestness, he
presented what he described to me with greater distinctness
than I can express. I can hardly believe, writing now long
afterwards, but that I was actually present in these scenes ; they
are impressed upon me with such an astonishing air of fidelity.

"As Em'ly's eyes — which was heavy — see this woman
better," Mr. Peggotty went on, " she know'd as she was one
of them as she had often talked to on the beach. Fur, though
she had run (as I have said) ever so fur in the night, she had
oftentimes wandered long ways, partly afoot, partly in boats
and carriages, and know'd all that country, 'long the coast,
miles and miles. She hadn't no children of her own, this
woman, being a young wife ; but she was a looking to have one
afore long. And may my prayers go up to Heaven that 'twill
be a happ'ness to her, and a comfort, and a honor, all her life !
May it love her and be dootiful to her, in her old age ; helpful
of her at the last ; a Angel to her heer, and heerafter ! "

" Amen ! " said my aunt.

"She had been summat timorous and down/' said Mr.
Peggotty, "and had sat, at first, a little way off, at her
spinning, or such work as it was, when Em'ly talked to the
children. But Em'ly had took notice of her, and had gone
and spoke to her ; and as the young woman was partial to the
children herself, they had soon made friends. Sermuchser,
that when Em'ly went that way, she always giv Em'ly flowers.
This was her as now asked what it was that had gone so much
amiss. Em'ly told her, and she — took her home. She did
indeed. She took her home," said Mr. Peggotty, covering his
face.

He was more effected by this act of kindness, than I had
ever seen him affected by anything since the night she went
away. My aunt and I did not attempt to disturb him.



316 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

"It was a little cottage, you may suppose/' he said, pres-
ently, " but she found space for Em'ly in it, — her husband
was away at sea, — and she kep it secret, and prevailed upon
such neighbors as she had (they was not many near) to keep
it secret too. Em'ly was took bad with fever, and what is
very strange to me is, — maybe 'tis not so strange to scholars,
— the language of that country went out of her head, and
she could only speak her own, that no one unnerstood. She
recollects, as if she had dreamed it that she lay there, always
a talking her own tongue, always believing as the old boat was
round the next pint in the bay, and begging and imploring of
'em to send theer and tell how she was dying, and bring back
a message of forgiveness, if it was on'y a wured. Almost the
whole time, she thowt, — now, that him as I made mention on
just now was lurking for her unnerneath the winder: now
that him as had brought her to this was in the room, — and
cried to the good young woman not to give her up, and know'd
at the same time, that she couldn't unnerstand, and dreaded
that she must be took away. Likewise the fire was afore her
eyes, and the roarings in her ears ; and there was no to-day,
nor yesterday, nor yet to-morrow ; but everything in her life
as ever had been, or as ever could be, and everything as never
had been, and as never could be, was a crowding on her all at
once, and nothing clear nor welcome, and yet she sang and
laughed about it ! How long this lasted, I doen't know ; but
then there come a sleep ; and in that sleep, from being a many
times stronger than her own self, she fell into the weakness of
the littlest child."

Here he stopped, as if for relief from the terrors of his own
description. After being silent for a few moments, he pursued
his story.

"It was a pleasant afternoon when she awoke; and so
quiet, that there warn't a sound but the rippling of that blue
sea without a tide, upon the shore. It was her belief, at first,
that she was at home upon a Sunday morning ; but, the vine
leaves as she see at the winder, and the hills beyond, warn't
home, and contradicted of her. Then, come in her friend, to
watch alongside of her bed ; and then she know'd as the old
boat warn't round that next pint in the bay no more, but was





fur off ; and know'd where she was, and why ; and broke out
a crying on that good young woman's bosom, wheer I hope
her baby is a lying now, a cheering of her with its pretty
eyes ! "

He could not speak of this good friend of Emily's without
a flow of tears. It was in vain to try. He broke down again>
endeavoring to bless her !

" That done my Em'ly good/' he resumed, after such emo-
tion as I could not behold without sharing in; and as to my
aunt, she wept with all her heart ; " that done Em'ly good,
and she begun to mend. But, the language of that country
was quite gone from her, and. she was forced to make signs.
So she went on, getting better from day to day, slow, but sure,
and trying to learn the names of common things — names as
she seemed never to have heerd in all her life — till one even-
ing come, when she was a setting at her window, looking at a
little girl at play upon the beach. And of a sudden this child
held out her hand, and said, what would be in English, ' Fish-
erman's daughter, here's a shell ! ' — for you are to unnerstand
that they used at first to call her ' Pretty lady,' as the general
way in that country is, and that she had taught 'em to call
her ' Fisherman's daughter ' instead. The child says of a sud-
den, 'Fisherman's daughter, here's a shell!' Then Em'ly
unnerstands her; and she answers, bursting out a crying ; and
it all comes back !

" When Em'ly got strong again," said Mr. Peggotty, after
•another short interval of silence, "she cast about to leave that
good young creetur, and get to her own country. The hus-
band was come home, then; and the two together put her
aboard a small trader bound to Leghorn, and from that to
Prance. She had a little money, but it was less than little as
they would take for all they done. I'm a'most glad on it,
though they was so poor ! What they done, is laid up wheer
neither moth nor rust doth corrupt, and wheer thieves do not
break through nor steal. Mas'r Davy, it'll outlast all the
treasure in the wureld.

"Em'ly got to France, and took service to wait on travel-
ling ladies at a inn in the port. Theer, theer come, one day,
that snake. — Let him never come nigh me. I doen't know



318 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

what hurt I might do him ! — Soon as she see him, without
him seeing her, all her fear and wildness returned upon her,
and she fled afore the very breath he draw'd. She come to
England, and was set ashore at Dover.

" I doen't know," said Mr. Peggotty, " for sure, when her
'art begun to fail her; but all the way to England she had
thowt to come to her dear home. Soon as she got to Eugland
she turned her face towards it. But, fear of not being forgiv,
fear of being pinted at, fear of some of us being dead along of
her, fear of many things, turned her from it, kiender by force,
upon the road : c Uncle, uncle/ she says to me, ' the fear of
not being worthy to do, what my torn and bleeding breast so
longed to do, was the most frightening fear of all ! I turned
back, when my 'art was full of prayers that I might crawl to
the old doorstep, in the night, kiss it, lay my wicked face
upon it, and theer be found dead in the morning.'

" She come," said Mr. Peggotty, dropping his voice to an
awe-stricken whisper, " to London. She — as had never seen
it in her life — alone — without a penny — young — so pretty
— come to London. A'most the moment as she lighted heer,
all so desolate, she found (as she believed) a friend j a decent
woman as spoke to her about the needle-work as she had
been brought up to do, about finding plenty of it fur her, about
a lodging for the night, and making secret inquiration concern-
ing of me and all at home, to-morrow. When my child," he
said aloud, and with an energy of gratitude that shook him
from head to foot, " stood upon the brink of more than I can
say or think on — Martha, trew to her promise, saved her ! "

I could not repress a cry of joy.

" Mas'r Davy ! " he said, griping my hand in that strong
hand of his, " it was you as first made mention of her to me.
I thankee, sir ! She was arnest. She had know'd of her bitter
knowledge wheer to watch and what to do. She had done it.
And the Lord was above all ! She come, white and hurried,
upon Em'ly in her sleep. She says to her, 'Kise up from
worse than death, and come with me!' Them belonging to
the house would have stopped her, but they might as soon have
stopped the sea. ' Stand away from me,' she says, ( I am a
ghost that calls her from beside her open grave ! ' She told



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 319

Ein'ly she had seen me, and know'd I loved her, and forgiv
her. She wrapped her, hasty, in her clothes. She took her,
faint and trembling, on her arm. She heeded no more what
they said, than if she had had no ears. She walked among
'era with my child, minding only her ; and brought her safe
out, in the dead of the night, from that black pit of ruin !

"She attended on Em'ly," said Mr. Peggotty, who had
released my hand, and put his own hand on his heaving
chest; "she attended to my Em'ly, lying wearied out, and
wandering betwixt whiles, till late next day. Then she went
in search of me; then in search of you, Mas'r Davy. She
didn't tell Em'ly what she come out fur, lest her 'art should
fail, and she should think of hiding of herself. How the
cruel lady know'd of her being theer, I can't say. Whether
him as I have spoke so much of, chanced to see 'em going
theer, or whether (which is most like to my thinking) he had
heerd it from the woman, I doen't greatly ask myself. My
niece is found.

"All night long," said Mr. Peggotty, "we have been
together, Em'ly and me. 'Tis little (considering the time) as
she has said, in wureds, through them broken-hearted tears ;
'tis less as I have seen of her dear face, as grow'd into a
woman's at my hearth. But, all night long, her arms has
been about my neck; and her head was laid heer; and we
knows full well, as we can put our trust in one another ever
more."

He ceased to speak, and his hand upon the table rested there
in perfect repose, with a resolution in it that might have con-
quered lions.

" It was a gleam of light upon me, Trot," said my aunt,
drying her eyes, " when I formed the resolution of being god-
mother to your sister Betsey Trotwood, w T ho disappointed me ;
but, next to that, hardly anything would have given me greater
pleasure, than to be godmother to that good young creature's '
baby ! "

Mr. Peggotty nodded his understanding of my aunt's feel-
ings, but could not trust himself with any verbal reference to
the subject of her commendation. We all remained silent, and
occupied with our own reflections (my aunt drying her eyes,



320 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

and now sobbing convulsively, and now laughing and calling
herself a fool) ; until I spoke.

"You have quite made up your mind/' said I to Mr. Peg-
gotty ; " as to the future, good friend ? I need scarcely ask
you."

" Quite, Mas'r Davy," he returned ; " and told Em'ly, Theer's
mighty countries, fur from heer. Our future life lays over
the sea."

" They will emigrate together, aunt," said I.

"Yes !" said Mr. Peggotty, with a hopeful smile. "i$o one
can't reproach my darling in Australia. We will begin a new
life over theer ! "

I asked him if he yet proposed to himself any time for
going away.

"I was down at the Docks early this morning, sir," he
returned, "to get information concerning of them ships. In
about six weeks or two months from now, there'll be one sail-
ing — I see her this morning — went aboard — and we shalJ
take our passage in her."

" Quite alone ? " I asked.

" Ay, Mas'r Davy ! " he returned. " My sister, you see, she's
that fond of you and yourn, and that accustomed to think on'y
of her own country, that it wouldn't be hardly fair to let her
go. Besides which, theer's one she has in charge, Mas'r Davy,
as doen't ought to be forgot."

"Poor Ham!" said I.

"My good sister takes care of his house, you see, ma'am,
and he takes kindly to her," Mr. Peggotty explained for my
aunt's better information. " He'll set and talk to her, with a
calm spirit, wen it's like he couldn't bring himself "to open his
lips to another. Poor fellow ! " said Mr. Peggotty, shaking his
head, " theer's not so much left him, that he could spare the
little as he has ! "

"And Mrs. Gummidge ? " said I.

"Well, Fve had a mort of con-sideration, I do tell you,"
returned Mr. Peggotty, with a perplexed look which gradually
cleared as he went on, " concerning of Missis Gummidge. You
see, wen Missis Gummidge falls a thinking of the old 'un, she
an't what you may call good company. Betwixt you and me,



OF DAVID COPPEEFIELD. 321

Mas'r Davy — and you, ma'am — wen Missis Gummidge takes
to wimicking," — our old county word for crying, — "she's lia-
ble to be considered to be, by them as didn't know the old 'un,
peevish-like. Now I did know the old 'un," said Mr. Peggotty,
"and I know'd his merits, so I unnerstan' her; but 'tan't,
entirely so, you see, with others — nat'rally can't be !"

My aunt and I both acquiesced.

" Wheerby," said Mr. Peggotty, "my sister might — I doen't
say she would, but might — find Missis Gummidge give her a
leetle trouble now-and-again. Theerfur 'tan't my intentions to
moor Missis Gummidge 'long with them, but to find a Beein' fur
her wheer she can fisherate fur herself." (A Beein' signifies,
in that dialect, a home, and to fisherate is to provide.) " Eur
which purpose," said Mr. Peggotty, " I means to make her a
'lowance afore I go, as'll leave her pretty comfort'ble. She's
the faithfullest of creeturs. 'Tan't to be expected, of course,
at her time of life, and being lone and lorn, as the good
old Mawther is to be knocked about aboardship, and in the
woods and wilds of a new and fur-away country. So that's
what I'm a going to do with her"

He forgot nobody. He thought of everybody's claims and
strivings, but his own.

"Em'ly," he continued, "will keep along with me — poor
child, she's sore in need of peace and rest ! — until such time
as we goes upon our voyage. She'll work at them clothes,
as must be made ; and I hope her troubles will begin to seem
longer ago than they was, wen she finds herself once more by
her rough but loving uncle."

My aunt nodded confirmation of this hope, and imparted
great satisfaction to Mr. Peggotty.

"Theer's one thing furder, Mas'r Davy," said he, putting
his hand in his breast-pocket, and gravely taking out the little
paper bundle I had seen before, which he unrolled on the
table. " Theer's these heer bank-notes — fifty pound, and ten.
To them I wish to add the money as she come away with.
I've asked her about that (but not saying why), and have
added of it up. I an't a scholar. Would you be so kind as
see how 'tis ? "

He handed me, apologetically for his scholarship, a piece of

VOL. II — 21



322 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

paper, and observed me while I looked it over. It was quite
right.

" Thankee, sir," he said, taking it back. " This money, if
you doen't see objections, Mas'r Davy, I shall put up jest afore
I go, in a cover directed to him ; and put that up in another
directed to his mother. I shall tell her, in no more wureds
than I speak to you, what it's the price on ; and that Fm gone,
and past receiving of it back."

I told him that I thought it would be right to do so — that
I was thoroughly convinced it would be, since he felt it to be
right.

" I said that theer was on'y one thing furder," he proceeded
with a grave smile, when he had made up his little bundle
again, and put it in his pocket ; " but theer was two. I warn't
sure in my mind, wen I come out this morning, as I could go
and break to Ham, of my own self, what had so thankfully
happened. So I writ a letter while I was out, and put it in
the post-office, telling of 'em how all was as 'tis ; and that I
should come down to-morrow to unload my mind of what lit-
tle needs a doing of down theer, and, most-like, take my fare-
well leave of Yarmouth."

a And do you wish me to go with you ? " said I, seeing that
he left something unsaid.

"If you could do me that kind favor, Mas'r Davy," he
replied, "I know the sight on you would cheer 'em up a bit."

My little Dora being in good spirits, and very desirous that
I should go — as I found on talking it over with her — I
readily pledged myself to accompany him in accordance with
his wish. Next morning consequently, we were on the Yar-
mouth coach, and again travelling over the old ground.

As we passed along the familiar street at night — Mr. Peg-
gotty, in despite of all my remonstrances, carrying my bag —
I glanced into Omer and Joram's shop, and saw my old friend
Mr. Omer there, smoking his pipe. I felt reluctant to be
present, when Mr. Peggotty first met his sister and Ham ; and
made Mr. Omer my excuse for lingering behind.

" How is Mr. Orner after this long time ? " said I, going in.

He fanned away the smoke of his pipe, that he might get a
better view of me, and soon recognized me with great delight.



OF DAVID COPPEEFIELD. 323

" I should get up, sir, to acknowledge such an honor as this
visit/' said he, " only my limbs are rather out of sorts, and I
am wheeled about. With the exception of my limbs and my
breath, howsoever, I am as hearty as a man can be, Fm thank-
ful to say."

I congratulated him on his contented looks and his good
spirits, and saw, now, that his easy chair went on wheels.

" It's an ingenious thing, ain't it ? " he inquired, following
the direction of my glance, and polishing the elbow with his
arm. "It runs as light as a feather, and tracks as true as a
mail-coach. Bless you, my little Minnie — my grand-daughter
you know, Minnie's child — puts her little strength against the
back, gives it a shove, and away we go, as clever and merry as
ever you see anything! And I tell you what — it's a most
uncommon chair to smoke a pipe in."

I never saw such a good old fellow to make the best of a
thing, and find out the enjoyment of it, as Mr. Omer. He
was as radiant, as if his chair, his asthma, and the failure of
his limbs, were the various branches of a great invention for
enhancing the luxury of a pipe.

"I see more of the world, I can assure you," said Mr.
Omer, "in this chair, than ever I see out of it. You'd be
surprised at the number of people that looks in of a day to
have a chat. You really would ! There's twice as much in
the newspaper, since I've taken to this chair, as there used to
be. As to general reading, dear me, what a lot of it I do get
through ! That's what I feel so strong, you know ! If it had
been my eyes, what should I have done ? If it had been my
ears, what should I have done? Being my limbs, what .does
it signify ? Why, my limbs only made my breath shorter
when I used 'em. And now, if I want to go out into the
street or down to the sands, I've only got to call Dick, Joram's
youngest 'prentice, and away I go in my own carriage, like the
Lord Mayor of London."

He half suffocated himself with laughing here.

"Lord bless you!" said Mr. Omer, resuming his pipe, "a
man must take the fat with the lean; that's what he must
make up his mind to in this life. Joram does a fine business.
Ex-cellent business ! "



324 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" I am very glad to hear it," said I.

" I knew you would be," said Mr. Omer. " And Joram and
Minnie are like valentines. What more can a man expect ?
What's his limbs to that ! "

His supreme contempt for his own limbs, as he sat smoking,
was one of the pleasantest oddities I have ever encountered.

"And since I've took to general reading, you've took to
general writing, eh, sir ? " said Mr. Omer, surveying me ad-
miringly. " What a lovely work that was of yours ! What
expressions in it ! I read it every word — every lvord. And
as to feeling sleepy ! Not at all ! "

I laughingly expressed my satisfaction, but I must confess
that I thought this association of ideas significant.

"I give you my word and honor sir," said Mr. Omer, "that
when I lay that book upon the table, and look at it outside ;
compact in three separate and indiwidual wollumes — one, two,
three ; I am as proud as Punch to think that I once had the
honor of being connected with your family. And dear me,
it's a long time ago, now, ain't it? Over at Blunderstone.
With a pretty little party laid along with the other party.
And you quite a small party then, yourself. Dear, dear ! "

I changed the subject by referring to Emily. After assuring
him that I did not forget how interested he had always been
in her, and how kindly he had always treated her, I gave him
a general account of her restoration to her uncle by the aid
of Martha ; which I knew would please the old man. He
listened with the utmost attention, and said, feelingly, when I
had done :

"I am rejoiced at it, sir ! It's the best news I have heard
for many a day. Dear, dear, dear ! And what's going to be
undertook for that unfortunate young woman, Martha, now ? "

" You touch a point that my thoughts have been dwelling
on since yesterday," said I, " but on which I can give you no
information yet, Mr. Omer. Mr. Peggotty has not alluded to
it, and I have a delicacy in doing so. I am sure he has : not
forgotten it. He forgets nothing that is disinterested and
good."

"Because you know," said Mr. Omer, taking himself up,
where he had left off, " whatever is done, I should wish to be



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 325

a member of. Put me down for anything you may consider
right, and let me know. I never could think the girl all bad,
and I'm glad to find she's not. So will my daughter Minnie
be. Young women are contradictory creatures in some things
— her mother was just the same as her — but their hearts are
soft and kind. It's all show with Minnie, about Martha.
Why she should consider it necessary to make any show, I
don't undertake to tell you. But it's all show, bless you.
She'd do her any kindness in private. So, put me down for
whatever you may consider right, will you be so good ? and
drop me a line where to forward it. Dear me!" said Mr.
Omer, " when a man is drawing on to a time of life, where the
two ends of life meet ; when he finds himself, however hearty
he is, being wheeled about for the second time, in a speeches
of go-cart ; he should be over-rejoiced to do a kindness if he
can. He wants plenty. And I don't speak of myself, par-
ticular," said Mr. Omer, " because sir, the way I look at it is,
that we are all drawing on to the bottom of the hill, whatever
age we are, on account of time never standing still for a single
moment. So let us always do a kindness, and be over-rejoiced.
To be sure ! "

He knocked the ashes out of his pipe, and put it on a ledge
in the back of his chair, expressly made for its reception.

"There's Em'ly's cousin, him that she was to have been
married to," said Mr. Omer, rubbing his hands feebly, "as
fine a fellow as there is in Yarmouth ! He'll come and talk
or read to me, in the evening, for an hour together sometimes.
That's a kindness, I should call it ! All his life's a kindness."

" I am going to see him now," said I.

"Are you ?" said Mr. Omer. " Tell him I was hearty, and
sent my respects. Minnie and Joram's at a ball. They would
be as proud to see you as I am, if they was at home. Minnie
won't hardly go out at all, you see, c on account of father,' as
she says. So I swore to-night, that if she didn't go, Pd go to
bed at six. In consequence of which," Mr. Omer shook him-
self and his chair, with laughter at the success of his device,
" she and Joram's at a ball."

I shook hands with him, and wished him good night.

"Half a minute, sir," said Mr. Omer. "If you was to go



326 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

without seeing my little elephant, you'd lose the best of sights,
You never see such a sight ! Minnie ! "

A musical little voice answered, from somewhere up stairs,
" I am coming, grandfather ! " and a pretty little girl with
long, flaxen, curling hair, soon came running into the shop.

" This is my little elephant, sir," said Mr. Omer, fondling
the child. " Siamese breed, sir. Now, little elephant ! "

The little elephant set the door of the parlor open, enabling
me to see that, in these latter days, it was converted into a
bedroom for Mr. Omer, who could not be easily conveyed up
stairs ; and then hid her pretty forehead, and tumbled her long
hair, against the back of Mr. Omer's chair.

" The elephant butts, you know, sir," said Mr. Omer, wink-
ing, "when he goes at a object. Once, elephant. Twice.
Three times ! "

At this signal, the little elephant, with a dexterity that was
next to marvellous in so small an animal, whisked the chair
round with Mr. Omer in it, and rattled it off, pell-mell, into
the parlor, without touching the doorpost : Mr. Omer indescrib-
ably enjoying the performance, and looking back at me on
the road as if it were the triumphant issue of his life's
exertions.

After a stroll about the town, I went to Ham's house.
Peggotty had now removed here for good; and had let her
own house to the successor of Mr. Barkis in the carrying busi-
ness, who had paid her very well for the goodwill, cart, and
horse. I believe the very same slow horse that Mr. Barkis
drove was still at work.

I found them in the neat kitchen, accompanied by Mrs.
Gum midge, who had been fetched from the old boat by Mr.
Peggotty himself. I doubt if she could have been induced to
desert her post, by any one else. He had evidently told them
all. Both Peggotty and Mrs. Gummidge had their aprons to
their eyes, and Ham had just stepped out " to take a turn on
the beach." He presently came home, very glad to see me ;
and I hope they were all the better for my being there. We
spoke, with some approach to cheerfulness, of Mr. Peggotty's
growing rich in a new country, and of the wonders he would
describe in his letters. We said nothing of Emily by name,



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 327

but distantly referred to her more than once. Ham was the
serenest of the party.

But Peggotty told me, when she lighted me to a little
chamber where the Crocodile book was lying ready for me on
the table, that he always was the same. She believed (she
told me, crying) that he was broken-hearted ; though he was
as full of courage as of sweetness, and worked harder and
better than any boat-builder in any yard in all that part.
There were times, she said, of an evening, when he talked of
their old life in the boat-house ; and then he mentioned Emily
as a child. But, he never mentioned her as a woman.

I thought I had read in his face that he would like to speak
to me alone. I therefore resolved to put myself in his way
next evening, as he came home from his work. Having settled
this with myself, I fell asleep. That night, for the first time
in all those many nights, the candle was taken out of the
window, Mr. Peggotty swung in his old hammock in the old
boat, and the wind murmured with the old sound round his
head.

All next day, he was occupied in disposing of his fishing-
boat and tackle; in packing up, and sending to London by
wagon, such of his little domestic possessions as he thought
would be useful to him; and in parting with the rest, or
bestowing them on Mrs. Gummidge. She was with him all
day. As I had a sorrowful wish to see the old place once
more, before it was locked up, I engaged to meet them there
in the evening. But I so arranged it, as that I should meet
Ham first.

It was easy to come in his way, as I knew where he worked.
I met him at a retired part of the sands which I knew he
would cross, and turned back with him, that he might have
leisure to speak to me if he really wished. I had not mis-
taken the expression of his face. We had walked but a little
way together, when he said, without looking at me :

" Mas'r Davy, have you seen her ? "

"Only for a moment, when she was in a swoon," I softly
answered.

We walked a little farther, and he said :

" Mas'r Davy, shall you see her, d'ye think ? "



328 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" It would be too painful to her, perhaps," said I.

" I have thowt of that," he replied. " So 'twould, sir, so
'twould."

"But, Ham," said I, gently, "if there is anything that I
could write to her, for you, in case I could not tell it ; if there
is anything you would wish to make known to her through me ;
I should consider it a sacred trust."

" I am sure on't. I thankee, sir, most kind ! I think theer
is something I could wish said or wrote."

"What is it?"

We walked a little farther in silence, and then he spoke.

"'Tan't that I forgive her. 'Tan't that so much. 'Tis more
as I beg of her to forgive me, for having pressed my affections
upon her. Odd times, I think that if I hadn't had her promise
fur to marry me, sir, she was that trustful of me, in a friendly
way, that she'd have told me what was struggling in her mind,
and would have counselled with me, and I might have saved
her."

I pressed his hand. " Is that all ? "

" Theer's yet a something else," he returned, "if I can say
it, IVIas'r Davy."

We walked on, farther than we had walked yet, before he
spoke again. He was not crying when he made the pauses I
shall express by lines. He was merely collecting himself to
speak very plainly.

" I loved her — and I love the memory of her — too deep —
to be able to lead her to believe of my own self as I'm a
happy man. I could only be happy — by forgetting of her —
and I'm afeerd I couldn't hardly bear as she should be told I
done that. But if you, being so full of learning, Mas'r Davy,
could think of anything to say as might bring her to believe I
wasn't greatly hurt : still loving of her, and mourning for her :
anything as might bring her to believe as I was not tired of
my life, and yet was hoping fur to see her without blame,
wheer the wicked cease from troubling and the weary are at
rest — anything as would ease her sorrowful mind, and yet not
make her think as I could ever marry, or as 'twas possible that
any one could ever be to me what she was — I should ask of
you to say that — with my prayers for her — that was so dear."



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 329

I pressed his manly hand again, and told him I would charge
myself to do this as well as I could.

" I thankee, sir/' he answered. " 'Twas kind of you to meet
me. 'Twas kind of you to bear him company down. Mas'r
Davy, I unnerstan' very well, though my aunt will come to
Lon'on afore they sail, and they'll unite once more, that I am
not like to see him agen. I fare to feel sure on't. We doen't
say so, but so 'twill be, and better so. The last you see on
him — the very last — will you give him the lovingest duty
and thanks of the orphan, as he was ever more than a father
to?"

This I also promised, faithfully.

" I thankee again, sir," he said, heartily shaking hands. " I
know wheer you're a going. Good by ! "

With a slight wave of his hand, as though to explain to me
that he could not enter the old place, he turned away. As I
looked after his figure, crossing the waste in the moonlight, I
saw him turn his face towards a strip of silvery light upon the
sea, and pass on, looking at it, until he was a shadow in the
distance.

The door of the boat-house stood open when I approached ;
and, on entering, I found it emptied of all its furniture, saving
one of the old lockers, on which Mrs. Gummidge, with a bas-
ket on her knee, was seated, looking at Mr. Peggotty. He
leaned his elbow on the rough chimney-piece, and gazed
upon a few expiring embers in the grate ; but he raised his
head, hopefully, on my coming in, and spoke in a cheery
manner.

" Come, according to promise, to bid farewell to't, eh, Mas'r
Davy ! " he said, taking up the candle. " Bare enough,_now,
an'tit?"

* Indeed you have made good use of the time," said I.

"Why we have not been idle, sir. Missis Gummidge has
worked like a — I doen't know what Missis Gummidge an't
worked like/' said Mr. Peggotty, looking at her, at a loss for a
sufficiently approving simile.

Mrs. Gummidge, leaning on her basket, made no observation.

"Theer's the very locker that you used to sit on, 'long with
Em'ly H' said Mr. Peggotty, in a whisper. " Pm a going to



330 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

carry it away with Hie, last of all. And heer's your old little
bedroom, see, Mas'r Davy ? Almost as bleak to-sight, as 'art
could wish ! "

In truth, the wind, though it was low, had a solemn sound,
and crept around the deserted house with a whispered wailing
that was very mournful. Everything was gone, down to the
little mirror with the oyster-shell frame. I thought of myself,
lying here, when that first great change was being wrought at
home. I thought of the blue-eyed child who had enchanted
me. I thought of Steerforth : and a foolish, fearful fancy
came upon me of his being near at hand, and liable tQ be met
at any turn.

"'Tis like to be long," said Mr. Peggotty, in a low voice,
"afore the boat finds new tenants. They look upon 't down
heer, as being unfortunate now ! "

" Does it belong to anybody in the neighborhood ? " I asked.

"To a mast-maker up town," said Mr. Peggotty. "Pm a
going togive the key to him to-night."

We looked into the other little room, and came back to Mrs.
Gummidge, sitting on the locker, whom Mr. Peggotty, putting
the light on the chimney-piece, requested to rise, that he
might carry it outside the" door before extinguishing the
candle,

"Dan'l," said Mrs. Gummidge, suddenly deserting her
basket, and clinging to his arm, " my dear Dan'l, the parting
words I speak in this house is, I mustn't be left behind.
Doen't ye think of leaving me behind, Dan'l ! Oh, doen't ye
ever do it ! "

Mr. Peggotty, taken aback, looked from Mrs. Gummidge to
me, and from me to Mrs. Gummidge, as if he had been
awakened from a sleep.

" Doen't ye, dearest Dan'l, doen't ye ! " cried Mrs. Gum-
midge, fervently. "Take me 'long with you, Dan'l, take me
'long with you and Em'ly ! I'll be your servant, constant and
trew. If there's slaves in them parts where you're a going,
I'll be bound to you for one, and happy, but doen't ye leave
me behind, Dan'l, that's a deary dear ! "

"My good soul," said Mr. Peggotty, shaking his head, "you
doen't know what a long voyage, and what a hard life 'tis ! "





" Yes I do, Dan'l ; I can guess ! " cried Mrs. Gummidge.
u But my parting words under this roof is, I shall go into the
house and die, if I am not took. I can dig, Dan'l. I can
work. I can live hard. I can be loving and patient now —
more than you think, Dan'l, if you'll on'y try me. I wouldn't
touch the 'lowance, not if I was dying of want, Dan'l Peg-
gotty ; but I'll go with you and Em'ly, if you'll on'y let me,
to the world's end! I know how 'tis; I know you think that
I am lone and lorn; but deary love, 'tant so no more ! I an't
sat here, so long, a watching, and a thinking of your trials,
without some good being done me. Mas'r Davy, speak to him
for me; I knows his ways, and Em'ly's, and I knows their
sorrows, and can be a comfort to 'em, some odd times, and
labor for 'em alius ! Dan'l, deary Dan'l, let me go 'long with
you ! "

And Mrs. Gummidge took his hand, and kissed it with a
homely pathos and affection, in a homely rapture of devotion
and gratitude, that he well deserved.

We brought the locker out, extinguished the candle, fast-
ened the door on the outside, and left the old boat close shut
up, a dark speck in the cloudy night. Next day, when we
were returning to London outside the coach, Mrs. Gummidge
and her basket were on the seat behind, and Mrs. Gummidge
was happy.



332 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE



CHAPTER XXIII.

I ASSIST AT AN EXPLOSION.



i oItt



When the time Mr. Micawber had appointed so mysteriously,
was within four-and-twenty hours of being come, my aunt and
I consulted how we should proceed ; for my aunt was very
unwilling to leave Dora. Ah ! how easily I carried Dora up
and down stairs, now !

We were disposed, notwithstanding Mr. Micawber's stipula-
tion for my aunt's attendance, to arrange that she should stay
at home, and be represented by Mr. Dick and me. In short,
we had resolved to take this course, when Dora again unsettled
us by declaring that she never would forgive herself, and never
would forgive her bad boy, if my aunt remained behind on any
pretence.

" I won't speak to you," said Dora, shaking her curls at my
aunt. " I'll be disagreeable ! I'll make Jip bark at you all
day. I shall be sure that you really are a cross old thing, if
you don't go ! "

" Tut, Blossom ! " laughed my aunt. " You know you can't
do without me ! "

" Yes, I can," said Dora. " You are no use to me at all.
You never run up and down stairs for me, all day long. You
never sit and tell me stories about Doady, when his shoes were
worn out, and he was covered with dust — oh, what a poor lit-
tle mite of a fellow ! You never do anything at all to please
me, do you, dear ? " Dora made haste to kiss my aunt, and
say, "Yes, you do ! I'm only joking ! " — lest my aunt should
think she really meant it.

" But, aunt," said Dora, coaxingly, u now listen. You must
go. I shall tease you, till you let me have my own way about
it. I shall lead my naughty boy such a life, if he don't make
you go. I shall make myself so disagreeable — and so will
Jip ! You'll wish you had gone like a good thing, for ever



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 333

and ever so long, if you don't go. Besides/' said Dora, put-
ting back her hair, and looking wonder ingly at my aunt and
me, " why shouldn't you both go ? I am not very ill indeed.
Ami?"

" Why, what a question ! n cried my aunt.

" What a fancy !" said I.

" Yes ! I know I am a silly little thing ! " said Dora, slowly
looking from one of us to the other, and then putting up her
pretty lips to kiss us as she lay upon her couch. " Well, then,
you must both go, or I shall not believe you ; and then I shall
cry ! V.

I saw, in my aunt's face that she began to give way now, and
Dora brightened again, as she saw it too.

" You'll come back with so much to tell me, that it'll take
at least a week to make me understand ! " said Dora. "Because
I know I shan't understand, for a length of time, if there's any
business in it. And there's sure to be some business in it !
If there's anything to add up, besides, I don't know when I
shall make it out ; and my bad boy will look so miserable all
the time. There ! ISTow you'll go, won't you ? You'll only
be gone one night, and Jip will take care of me while you are
gone. Doady will carry me up stairs before you go, and I
won't come down again till you come back ; and you shall take
Agnes a dreadfully scolding letter from me because she has
never been to see us ! "

We agreed, without any more consultation, that we would
both go, and that Dora was a little Impostor, who feigned to be
rather unwell, because she liked to be petted. She was greatly
pleased, and very merry ; and we four, that is to say, my aunt,
Mr. Dick, Traddles, and I, went down to Canterbury by the
Dover mail that night.

At the hotel, where Mr. Micawber had requested us to
await him, which we got into, with some trouble, in the middle
of the night, I found a letter, importing that he would appear
in the morning punctually at half-past nine. After which, we
went shivering, at that uncomfortable hour, to our respective
beds, through various close passages ; which smelt as if they
had been steeped, for ages, in a solution of soup and stables.

Early in the morning, I sauntered through the dear old



334 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

tranquil streets, and again mingled with the shadows of the
venerable gateways and churches. The rooks were sailing
about the cathedral towers ; and the towers themselves, over-
looking many a long, unaltered mile of the rich country and
its pleasant streams, were cutting the bright morning air, as
if there were no such thing as change on earth. Yet the bells,
when they sounded, told me sorrowfully of change in every-
thing; told me of their own age, and my pretty Dora's youth ;
and of the many, never old, who had lived and loved and died,
while the reverberations of the bells had hummed through the
rusty armor of the Black Prince hanging up within, and, motes
upon the deep of Time, had lost themselves in air, as circles
do in water.

I looked at the old house from the corner of the street, but
did not go nearer to it, lest, being observed, I might unwit-
tingly do any harm to the design I had come to aid. The
early sun was striking edgewise on its gables and lattice-win-
dows, touching them with gold; and some beams of its old
peace seemed to touch my heart.

I strolled into the country for an hour or so, and then
returned by the main street, which in the interval had shaken
off its last night's sleep. Among those who were stirring in
the shops, I saw my ancient enemy, the butcher, now advanced
to top-boots and a baby, and in business for himself. He was
nursing the baby, and appeared to be a benignant member of
society.

We all became very anxious and impatient, when we sat
down to breakfast. As it approached nearer and nearer to
half-past nine o'clock, our restless expectation of Mr. Micaw-
ber increased. At last we made no more pretence of attending
to the meal, which, except with Mr. Dick, had been a mere
form from the first; but my aunt walked up and down the
room, Traddles sat upon the sofa affecting to read the paper
with his eyes on the ceiling ; and I looked out of the window
to give early notice of Mr. Micawber's coming. Nor had I
long to watch, for, at the first chime of the half-hour, he
appeared in the street.

" Here he is," said I, " and not in his legal attire ! V

My aunt tied the strings of her bonnet (she had come down



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 335

to breakfast in it), and put on her shawl, as if she were ready
for anything that was resolute and uncompromising. Traddles
buttoned his coat with a determined air. Mr. Dick, disturbed
by these formidable appearances, but feeling it necessary to
imitate them, pulled his hat, with both hands, as firmly over
his ears as he possibly could ; and instantly took it off again,
to welcome Mr. Micawber.

" Gentlemen, and madam," said Mr. Micawber, " good morn-
ing ! My dear sir," to Mr. Dick, who shook hands with him
violently, "you are extremely good."

"Have you breakfasted? " said Mr. Dick. "Have a chop !"

"Not for the world, my good sir!" cried Mr. Micawber,
stopping him on his way to the bell ; " appetite and myself,
Mr. Dixon, have long been strangers."

Mr. Dixon was so well pleased with his new name, and
appeared to think it so very obliging in Mr. Micawber to confer
it upon him, that he shook hands with him again, and laughed
rather childishly.

" Dick," said my aunt, " attention ! "

Mr. Dick recovered himself, with a blush.

"Now, sir," said my aunt to Mr. Micawber, as she put on
her gloves, "we are ready for Mount Vesuvius, or anything
else, as soon as you please."

"Madam," returned Mr. Micawber, "I trust you will shortly
witness an eruption. Mr. Traddles, I have your permission,
I believe, to mention here that we have been in communica-
tion together ? "
m "It is undoubtedly the fact, Copperfield,"'said Traddles, to
whom I looked in surprise. "Mr. Micawber has consulted
me, in reference to what he has in contemplation ; and I have
advised him to the best of my judgment."

"Unless I deceive myself, Mr. Traddles," pursued Mr.
Micawber, " what I contemplate is a disclosure of an important
nature."

"Highly so," said Traddles.

"Perhaps, under such circumstances, madam and gentle-
men," said Mr. Micawber, "you will do me the favor to sub-
mit yourselves, for the moment, to the direction of one, who,
however unworthy to be regarded in any other light but as a



336 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

Waif and Stray upon the shore of human nature, is still
your fellow nian, though crushed out of his original form by
individual errors, and the accumulative force of a combination
of circumstances ? "

" We have perfect confidence in you, Mr. Micawber," said I,
" and will do what you please."

"Mr. Copperfield," returned Mr. Micawber, "your confi-
dence is not, at the existing juncture, ill-bestowed. I would
beg to be allowed a start of five minutes by the clock ; and
then to receive the present company, inquiring for Miss
Wickfield, at the office of Wickfield and Heep, whose
Stipendiary I am."

My aunt and I looked at Traddles, who nodded his approval.

"I have no more," observed Mr. Micawber, "to say at
present."

With which, to my infinite surprise, he included us all in
a comprehensive bow, and disappeared ; his manner being
extremely distant, and his face extremely pale.

* Traddles only smiled, and shook his head (with his hair
standing upright on the top of it), when I looked to him for
an explanation ; so I took out my watch, and, as a last re-
source, counted off the five minutes. My aunt with her own
watch in her hand did the like. When the time was expired,
Traddles gave her his arm ; and we all went out together to
the old house, without saying one word on the way.

We found Mr. Micawber at his desk, in the turret office on
the ground floor, either writing, or pretending to write, hard.
The large office-ruler was stuck into his waistcoat, and was
not so well concealed but that a foot or more of that instru-
ment protruded from his bosom, like a new kind of shirt-frill.

As it appeared to me that I was expected to speak, I said
aloud :

" How do you do, Mr. Micawber ? "

"Mr. Copperfield," said Mr. Micawber, gravely, "I hope I
see you w T ell ? "

" Is Miss Wickfield at home ? " said I.

" Mr. Wickfield is unwell in bed, sir, of a rheumatic fever,"
he returned ; " but Miss Wickfield, I have no doubt, will be
happy to see old friends. Will you walk in, sir ? "



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 337

He preceded us to the dining-room — the first room I had
entered in that house — and flinging open the door of Mr.
Wickfield's former office, said, in a sonorous voice :

"Miss Trotwood, Mr. David Copperfield, Mr. Thomas
Tr addles, and Mr. Dixon!"

I had not seen Uriah Heep since the time of the blow.
Our visit astonished him, evidently ; not the less, I dare say,
because it astonished ourselves. He did not gather his eye-
brows together, for he had none worth mentioning ; but he
frowned to that degree that he almost closed his small eyes,
while the hurried raising of his grisly hand to his chin be-
trayed some trepidation or surprise. This was only when we
were in the act of entering his room, and when I caught a
glance at him over my aunt's shoulder. A moment after-
wards, he was as fawning and as humble as ever.

"Well, I am sure," he said. "This is indeed an unex-
pected pleasure ! To have, as I may say, all friends round
Saint Paul's, at once, is a treat unlooked for ! Mr. Copper-
field, I hope I see you well, and — if I may umbly express
self so — friendly towards them as is ever your friends,
whether or not. Mrs. Copperfield, sir, I hope she's getting
on. We have been made quite uneasy by the poor accounts
we have had of her state, lately, I do assure you."

I felt ashamed to let him take my hand, but I did not know
yet what else to do.

" Things are changed in this office, Miss Trotwood, since I
was an umble clerk, and held your pony ; ain't they ? " said
Uriah, with his sickliest smile. "But I am not changed,
Miss Trotwood."

" Well, sir," returned my aunt, " to tell you the truth, I
think you are pretty constant to the promise of your youth ;
if that's anjr satisfaction to you."

" Thank you, Miss Trotwood," said Uriah, writhing in his
ungainly manner, " for your good opinion ! Micawber, tell
'em to let Miss Agnes know — and mother. Mother will be
quite in a state, when she sees the present company ! " said
Uriah, setting chairs.

" You are not busy. Mr. Heep ? " said Traddles, whose eye

vol. ii — 22



338 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE






the cunning red eye accidentally caught, as it at once scruti-
nized and evaded us.

a No, Mr. Traddles," replied Uriah, resuming his official
seat, and squeezing his bony hands, laid palm to palm between
his bony knees. " Not so much as I could wish. But lawyers,
sharks, and leeches, are not easily satisfied, you know ! Not
but what myself and Micawber have our hands pretty full in
general, on account of Mr. Wickfield's being hardly fit for any
occupation, sir. But it's a pleasure as well as a duty, I am
sure, to work for him. You've not been intimate with Mr.
Wickfield, I think, Mr. Traddles ? I believe Pve only had
the honor of seeing you once myself ? "

" No, I have not been intimate with Mr. Wickfield," returned
Traddles ; "or I might perhaps have waited on you long ago,
Mr. Heep."

There was something in the tone of this reply, which made
Uriah look at the speaker again, with a very sinister and
suspicious expression. But, seeing only Traddles, with his
good-natured face, simple manner, and hair on end, he dis-
missed it as he replied, with a jerk of his whole body, but
especially his throat :

"I am sorry for that, Mr. Traddles. You would have
admired him as much as we all do. His little failings would
only have endeared him to you the more. But if you would
like to hear my fellow-partner eloquently spoken of, I should
refer you to Copperfield. The family is a subject he's very
strong upon, if you never heard him."

I was prevented from disclaiming the compliment (if I
should have done so, in any case), by the entrance of Agnes,
now ushered in by Mr. Micawber. She was not quite so self-
possessed as usual, I thought ; and had evidently undergone
anxiety and fatigue. But her earnest cordiality, and her quiet
beauty, shone with the gentler lustre for it.

I saw Uriah watch her while she greeted us ; and he re-
minded me of an ugly and rebellious genie watching a good
spirit. In the meanwhile, some slight sign passed between
Mr. Micawber and Traddles ; and Traddles, unobserved except
by me, went out.

" Don't wait, Micawber," said Uriah.



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 339

Mr. Micawber, with his hand upon the ruler in his breast,
stood erect before the door, most unmistakably contemplating
one of his fellow-men, and that man his employer.

" What are you waiting for ? " said Uriah. " Micawber !
did you hear me tell you not to wait ? "

" Yes ! " replied the immovable Mr. Micawber.

" Then why do you wait ? " said Uriah.

" Because I — in short choose," replied Mr. Micawber, with
a burst.

Uriah's cheeks lost color, and an unwholesome paleness, still
faintly tinged by his pervading red, overspread them. He
looked at Mr. Micawber attentively, with his whole face breath-
ing short and quick in every feature.

" You are a dissipated fellow, as all the world knows," he
said, with an effort at a smile, "and I am afraid you'll oblige
me to get rid of you. Go along ! I'll talk to you presently."

" If there is a scoundrel on this earth," said Mr. Micawber,
suddenly breaking out again with the utmost vehemence,
" with whom I have already talked too much, that scoundrel's
name is — Heep ! "

Uriah fell back, as if he had been struck or stung. Looking
slowly round upon us with the darkest and wickedest expres-
sion that his face could wear, he said, in a lower voice :

" Oho ! This is a conspiracy ! You have met here, by
appointment ! You are playing Booty with my clerk, are
you, Copperfield ? Now, take care. You'll make nothing of
this. We understand each other, you and me. There's no
love between us. You were always a puppy with a proud
stomach, from your first coming here ; and you envy me my
rise, do you? None of your plots against me; I'll counter-
plot you ! Micawber, you be off. I'll talk to you presently."

"Mr. Micawber," said I, "there is a sudden change in this
fellow, in more respects than the extraordinary one of his
speaking the truth in one particular, which assures me that
he is brought to bay. Deal with him as he deserves ! "

"You are a precious set of people, ain't you ? " said Uriah,
in the same low voice, and breaking out into a clammy heat,
which he wiped from his forehead, with his long lean hand,
" to buy over my clerk, who is the very scum of society, — as



340 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

you yourself were, Copperfield, you know it, before any one
had charity on you, — to defame me with his lies ? Miss Trot-
wood, you had better stop this; or I'll stop your husband
shorter than will be pleasant to you. I won't know your story
professionally, for nothing, old lady ! Miss Wickfield, if you
have any love for your father, you had better not join that
gang. I'll ruin him, if you do. Now, come ! I have got some
of you under the harrow. Think twice, before it goes over
you. Think twice, you, Micawber, if you don't want to be
crushed. I recommend you to take yourself off, and be talked
to presently, you fool ! while there's time to retreat. Where's
mother ! " he said, suddenly appearing to notice, with alarm,
the absence of Traddles, and pulling down the bell-rope.
" Fine doings in a person's own house ! "

" Mrs. Heep is here, sir," said Traddles, returning with that
worthy mother of a worthy son. " I have taken the liberty of
making myself known to her."

" Who are you to make yourself known ? " retorted Uriah.
" And what do you want here ? "

"I am the agent and friend of Mr. Wickfield, sir," said
Traddles, in a composed business-like way. "And I have a
power of attorney from him in my pocket, to act for him in all
matters."

"The old ass has drunk himself into a state of dotage,"
said Uriah, turning uglier than before, " and it has been got
from him by fraud ! "

"Something has been got from him by fraud, I know,"
returned Traddles quietly ; " and so do you, Mr. Heep. We
will refer that question, if you please, to Mr. Micawber."

" Ury — ! " Mrs. Heep began, with an anxious gesture.

" You hold your tongue, mother," he returned ; " least said,
soonest mended."

"But my Ury — "

"Will you hold your tongue, mother, and leave it to me ? "

Though I had long known that his servility was false, and
all his pretences knavish and hollow, I had had no adequate
conception of the extent of his hypocrisy, until I now saw him
with his mask off. The suddenness with which he dropped
it, when he perceived that it was useless to him ; the malice,



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 341

insolence, and hatred he revealed; the leer with which he
exulted, even at this moment, in the evil he had done — all
this time being desperate too, and at his wit's end for the
means of getting the better of us — though perfectly consist-
ent with the experience I had of him, at first took even me
by surprise, who had known him so long, and disliked him so
heartily.

I say nothing of the look he conferred on me, as he "stood
eyeing us, one after another ; for I had always understood
that he hated me, and I remembered the marks of my hand
upon his cheek. But when his eyes passed on to Agnes, and
I saw the rage with which he felt his power over her slipping
away, and the exhibition, in their disappointment, of the
odious passions that had led him to aspire to one whose vir-
tues he could never appreciate or care for, I was shocked by
the mere thought of her having lived, an hour, within sight of
such a man.

After some rubbing of the lower part of his face, and some
looking at us with those bad eyes, over his grisly fingers, he
made one more address to me, half whining, and half abusive.

"You think it justifiable, do you, Copperfield, you who
pride yourself so much on your honor and all the rest of it,
to sneak about my place, eaves-dropping with my clerk ? If it
had been me, I shouldn't have wondered; for I don't make
myself out a gentleman (though I never was in the streets
either, as you were, according to Micawber), but being you!
— And you're not afraid of doing this, either ? You don't
think at all of what I shall do, in return ; or of getting your-
self into trouble for conspiracy and so forth? Very well.
We shall see ! Mr. What's-your-name, you were going to refer
some question to Micawber. There's your referee. Why don't
you make him speak ? He has learnt his lesson, I see."

Seeing that what he said had no effect on me or any of us,
he sat on the edge of his table with his hands in his pockets,
and one of his splay feet twisted round the other leg, waiting
doggedly for what might follow.

Mr. Micawber, whose impetuosity I had restrained thus far
with the greatest difficulty, and who had repeatedly interposed
with the first syllable of ScouN-drel ! without getting to the



342 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

second, now burst forward, drew the ruler from his breast
(apparently as a defensive weapon), and produced from his
pocket a foolscap document, folded in the form of a large
letter. Opening this packet, with his old flourish, and glanc-
ing at the contents, as if he cherished an artistic admiration
of their style of composition, he began to read as follows :

" < Dear Miss Trotwood and gentlemen — } "

" Bless and save the man ! " exclaimed my aunt in a low
voice. " He'd write letters by the ream, if it was a capital
offence ! "

Mr. Micawber, without hearing her, went on.

" ' In appearing before you to denounce probably the most
consummate Villain that has ever existed/ " Mr. Micawber,
without looking off the letter, pointed the ruler, like a ghostly
truncheon, at Uriah Heep, u < I ask no consideration for myself.
The victim, from my cradle, of pecuniary liabilities to which
I have been unable to respond, I have ever been the sport and
toy of debasing circumstances. Ignominy, Want, Despair,
and Madness, have, collectively or separately, been the attend-
ants of my career/ "

The relish with which Mr. Micawber described himself, as
a prey to these dismal calamities, was only to be equalled by
the emphasis with which he read his letter ; and the kind of
homage he rendered to it with a roll of his head, when he
thought he had hit a sentence very hard indeed.

"'In an accumulation of Ignominy, Want, Despair, and
Madness, I entered the office — or, as our lively neighbor the
Gaul would term it, the Bureau — of the Firm, nominally con-
ducted under the appellation of Wickfield and — Heep, but, in
reality, wielded by — Heep, alone. Heep, and only Heep, is
the mainspring of that machine. Heep, and only Heep, is the
Forger and the Cheat/ "

Uriah, more blue than white at these words, made a dart at
the letter, as if to tear it in pieces. Mr. Micawber, with a per-
fect miracle of dexterity or luck, caught his advancing knuckles
with the ruler, and disabled his right hand. It dropped at the
wrist, as if it were broken. The blow sounded as if it had fal-
len on wood








" The Devil take you ! " said Uriah, writhing in a new way
With pain. "I'll be even with you."

"Approach me again, you — you — you Heep of infamy/ 5
gasped Mr. Micawber, " and if your head is human, I'll break
it. Come on, come on ! n

I think I never saw anything more ridiculous — I was sensi-
ble of it, even at the time — than Mr. Micawber making broad-
sword guards with the ruler, and crying, "Come on!" while
Traddles and I pushed him back into a corner, from which,
as often as we got him into it, he persisted, in emerging again.

His enemy, muttering to himself, after wringing his wounded
hand for some time, slowly drew off his neck-kerchief and
bound it up ; then, held it in his other hand, and sat upon his
table with his sullen face looking down.

Mr. Micawber, when he was sufficiently cool, proceeded with
his letter.

" i The stipendiary emoluments in consideration of which I
entered into the service of — Heep/" always pausing before
that word, and uttering it with astonishing vigor, " i were not
defined, beyond the pittance of twenty-two shillings and six
per week. The rest was left contingent on the value of my
professional exertions ; in other and more expressive words,
on the baseness of my nature, the cupidity of my motives, the
poverty of my family, the general moral (or rather immoral)
resemblance between myself and — Heep. Need I say, that
it soon became necessary for me to solicit from — Heep —
pecuniary advances towards the support of Mrs. Micawber,
and our blighted but rising family ! Need I say that this
necessity had been foreseen by — Heep ? That those advances
were secured by I. 0. XL's and other similar acknowledgments,
known to the legal institutions of this country. And that I
thus became immeshed in the web he had spun for my recep-
tion ? ' "

Mr. Mieawber's enjoyment of his epistolary powers, in
describing this unfortunate state of things, really seemed to
outweigh any pain or anxiety that the reality could have caused
him. He read on :

" l Then it was that — Heep — began to favor me with just
so much of his confidence, as was necessary to the discharge



344 THE PER SON AL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

of his infernal business. Then it was that I began, if I may
so Shakespearianly express myself, to dwindle, peak, and
pine. I found that my services were constantly called into
requisition for the falsification of business, and the mystifica-
tion of an individual whom I will designate as Mr. W. That
Mr. W. was imposed upon, kept in ignorance, and deluded,
in every possible way; yet, that all this while, the ruffian —
Heep — was professing unbounded gratitude to, and unbounded
friendship for, that much abused gentleman. This was bad
enough ; but, as the philosophic Dane observes, with that uni-
versal applicability which distinguishes the illustrious orna-
ment of the Elizabethan Era, worse remains behind ! ' "

Mr. Micawber was so very much struck by this happy round-
ing off with a quotation, that he indulged himself, and us, with
a second reading of the sentence, under pretence of having lost
his place.

" c It is not my intention/ " he continued, reading on, u c to
enter on a detailed list, within the compass of the present
epistle (though it is ready elsewhere), of the various malprac-
tices of a minor nature, affecting the individual whom I have
denominated Mr. W., to which I have been a tacitly consent-
ing party. My object, when the contest within myself between
stipend and no stipend, baker and no baker, existence and non-
existence, ceased, was to take advantage of my opportunities
to discover and expose the major malpractices committed, to
that gentleman's grievous wrong and injury, by — Heep.
Stimulated by the silent monitor within, and by a no less
touching and appealing monitor without — to whom I will
briefly refer as Miss W. — I entered on a not unlaborious task
of clandestine investigation, protracted now, to the best of my
knowledge, information, and belief, over a period exceeding
twelve calendar months/ "

He read this passage, as if it were from an Act of Parlia-
ment ; and appeared majestically refreshed by the sound of
the words.

" c My charges against — Heep/ " he read on, glancing at
him, and drawing the ruler into a convenient position under
his left arm, in case of need, " c are as f ollows.' "

"We all held our breath, I think. I am sure Uriah held his.



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 345

" < First/ " said Mr. Micawber. " < When Mr. W.'s faculties
and memory for business became, through causes into which
it is not necessary or expedient for me to enter, weakened and
confused, — Heep — designedly perplexed and complicated
the whole of the official transactions. When Mr. W. was
least fit to enter on business, — Heep was always at hand to
force him to enter on it. He obtained Mr. W.'s signature
under such circumstances to documents of importance, repre-
senting them to be other documents of no importance. He
induced Mr. W. to empower him to draw out, thus, one par-
ticular sum of trust-money, amounting to twelve six fourteen,
two, and nine, and employed it to meet pretended business
charges and deficiencies which were either already provided
for, or had never really existed. He gave this proceeding,
throughout, the appearance of having originated in Mr. W.'s
own dishonest intention, and of having been accomplished by
Mr. W.'s own dishonest act; and has used it, ever since, to
torture and constrain him.' "

" You shall proje this, you Copperfield ! " said Uriah, with
a threatening shake of the head. " All in good time ! "

"Ask — Heep — Mr. Traddles, who lived in his house after
him," said Mr. Micawber, breaking off from the letter; "will
you ? "

" The fool himself — and lives there now," said Uriah, dis-
dainfully.

" Ask — Heep — if he ever kept a pocket-book in that
house," said Mr. Micawber ; " will you ? "

I saw Uriah's lank hand stop, involuntarily, in the scraping
of his chin.

"Or ask him," said Mr. Micawber, "if he ever burnt one
there ? If he says yes, and asks you where the ashes are,
refer him to Wilkins Micawber, and he will hear of something
not at all to his advantage ! "

The triumphant flourish with which Mr. Micawber delivered
himself of these words, had a powerful effect in alarming the
mother ; who cried out in much agitation :

" Ury, Ury ! Be umble, and make terms, my dear ! "

" Mother ! " he retorted, " will you keep quiet ? You're in
a fright, and don't know -what you say or mean. Umble ! " he



346 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

repeated; looking at me, with a snarl ; " I've umbled some of
; em for a pretty long time back, umble as I was ! "

Mr. Micawber, genteelly adjusting his chin in his cravat,
presently proceeded with his composition.

" ' Second. Heep has, on several occasions, to the best of
my knowledge, information, and belief — ; "

"But that won't do," muttered Uriah, relieved. "Mother,
you keep quiet."

"We will endeavor to provide something that will do,
and do for you finally, sir, very shortly," replied Mr. Micaw-
ber.

" c Second. Heep has, on several occasions, to the best of
my knowledge, information, and belief, systematically forged,
to various entries, books, and documents, the signature of Mr.
W. ; and has distinctly done so in one instance, capable of
proof by me. To wit, in manner following, that is to say * ; "

Again, Mr. Micawber had a relish in this formal piling up
of words, which, however ludicrously displayed in his case,
was, I must say, not at all peculiar to him. I have observed
it, in the course of my life, in numbers of men. It seems to
me to be a general rule. In the taking of legal oaths, for
instance, deponents seem to enjoy themselves mightily when
they come to several good words in succession, for the expres-
sion of one idea ; as, that they utterly detest, abominate, and
abjure, or so forth ; and the old anathemas were made relish-
ing on the same principle. We talk about the tyranny of
words, but we like to tyrannize over them too ; we are fond of
having a large superfluous establishment of words to wait
upon us on great occasions ; we think it looks important, and
sounds well. As we are not particular about the meaning of
our liveries on state occasions, if they be but fine and numer-
ous enough, so the meaning or necessity of our words is a
secondary consideration, if there be but a great parade of
them. And as individuals get into trouble by making too
great a show of liveries, or as slaves when they are too
numerous rise against their masters, so I think I could men-
tion a nation that has got into many great difficulties, and will
get into many greater, from maintaining too large a retinue of
words.





Mr. Micawber read on, almost smacking his lips :

"'To wit, in manner following, that is to say. Mr. W.
being infirm, and it being within the bounds of probability
that his disease might lead to some discoveries, and to the
downfall of — Heep's — power over the W. family, — as I,
Wilkins Micawber, the undersigned, assume — unless the filial
affection of his daughter could be secretly influenced from
allowing any investigation of the partnership affairs to be
ever^made, the said — Heep — deemed it expedient to have a
bond ready by him, as from Mr. W., for the before-mentioned
sum of twelve six fourteen, two and nine, with interest, stated
therein to have been advanced by — Heep — to Mr. W. to save
Mr. W. from dishonor ; though really the sum was never ad-
vanced by him, and has long been replaced. The signatures
to this instrument, purporting to be executed by Mr. W. and
attested by Wilkins Micawber, are forgeries by — Heep. I
have, in my possession, in his hand and pocket-book, several
similar imitations of Mr. W.'s signature, here and there de-
faced by fire, but legible to any one. I never attested any
such document. And I have the document itself, in my pos-
session/ "

Uriah Heep, with a start, took out of his pocket a bunch of
keys, and opened a certain drawer ; then suddenly bethought
himself of what he was about, and turned again towards us,
without looking in it.

"'And I have the document/" Mr. Micawber read again,
looking about as if it were the text of a sermon, " { in my pos-
session/ — that is to say, I had, early this morning, when this
was written, but have since relinquished it to Mr. Traddles."

" It is quite true," assented Traddles.

"Ury, Ury ! " cried the mother, "be umble and make terms.
I know my son will be umble, gentlemen, if you'll give him
time to think. Mr. Copperfield, I'm sure you know that he
was always very umble, sir ! "

It was singular to see how the mother still held to the old
trick, when the son had abandoned it as useless.

" Mother," he said, with an impatient bite at the handker-
chief in which his hand was wrapped, " you had better take
and fire a loaded gun at me,"



348 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" But I love you, Ury," cried Mrs. Heep. And I have no
doubt she did ; or that he loved her, however strange it may
appear; though, to be sure, they were a congenial couple.
u And I can't bear to hear you provoking the gentleman, and
endangering of yourself more. I told the gentleman at first,
when he told me up stairs it was come to light, that I would
answer for your being umble, and making amends. Oh, see
how umble J am, gentlemen, and don't mind him ! "

"Why, there's Copperfield, mother," he angrily retorted,
pointing his lean finger at me, against whom all his animosity
was levelled, as the prime mover in the discovery ; and I did
not undeceive him; "there's Copperfield, would have given
you a hundred pound to say less than you've blurted out ! "

" I can't help it, Ury," cried his mother. " I can't see you
running into danger, through carrying your head so high.
Better be umble, as you always was."

He remained for a little, biting the handkerchief, and then
said to me with a scowl :

" What more have you got to bring forward ? If anything,
go on with it. What do you look at me for ? "

Mr. Micawber promptly resumed his letter, only too glad to
revert to a performance with which he was so highly satisfied.

" ' Third. And last. I am now in a condition to show, by
— Heep's — false books, and — Heep's — real memoranda,
beginning with the partially destroyed pocket-book (which I
was unable to comprehend, at the time of its accidental dis-
covery by Mrs. Micawber, on our taking possession of our
present abode, in the locker or birin devoted to the reception
of the ashes calcined on our domestic hearth), that the weak-
nesses, the faults, the very virtues, the parental affections,
and the sense of honor, of the unhappy Mr. W. have been
for years acted on by, and warped to the base purposes of —
Heep. That Mr. W. has been for years deluded and plun-
dered, in every conceivable manner, to the pecuniary aggran-
dizement of the avaricious, false, and grasping — Heep. That
the engrossing object of — Heep — was, next to gain, to sub-
due Mr. and Miss W. (of his ulterior views in reference to
the latter I say nothing)^ entirely to himself. That his last
act, completed but a few months since, was to induce Mr. W.



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 349

to execute a relinquishment of his share in the partnership,
and even a bill of sale on the very furniture of his house, in
consideration of a certain annuity, to be well and truly paid
by — Heep — on the four common quarter-days in each and
every year. That these meshes ; beginning with alarming and
falsified accounts of the estate of which Mr. W. is the receiver,
at a period when Mr. W. had launched into imprudent and ill-
judged speculations, and may not have had the money, for
which he was morally and legally responsible, in hand ; going
on with pretended borrowings of money at enormous interest,
really coming from — Heep — and by — Heep — fraudulently
obtained or withheld from Mr. W. himself, on pretence of
such speculations or otherwise; perpetuated by a miscella-
neous catalogue of unscrupulous chicaneries — gradually thick-
ened, until the unhappy Mr. W. could see no world beyond.
Bankrupt, as he believed, alike in circumstances, in all other
hope, and in honor, his sole reliance was upon the monster in
the garb of man/ " — Mr. Micawber made a good deal of this,
as a new turn of expression, — " c who, by making himself
necessary to him, had achieved his destruction. All this I
undertake to show. Probably much more ! * "

I whispered a few words to Agnes, who was weeping, half
joyfully, half-sorrowfully, at my side ; and there was a move-
ment among us, as if Mr. Micawber had finished. He said,
with exceeding gravity, " Pardon me," and proceeded, with a
mixture of the lowest spirits and the most intense enjoyment,
to the peroration of his letter.

"<I have now concluded. It merely remains for me to
substantiate these accusations; and then, with my ill-starred
family, to disappear from the landscape on which we appear
to be an incumbrance. That is soon done. It may be rea-
sonably inferred that our baby will first expire of inanition, as
being the frailest member of our circle ; and that our twins
will follow next in order. So be it ! For myself, my Canter-
bury Pilgrimage has done much; imprisonment on civil process,
and want, will soon do more. I trust that the labor and hazard
of an investigation — of which the smallest results have been
slowly pieced together, in the pressure of arduous avocations,
under grinding penurious apprehensions, at rise of morn, at



350 THE PERSONAL HISTOBY AND EXPERIENCE

dewy eve, in the shadows of night, under the watchful eye of
one whom it were superfluous to call Demon — combined with
the struggle of parental Poverty to turn it, when completed,
to the right account, may be as the sprinkling of a few drops
of sweet water on my funereal pyre. I ask no more. Let it be,
in justice, merely said of me, as of a gallant and eminent
naval Hero, with whom I have no pretensions to cope, that
what I have done, I did, in despite of mercenary and selfish
objects,

For England, home and Beauty.

"'Remaining always, &c. &c, Wilkixs Micawber.'"

Much affected, but still intensely enjoying himself, Mr.
Micawber folded up his letter, and handed it with a bow to
my aunt, as something she might like to keep.

There was, as I had noticed on my first visit long ago, an
iron safe in the room. The key was in it. A hasty suspicion
seemed to strike Uriah ; and with a glance at Mr. Micawber,
he went to it, and threw the doors clanking open. It was
empty.

" Where are the books ! " he cried, with a .frightful face.
" Some thief has stolen the books ! "

Mr. Micawber tapped himself with the ruler. " I did, when
I got the key from you as usual — but a little earlier — and
opened it this morning."

"Don't be uneasy," said Traddles. "They have come into
my possession, I will take care of them, under the authority
I mentioned."

" You receive stolen goods, do you ? " cried Uriah.

"Under such circumstances," answered Traddles, "yes."

What was my astonishment when. I beheld my aunt, who
had been profoundly quiet and attentive, make a dart at Uriah
Heep, and seize him by the collar with both hands !

" You know what I want ? " said my aunt.

" A strait-waistcoat," said he.

"jSTo. My Property!" returned my aunt. "Agnes, my
dear, as long as I believed it had been really made away with
by your father, I wouldn't — and, my dear, I didn't, even to
Trot, as he knows, — breathe a syllable of its having been




z

UJ
UJ

I-

UJ

m

u
o

z

UJ
Q
U.

o
u



<



D
2



U-

O



<

o

I-
</>

UJ





placed here for investment. But, now I know this fellow's
answerable for it, and I'll have it ! Trot, come and take it
away from him ! "

Whether my aunt supposed, for the moment, that he kept
her property in his neck-kerchief, I am sure I don't know;
but she certainly pulled at it as if she thought so/ I hastened
to put myself between them, and to assure her that Ave would
all take care that he should make the utmost restitution of
everything he had wrongly got. This, and a few moments'
reflection, pacified her ; but she was not at all disconcerted by
what she had done (though. I cannot say as much for her
bonnet) and resumed her seat composedly.

During the last few minutes, Mrs. Heep had been clamoring
to her son to be "umble;" and had been going down on her
knees to all of us in succession, and making the wildest prom-
ises. Her son sat her down in his chair ; and, standing sulkily
by her, holding her arm with his hand, but not rudely, said
to me, with a ferocious look :

" What do you want done ? " ,

" I will tell you what must be done," said Traddles .

" Has that Copperfield no tongue?" muttered Uriah. "I
would do a good deal for you if you could tell me, without
lying, that somebody had cut it out."

" My Uriah means to be umble ! " cried his mother. " Don't
mind what he says, good gentlemen ! "

" What must be done," said Traddles, " is this. First, the
deed of relinquishment, that we have heard of, must be given
over to me now — here."

" Suppose I haven't got it," he interrupted.

" But you have," said Traddles ; " therefore, you know, we
won't suppose so." And I cannot help avowing that this Was
the first occasion on which I really did justice to the clear
head, and the plain, patient, practical good sense, of my old
schoolfellow. " Then," said Traddles, " you must prepare to
disgorge all that your rapacity has become possessed of, and
to make restoration to the last farthing. All the partnership
books and papers must remain in our possession; all your
books and papers ; all money accounts and securities, of both
kinds. In short, everything here."



352 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" Must it ? I don't know that/' said Uriah. " I must have
time to think about that."

" Certainly/' replied Traddles ; " but, in the meanwhile, and
until everything is done to our satisfaction, we shall maintain
possession of these things; and beg you — in short, compel
you — to keep your own room, and hold no communication
with any one."

" I won't do it ! " said Uriah, with an oath.

"Maidstone Jail is a safer place of detention/' observed
Traddles ; " and though the law may be longer in righting us,
and may not be able to right us so completely as you can, there
is no doubt of its punishing you. Dear me, you know that
quite as well as I! Copperfield, will you go round to the
Guildhall, and bring a couple of officers ? "

Here, Mrs. Heep broke out again, crying on her knees to
Agnes to interfere in their behalf, exclaiming that he was
very humble, and it was all true, and if he didn't do what we
wanted, she would, and much more to the same purpose ; being
half frantic with fears for her darling. To inquire what he
might have done, if he had had any boldness, would be like
inquiring what a mongrel cur might do, if it had the spirit of
a tiger. He was a coward, from head to foot; and showed
his dastardly nature through his sullenness and mortification,
as much as at any time of his mean life.

" Stop ! " he growled to me ; and wiped his hot face with
his hand. " Mother, hold your noise. Well ! Let 'em have
that deed. Go and fetch it ! "

" Do you help her, Mr. Dick," said Traddles, " if you please."

Proud of his commission, and understanding it, Mr. Dick
accompanied her as a shepherd's dog might accompany a sheep.
But, Mrs. Heep gave him little trouble ; for she not only re-
turned with the deed, but with the box in which it was, where
we found a banker's book and some other papers that were
afterwards serviceable.

"Good!" said Traddles, when this was brought. "Now,
Mr. Heep, you can retire to think : particularly observing, if
you please, that I declare to you, on the part of all present,
that there is only one thing to be done ; that it is what I have
explained ; and that it must be done without delay."





Uriah, without lifting his eyes from the ground, shuffled
across the room with his hand to his chin, and pausing at the
door, said :

" Copperfield, I have always hated you. You've always been
an upstart, and you've always been against me."

" As I think I told you once before," said I, " it is you who
have been, in your greed and cunning, against all the world.
It may be profitable to you to reflect, in future, that there
never were greed and cunning in the world yet, that did not
do too much, and over-reach themselves. It is as certain as
death."

" Or as certain as they used to teach at school (the same
school where I picked up so much umbleness), from nine
o'clock to eleven, that labor was a curse ; and from eleven
o'clock to one, that it was a blessing and a cheerfulness, and
a dignity, and I don't know what all, eh ? " said he with a
sneer. ? You preach, about as consistent as they did. Won't
umbleness go down ? I shouldn't have got round my gentle-
man fellow-partner without it, I think. — Micawber, you old
bully, I'll pay you ! "

Mr. Micawber, supremely defiant of him and his extended
finger, and making a great deal of his chest until he had slunk
out at the door, then addressed himself to me, and proffered
me the satisfaction of "witnessing the re-establishment of
mutual confidence between himself and Mrs. Micawber." After
which, he invited the company generally to the contemplation
of that affecting spectacle.

"The veil that has long been interposed between Mrs.
Micawber and myself, is now withdrawn," said Mr. Micawber ;
"and my children and the Author of their Being can once
more come in contact on equal terms."

As we were all very grateful to him, and all desirous to
show that we were, as well as the hurry and disorder of our
spirits would permit, I dare say we should all have gone, but
that it was necessary for Agnes to return to her father, as yet
unable to bear more than the dawn of hope ; and for some one
else to hold Uriah in safe keeping. So Traddles remained
for the latter purpose, to be presently relieved by Mr. Dick ;
and Mr. Dick, my aunt, and I went home with Mr. Micawber.
vol. ii — 23



354 TEE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

As I parted hurriedly from the dear girl to whom I owed so
much, and thought from what she had been saved, perhaps,
that morning — her better resolution notwithstanding — I felt
devoutly thankful for the miseries of my younger days which
had brought me to the knowledge of Mr. Micawber.

His house was not far off ; and as the street-door opened
into the sitting-room, and he bolted in with a precipitation
quite his own, we found ourselves at once in the bosom of the
family. Mr. Micawber exclaiming, " Emma ! my life ! " rushed
into Mrs. Micawber's arms. Mrs. Micawber shrieked, and
folded Mr. Micawber in her embrace. Miss Micawber, nursing
the unconscious stranger of Mrs. Micawber^s last letter to me,
was sensibly affected. The stranger leaped. The twins tes-
tified their joy by several inconvenient but innocent demon-
strations. Master Micawber, whose disposition appeared to have
been soured by early disappointment, and whose aspect had
become morose, yielded to his better feelings, and blubbered.

" Emma ! " said Mr. Micawber. " The cloud is past from
my mind. Mutual confidence, so long preserved between us
once, is restored, to know no farther interruption. Now, wel-
come poverty ! " cried Mr. Micawber, shedding tears. " Wel-
come misery, welcome houselessness, welcome hunger, rags,
tempest, and beggary ! Mutual confidence will sustain us to
the end.

With these expressions, Mr. Micawber placed Mrs. Micaw-
ber in a chair, and embraced the family all round ; welcoming
a variety of bleak prospects, which appeared, to the best of
my judgment, to be anything but welcome to them ; and calling
upon them to come out into Canterbury and sing a chorus, as
nothing else was left for their support.

But Mrs. Micawber having, in the strength of her emotions,
fainted away, the first thing to be done, even before the chorus
could be considered complete, was to recover her. This, my
aunt and Mr. Micawber did ; and then my aunt was introduced,
and Mrs. Micawber recognized me.

"Excuse me, dear Mr. Copperfield," said the poor lady,
giving me her hand, 9 but I am not strong ; and the removal
of the late misunderstanding between Mr. Micawber and myself
was at first too much for me."





" Is this all your f amily, ma'am ? " said my aunt.

" There are no more at present," returned Mrs. Micawber.

" Good gracious, I didn't mean that, ina'am," said my aunt.
" I mean are all these yours ? "

" Madam," replied Mr. Micawber, " it is a true bill."

"And that eldest young gentleman, now," said my aunt,
musing, " What has he been brought up to ? " .

"It was my hope when I came here," said Mr. Micawber,
" to have got Wilkins into the Church : or perhaps I shall
express my meaning more strictly, if I say the Choir. But
there was no vacancy for a tenor in the venerable Pile for
which this city is so justly eminent; and he has — in short,
he has contracted a habit of singing in public-houses, rather
than in sacred edifices."

" But he means well," said Mrs. Micawber, tenderly.

"I dare say, my love," rejoined Mr. Micawber, "that he
means particularly well; but I have not yet found that he
carries out his meaning, in any given direction whatsoever."

Master Micawber's moroseness of aspect returned upon him
again, and he demanded, with some temper, what he was to.
do ? Whether he had been born a carpenter, or a coach
painter, any more than he had been born a bird ? Whether
he could go into the next street, and open a chemist's shop ?
Whether he could rush to the next assizes, and proclaim him-
self a lawyer ? Whether he could come out by force at the
opera, and succeed by violence ? Whether he could do any-
thing, without being brought up to something ?

My aunt mused a little while, and then said :

"Mr. Micawber, I wonder you have never turned your
thoughts to emigration."

"Madam," returned Mr. Micawber, "it was the dream of
my youth, and the fallacious aspiration of my riper years."
I am thoroughly persuaded, by the by, that he had never
thought of it in his life.

" Ay ? " said my aunt, with a glance at me. " Why, what
a thing it would be for yourselves and your family, Mr. and
Mrs. Micawber, if you were to emigrate now."

"Capital, madam, capital," urged Mr. Micawber, gloomily.



356 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

"That is the principal, I may say the only difficulty, my
dear Mr. Copperfield," assented his wife.

" Capital ? " cried my aunt. " But you are doing us a great
service — have done us a great service, I may say, for surely
much will come out of the fire — and what could we do for
you, that would be half so good as to find the capital ? "

" I could not receive it as a gift," said Mr. Micawber, full
of fire and animation, "but if a sufficient sum could be ad-
vanced, say at five per cent interest per annum, upon my
personal liability — say my notes of hand, at twelve, eighteen,
and twenty-four months, respectively, to allow time for some-
thing to turn up — "

" Could be ? Can be and shall be, on your own terms,"
returned my aunt, " if you say the word. Think of this now,
both of you. Here are some people David knows, going out
to Australia shortly. If you decide to go, why shouldn't you
go in the same ship ? You may help each other. Think of
this now, Mr. and Mrs. Micawber. Take your time, and weigh
it well."

" There is but one question, my dear ma'am, I could wish
to ask," said Mrs. Micawber. "The climate, T believe, is
healthy."

" Finest in the world ! " said my aunt.

"Just so," returned Mrs. Micawber. "Then my question
arises. Now, are the circumstances of the country such, that
a man of Mr. Micawber's abilities would have a fair chance
of rising in the social scale ? I will not say, at present, might
he aspire to be Governor, or anything of that sort ; but would
there be a reasonable opening for his talents to develop them-
selves — that, would be amply sufficient — and find their own
expansion ? "

" No better opening anywhere," said my aunt, " for a man
who conducts himself well, and is industrious."

"For a man who conducts himself well," repeated Mrs.
Micawber, with her clearest business manner, " and is indus-
trious. Precisely. It is evident to me that Australia is the
legitimate sphere of action for Mr. Micawber ! "

"I entertain the conviction, my dear madam," said Mr.
Micawber, "that it is, under existing circumstances, the land,





the only land, for myself and family ; and that something of
an extraordinary nature will turn up on that shore. It is no
distance — comparatively speaking ; and though consideration
is due to the kindness of your proposal, I assure you that is a
mere matter of form."

Shall I ever forget how, in a moment, he was the most
sanguine of "men, looking on to fortune ; or how Mrs. Micaw-
ber presently discoursed about the habits of the kangaroo !
Shall I ever recall that street of Canterbury on a. market day,
without recalling him, as he walked back with us ; expressing,
in the hardy roving manner he assumed, the unsettled habits
of a temporary sojourner in the land ; and looking at the
bullocks, as they came by, with the eye of an Australian
farmer !



358 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE



CHAPTER XXIV.

ANOTHER RETROSPECT.









I must pause yet once again. 0, my child-wife, there is a
figure in the moving crowd before my memory, quiet and still,
saying in its innocent love and childish beauty, Stop to think
of me — turn to look upon the little blossom, as it flutters to
the ground !

I do. All else grows dim, and fades away. I am again with
Dora, in our cottage. I do not know how long she has been
ill. I am so used to it in feeling, that I cannot count the time.
It is not really long, in weeks or months ; but, in my usage
and experience, it is a weary, weary while.

They have left off telling me to "wait a few days more
I have begun to fear, remotely, that the day may never shine,
when I shall see my child-wife running in the sunlight with
her old friend Jip.

He is, as it were suddenly, grown very old. It may be, that
he misses in his mistress, something that enlivened him and
made him younger ; but he mopes, and his sight is weak, and
his limbs are feeble, and my aunt is sorry that he objects to
her no more, but creeps near her as he lies on Dora's bed —
she sitting at the bedside — and mildly licks her hand.

Dora lies smiling on us, and is beautiful, and utters no hasty
or complaining word. She says that we are very good to her ;
that her dear old careful boy is tiring himself out, she knows
that my aunt has no sleep, ^yet is always wakeful, active, and
kind. Sometimes, the little bird-like ladies come to see her;
and then we talk about our wedding-day, and all that happy
time.

What a strange rest and pause in my'life there seems to be
— and in all life, within doors and without — when I sit in
the quiet, shaded, orderly room,- with the blue eyes of my
child-wife turned towards me, and her little fingers twining



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 359

round my hand ! Many and many an hour I sit thus ; but,
of all those times, three times come the freshest on my mind.

It is morning ; and Dora, made so trim by my aunt's hands,
shows me how her pretty hair will curl upon the pillow yet,
and how long and bright it is, and how she likes to have it
loosely gathered in that net she wears!

"Not that I am vain of it, now, you mocking boy," she
says, when I smile ; "but because you used to say you thought
it so beautiful ; and because, when I first began to think about
you, I used to peep in the glass, and wonder whether you
would like very much to have a lock of it. Oh what a foolish
fellow you were, Doady, when I gave you one ! "

" That was on the day when you were painting the flowers
I had given you, Dora, and when I told you how much in love
I was."

" Ah ! but I didn't like to tell you" says Dora, " then, how
I had cried over them, because I believed you really liked me !
When I can run about again as I used to do, Doady, let us go
and see those places where we were such a silly couple, shall
we ? And take some of the old walks ? And not forget poor
papa ? "

" Yes, we will, and have some happy days. So you must
make haste to get well, my dear."

" Oh, I shall soon do that ! I am so much better, you don't
know ! "

It is evening ; and I sit in the same chair, by the same bed,
with the same face turned towards me. We have been silent,
and there is a smile upon her face. I have ceased to carry
my light burden up and down stairs now. She lies here all
the day.

" Doady ! "

"My dear Dora!"

"You won't think what I am going to say, unreasonable,
after what you told me, such a little while ago, of Mr. Wick-
field's not being well ? I want to see Agnes. Very much I
want to see her."

" I will write to her, my dear/'



360 THE PERSONAL HISTOBY AND EXPERIENCE

"Will you?"

"Directly."

" What a good, kind boy ! Doady, take me on your arm.
Indeed, my dear, it's not a whim. It's not a foolish fancy.
I want very much indeed, to see her ! "

" I am certain of it. I have only to tell her so, and she is
sure to come."

" You are very lonely when you go down stairs, now ? "
Dora whispers, with her arm about my neck.

" How can I be otherwise, my own love, when I see your
empty chair ? "

" My empty chair ! " She clings to me for a little while,
in silence. " And you really miss me, Doady ? " looking up,
and brightly smiling. " Even poor, giddy, stupid me ? "

" My heart, who is there upon earth that I could miss so
much ? "

" Oh, husband ! I am so glad, yet so sorry ! " creeping
closer to me, and folding me in both her arms. She laughs
and sobs, and then is quiet, and quite happy.

" Quite ! " she says. " Only give Agnes my dear love, and
tell her that I want very, very, much to see her ; and I have
nothing left to wish for."

" Except to get well again, Dora." .

" Ah, Doady ! Sometimes I think — you know I always
was a silly little thing ! — that that will never be ! "

" Don't say so, Dora ! Dearest love, don't think so ! "

" I won't, if I can help it, Doady. But I am very happy ;
though my dear boy is so lonely by himself, before his child-
wife's empty chair ! "

It is night ; and I am with her still. Agnes has arrived ;
has been among us, for a whole day and an evening. She,
my aunt, and I, have sat with Dora since the morning, all
together. We have not talked much, but Dora has been
perfectly contented and cheerful. We are now alone.

Do I know, now, that my child-wife will soon leave me ?
They have told me so ; they have told me nothing new to my
thoughts ; but I am far from sure that I have taken that truth
to heart. I cannot master it. I have withdrawn by myself,



p.- : f^-tf



illll^iSlQ^v



"5l*ii




MY CHILD-WIFE'S OLD COMPANION



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 361

many times to-day, to weep. I have remembered Who wept
for a parting between the living and the dead. I have be-
thought me of all that gracious and compassionate history.
I have tried to resign myself, and to console myself ; and that,
I hope, I may have done imperfectly ; but what I cannot
firmly settle in my mind is, that the end will absolutely come.
I hold her hand in mine, I hold her heart in mine, I see her
love for me, alive in all its strength. I cannot shut out a pale
lingering shadow of belief that she will be spared.

" I am going to speak to you, Doady. I am going to say
something I have often thought of saying, lately. You won't
mind ? " with a gentle look.

" Mind, my darling ? "

" Because I don't know what you will think, or what you
may have thought sometimes. Perhaps you have often
thought the same. Doady, dear, I am afraid I was too
young."

I lay my face upon the pillow by her, and she looks into
my eyes, and speaks very softly. Gradually, as she goes on,
I feel, with a stricken heart, that she is speaking of herself as
past.

"J am afraid, dear, I was too young. I don't mean in
years only, but in experience, and thoughts, and everything.
I was such a silly little creature ! I am afraid it would have
been better, if we had only loved each other as a boy and girl,
and forgotten it. I have begun to think I was not fit to be
a wife."

I try to stay my tears, and to reply, " Oh, Dora, love, as fit
as I to be a husband ! "

"I don't know," with the old shake of her curls. "Per-
haps ! But, if I had been more fit to be married, I might
have made you more so, too. Besides, you are very clever,
and I never was."

" We have been very happy, my sweet Dora."

" I was very happy, very. But, as years went on, my dear
boy would have wearied of his child-wife. She would have
been less and less a companion for him. He would have been
more and more sensible of what was wanting in his home.
She wouldn't have improved. It is better as it is."



362 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" Oh, Dora, dearest, dearest, do not speak to me so. Every
word seems a reproach ! n

" No, not a syllable ! " she answers, kissing me. " Oh, my
dear, you never deserved it, and I loved you far too well, to
say a reproachful word to you, in earnest — it was all the
merit I had, except being pretty — or you thought me so. Is
it lonely down stairs, Doady ? "

"Very! Very!"

" Don't cry ! Is my chair there ? "

" In its old place."

" Oh, how my poor boy cries ! Hush, hush ! Now, make
me one promise. I want to speak to Agnes. When you go
down stairs, tell Agnes so, and send her up to me ; and while
I speak to her, let no one come — not even aunt. I want to
speak to Agnes by herself. I want to speak to Agnes, quite
alone."

I promise* that she shall, immediately ; but I cannot leave
her, for my grief.

" I said that it was better as it is ! " she whispers, as she
holds me in her arms. " Oh, Doady, after more years, you
never could have loved your child- wife better than you do;
and, after more years, she would so have tried and disappointed
you, that you might not have been able to love her half so
well ! I know I was too young and foolish. It is much better
as it is ! "

Agnes is down stairs, when I go into the parlor ; and I give
her the message. She disappears, leaving me alone with Jip.

His Chinese house is by the fire ; and he lies within it, on
his bed of flannel, querulously trying to sleep. The bright
moon is high and clear. As I look out on the night, my tears
fall fast, and my undisciplined heart is chastened heavily —
heavily.

I sit down by the fire, thinking with a blind remorse of all
those secret feelings I have nourished since my marriage. I
think of every little trifle between me and Dora, and feel the
truth, that trifles make the sum of life. Ever rising from the
sea of my remembrance, is the image of the dear child as I
knew her first, graced by my young love, and by her own, with





every fascination wherein such love is rich. Would it, indeed,
have been better if we had loved each other as a boy and girl,
and forgotten it ? Undisciplined heart, reply !

How the time wears, I know not ; until I am recalled by my
child-wife's old companion. More restless than he was, he
crawls out of his house, and looks at me, and wanders to the
door, and whines to go up stairs.

" Not to-night, Jip ! Not to-night ! "

He comes very slowly back to me, licks my hand, and lifts
his dim eyes to my face.

" 0, Jip ! It may be, never again ! n

He lies down at my feet, stretches himself out as if to sleep,
and with a plaintive cry, is dead.

" Agnes ! Look, look, here ! "

— That face, so full of pity, and of grief, that rain of tears,
that awful mute appeal to me, that solemn hand upraised
towards Heaven !

" Agnes ? 7

It is over. Darkness comes before my eyes ; and, for a time,
all things are blotted out of my remembrance.



364 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE



CHAPTER XXV.

MR. micawber's transactions.

This is not "the time at which I am to enter on the state of
my mind beneath its load of sorrow. I came to think that the
Future was walled up before me, that the energy and action of
my life were at an end, that I never could find any refuge but in
the grave. I came to think so, I say, but not in the first shock
of my grief. It slowly grew to that. If the events I go on to
relate, had not thickened around me, in the beginning to con-
fuse, and in the end to augment, my affliction, it is possible
(though I think not probable), that I might have fallen at once
into this condition. As it was, an interval occurred before I
fully knew my own distress ; an interval, in which I even sup-
posed that its sharpest pangs were past ; and when my mind
could soothe itself by resting on all that was most innocent
and beautiful, in the tender story that was closed for ever.

When it was first proposed that I should go abroad, or how
it came to be agreed among us that I was to seek the resto-
ration of my peace in change and travel, I do not, even now,
distinctly know. The spirit' of Agnes so pervaded all we
thought, and said, and did, in that time of sorrow, that I
assume I may refer the project to her influence. But her
influence was so quiet that I know no more.

And now, indeed, I began to think that in my old association
of her with the stained-glass window in the church, a prophetic
foreshadowing of what she would be to me, in the calamity
that was to happen in the fulness of time, had found a way
into my mind. In all that sorrow, from the moment, never to
be forgotten, when she stood before me with her upraised hand,
she was like a sacred presence in my lonely house. When the
Angel of Death alighted there, my child-wife fell asleep —
they told me so when I could bear to hear it — on her bosom,
with a smile. Prom my swoon, I first awoke to a conscious-





ness of her compassionate tears, her words of hope and peace,
her gentle face bending down as from a purer region nearer
Heaven, over my undisciplined heart, and softening its pain.

Let me go on.

I was to go abroad. That seemed to have been determined
among us from the first. The ground now covering all that
could perish of my departed wife, I waited only for what
Mr. Micawber called the "final pulverization of Heep," and for
the departure of the emigrants.

At the request of Traddles, most affectionate and devoted of
friends in my trouble, we returned to Canterbury : I mean my
aunt, Agnes, and I. We proceeded by appointment straight
to Mr. Micawber's house ; where, and at Mr. Wickfield ; s, my
friend had been laboring ever since our explosive meeting.
"When poor Mrs. Micawber saw me come in, in my black
clothes, she was sensibly affected. There was a great deal of
good in Mrs. Micawber's heart, which had not been dunned out
of it in all those many years.

"Well, Mr. and Mrs. Micawber," was my aunt's first saluta-
tion after we were seated. "Pray, have you thought about
that emigration proposal of mine ? "

"My dear madam," returned Mr. Micawber, "perhaps I
cannot better express the conclusion at which Mrs. Micawber,
your humble servant, and I may add our children, have jointly
and severally arrived, than by borrowing the language of an
illustrious poet, to reply that our Boat is on the shore, and our
Bark is on the sea."

" That's right," said my aunt. " I augur all sorts of good
from your sensible decision."'

"Madam, you do us a great deal of honor," he rejoined.
He then referred to a memorandum. " With respect to the
pecuniary assistance enabling us to launch our frail canoe
on the ocean of enterprise, I have reconsidered that important
business-point ; and would beg to propose my notes of hand
— drawn, it is needless to stipulate, on stamps of the amounts
respectively required by the various Acts of Parliament apply-
ing to such securities — at eighteen, twenty-four, and thirty
months. The proposition I originally submitted, was twelve,
eighteen, and twenty-four ; but I am apprehensive that such



366 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

an arrangement might not allow sufficient time for the requisite
amount of — Something — to turn up. We might not," said
Mr. Micawber, looking round the room as if it represented
several hundred acres of highly cultivated land, "on the first
responsibility becoming due, have been successful in our har-
vest, or we might not have got our harvest in. Labor, I
believe, is sometimes difficult to obtain in that portion of our
colonial possessions where it will be our lot to combat with
the teeming soil."

"Arrange it in any way you please, sir," said my aunt.

"Madam," he replied, "Mrs. Micawber and myself are
deeply sensible of the very considerate kindness of our
friends and patrons. What I wish is, to be perfectly busi-
ness-like, and perfectly punctual. Turning over, as we are
about to turn over, an entirely new leaf ; and falling back, as
we are now in the act of falling back, for a Spring of no com-
mon magnitude ; it is important to my sense of self-respect,
besides being an example to my son, that these arrangements
should be concluded as between man and man."

I don't know that Mr. Micawber attached any meaning to
this last phrase ; I don't know that anybody ever does, or
did; but he appeared to relish it uncommonly, and repeated,
with an impressive cough, " as between man and man."

" I propose," said Mr. Micawber, " Bills — a convenience
to the mercantile world, for which, I believe, we are originally
indebted to the Jews, who appear to me to have had a devilish
deal too much to do with them ever since — because they are
negotiable. But if a Bond, or any other description of secur-
ity, would be preferred, I should be happy to execute any such
instrument. As between man and man."

My aunt observed, that in a case where both parties were
willing to agree to anything, she took it for granted there
would be no difficulty in settling this point. Mr. Micawber
was of her opinion.

"In reference to our domestic preparations, madam," said
Mr. Micawber, with some pride, " for meeting the destiny to
which we are now understood to be self-devoted, I beg to report
them. My eldest daughter attends at five every morning in a
neighboring establishment, to acquire the process — if process



OF DAVID GOPPERFIELD. 367

it may be called — of milking cows. My younger children
are instructed to observe, as closely as circumstances will per-
mit, the habits of the pigs and poultry maintained in the
poorer parts of this city : a pursuit from which they have, on
two occasions, been brought home, within an inch of being
run over. I have myself directed some attention, during the
past week, to the art of baking; and my son Wilkins has
issued forth with a walking-stick and driven cattle, when per-
mitted, by the rugged hirelings who had them in charge, to
render any voluntary service in that direction — which I
regret to say, for the credit of our nature, was not often ; he
being generally warned, with imprecations, to desist."

"All very right, indeed," said my aunt, encouragingly.
" Mrs. Micawber has been busy, too, I have no doubt."

"My dear madam," returned Mrs. Micawber, with her
business-like air, "I am free to confess, that I have not been
actively engaged in pursuits immediately connected with culti-
vation or with stock, though well aware that both will claim
my attention on a foreign shore. Such opportunities as I
have been enabled to alienate from my domestic duties, I have
devoted to corresponding at some length with my family. For
I own it seems to me, my dear Mr. Gopperfield," said Mrs.
Micawber, who always fell back on me, I suppose from old
habit, to whomsoever else she might address her discourse at
starting, "that the time is come when the past should be
buried in oblivion ; when my family should take Mr. Micaw-
ber by the hand, and Mr. Micawber should take my family by
the hand ; when the lion should lie down with the lamb, and
my family be on terms with Mr. Micawber."

I said I thought so too.

"This, at least, is the light, my dear Mr. Copperfield,"
pursued Mrs. Micawber, "in which /view the subject. When
I lived at home with my papa and mamma, my papa was
accustomed to ask, when any point was under discussion in
our limited circle, 'In what light does my Emma view the
subject?' That my papa was too partial, I know; still, on
such a point as the frigid coldness which has ever subsisted
between % Mr. Micawber and my family, I necessarily have
formed an opinion, delusive though it may be."



368 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

"Xo doubt. Of course you have, ma'am," said my aunt.

" Precisely so," assented Mrs. Micawber. " Xow, 1 may be
wrong in my conclusions ; it is very likely that I am ; but my
individual impression is, that the gulf between my family and
Mr. Micawber may be traced to an apprehension, on the part
of my family, that Mr. Micawber would require pecuniary
accommodation. I cannot help thinking/ 5 said Mrs. Micaw-
ber, with an air of deep sagacity, " that there are members of
my family who have been apprehensive that Mr. Micawber
would solicit them for their names. — I do not mean to be con-
ferred in Baptism upon our children, but to be inscribed on
Bills of Exchange, and negotiated in the Money Market."

The look of penetration with which Mrs. Micawber an-
nounced this discovery, as if no one had ever thought of it
before, seemed rather to astonish my aunt, who abruptly
replied, " Well, ma'am, upon the whole, I shouldn't wonder if
you were right ! "

" Mr. Micawber being now on the eve of casting off the
pecuniary shackles that have so long enthralled him," said
Mrs. Micawber, " and of commencing a new career in a country
where there is sufficient range for his abilities, — which, in my
opinion, is exceedingly important^ Mr. Micawber's abilities
peculiarly requiring space, — it seems to me that my family
should signalize the occasion by coming forward. What I
could wish to see, would be a meeting between Mr. Micawber
and my family at a festive entertainment, to be given at my
family's expense ; where Mr. Micawber's health and prosperity
being proposed, by some leading member of my family, Mr.
Micawber might have an opportunity of developing his views."

" My dear," said Mr. Micawber, with some heat, " it may be
better for me to state distinctly, at once, that if I were to
develop my views to that assembled group, they would possi-
bly be found of an offensive nature ; my impression being that
your family are, in the aggregate, impertinent Snobs ; and, in
detail, unmitigated Kuffians."

" Micawber," said Mrs. Micawber, shaking her head, " no !
You have never understood them, and they have never under-
stood you."

Mr. Micawber coughed.



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 369

"They have never understood you, Micawber," said his
wife. " They may be incapable of it. If so, that is their mis-
fortune. I can pity their misfortune."

" I am extremely sorry, my dear Emma," said Mr. Micawber,
relenting, "to have been betrayed into any expressions that
might, even remotely, have the appearance of being strong
expressions. All I would say, is, that I can go abroad without
your family coming forward to favor me, — in short, with a
parting Shove of their cold shoulders ; and that, upon the
whole, I would rather leave England with such impetus as I
possess, than derive any acceleration of it from that quarter.
At the same time, my dear, if they should condescend to reply
to your communications -*- which our joint experience renders
most improbable — far be it from me to be a barrier to your
wishes."

The matter being thus amicably settled, Mr. Micawber gave
Mrs. Micawber his arm, and, glancing at the heap of books and
papers lying before Traddles on the table, said they would
leave us to ourselves ; which they ceremoniously did.

" My dear Copperfield," said Traddles, leaning back in his
chair when they were gone, and looking at me with an affec-
tion that made his eyes red, and his hair all kinds of shapes,
" I don't make any excuse for troubling you with business,
because I know you are deeply interested in it, and it may
divert your thoughts. My dear boy, I hope you are not worn
out ? "

"I am quite myself," said I, after a pause. "We have more
cause to think of my aunt than of any one. You know how
much she has done."

"Surely, surely," answered Traddles. "Who can forget
it!"

"But even that is not all," said I, "During the last fort-
night, some new trouble has vexed her ; and she has been in
and out of London every day. Several times she has gone out
early, and been absent until evening. Last night, Traddles,
with this journey before her, it was almost midnight before she
came home. You know what her consideration for others is.
She will not tell me what has happened to distress her."

My aunt, very pale, and with deep lines in her face, sat
vol. n — 24



870 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

immovable until I had finished ; when some stray tears found
their way to her cheeks, and she put her hand on mine.

" It's nothing, Trot ; it's nothing. There will be no more of
it. You shall know by and by. Now, Agnes, my dear, let us
attend to these affairs."

"I must do Mr. Micawber the justice to say," Traddles
began, " that although he would appear not to have worked
to any good account for himself, he is a most untiring man
when he works for other people. I never saw such a fellow.
If he always goes on in the same way, he must be, virtually,
about two hundred years old, at present. The heat into which
he has been continually putting himself ; and the distracted
and impetuous manner in which he has been diving, day and
night, among papers and books ; to say nothing of the immense
number of letters he has written me between this house and
Mr. Wickfield's, and often across the table when he has been
sitting opposite, and might much more easily have spoken ; is
quite extraordinary."

" Letters ! " cried my aunt. "I believe he dreams in
letters!"

"There's Mr. Dick, too," said Traddles, "has been doing
wonders ! As soon as he was released from overlooking Uriah
Heep, whom he kept in such charge as I never saw exceeded,
he began to devote himself to Mr. Wickfield. And really his
anxiety to be of use in the investigations we have been mak-
ing, and his real usefulness in extracting, and copying, and
fetching, and carrying, have been quite stimulating to us."

"Dick is a very remarkable man," exclaimed my aunt;
" and I always said he was. Trot, you know it ! "

" I am happy to say, Miss Wickfield," pursued Traddles, at
once with great delicacy and with great earnestness, "that
in your absence Mr. Wickfield has considerably improved.
Relieved of the incubus that had fastened upon him for so
long a time, and of the dreadful apprehensions under which he
had lived, he is hardly the same person. At times, even his
impaired power of concentrating his memory and attention on
particular points of business, has recovered itself very much ;
and he has been able to assist us in making some things clear,
that we should have found very difficult indeed, if not hope-



OF DAVID COPPEEFIELD. 371

less, without him. But, what I have to do is to come to
results ; which are short enough ; not to gossip on all the hope-
ful circumstances I have observed, or I shall never have done."

His natural manner and agreeable simplicity made it trans-
parent that he said this to put us in good heart, and to enable
Agnes to hear her father mentioned with greater confidence ;
but it was not the less pleasant for that.

"Now, let me see," said Traddles, looking among the papers
on the table. " Having counted our funds, and reduced to
order a great mass of unintentional confusion in the first place,
and of wilful confusion and falsification in the second, we
take it to be clear that Mr. Wickfield might now wind up his
business, and his agency-trust, and exhibit no deficiency or
defalcation whatever."

" Oh, thank Heaven ! " cried Agnes," fervently.

"But," said Traddles, "the surplus that would be left as his
means of support — and I suppose the house to be sold, even
in saying this — would be so small, not exceeding in all proba-
bility some hundreds of pounds, that perhaps, Miss Wickfield,
it would be best to consider whether he might not retain his
agency of the estate to which he has so long been receiver.
His friends might advise him you know ; now he is free. You
yourself, Miss Wickfield — Copperfield — I — "

"I have considered it, Trotwood," said Agnes, looking to
me, " and I feel that it ought not to be, and must not be ; even
on the recommendation of a friend to whom. I am so grateful,
and owe so much."

" I will not say that I recommend it," observed Traddles.
" I think it right to suggest it. No more."

" I am happy to hear you say so," answered Agnes, steadily,
" for it gives me hope, almost assurance, that we think alike.
Dear Mr. Traddles and dear Trotwood, papa once free with
honor, what could I wish for! I have always aspired, if I
could have released him from the toils in which he was held,
to render back some little portion of the love and care I owe
him, and to devote my life to him. It has been, for years, the
utmost height of my hopes. To take our future on myself,
wlQ be the next great happiness — the next to his release from
all trust and responsibility — that I can know."



372 THE PEE SON AL HISTOBY AND EXPERIENCE

" Have you thought how, Agnes ? "

" Often ! I am not afraid, dear Trotwood. I am certain of
success. So many people know me here, and think kindly of
me, that I am certain. Don't mistrust me. Our wants are
not many. If I rent the dear old house,, and keep a school, I
shall be useful and happy."

The calm fervor of her cheerful voice brought back so
vividly, first the dear old house itself, and' then my solitary
home, that my heart was too full for speech. Traddles pre-
tended for a little while to be busily looking among the papers.

" Next, Miss Trotwood," said Traddles, " that property of
yours."

" Well, sir," sighed my aunt. " All I have got to say about
it, is, that if it's gone, I can bear it ; and if it's not gone, I shall
be glad to get it back."

"It was originally, I think, eight thousand pounds, Con-
sols ? " said Traddles.

" Eight ! " replied my aunt.

" I can't account for more than five," said Traddles, with an
air of perplexity.

" — thousand, do you mean ? " inquired my aunt, with
uncommon composure, " or pounds ? "

" Five thousand pounds," said Traddles.

"It was all there was," returned my aunt. "I sold three,
myself. One, I paid for your articles, Trot, my dear ; and the
other two I have by me. When I lost the rest, I thought it
wise to say nothing about that sum, but to keep it secretly for
a rainy day. I wanted to see how you would come out of the
trial, Trot ; and you came out nobly - — persevering, self-reliant,
self-denying ! So did Dick. Don't speak to me, for I find my
nerves a little shaken ! "

Nobody would have thought so, to see her sitting upright,
with her arms folded ; but she had wonderful self-command.

" Then I am delighted to say," cried Traddles, beaming with
joy, " that we have recovered the whole money ! "

u Don't congratulate me, anybody ! " exclaimed my aunt.
"How so, sir?"

"You believed it had been misappropriated by Mr. Wick-
field ? " said Traddles.



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 373

" Of course I did," said my aunt, " and was therefore easily
silenced. Agnes, not a word ! "

" And indeed/' said Traddles, " it was sold, by virtue of the
power of management he held from you ; but I needn't say by
whom sold, or on whose actual signature. It was afterwards
pretended to Mr. Wiekfield, by that rascal, — and proved, too,
by figures, — that he had possessed himself of the money (on
general instructions, he said) to keep other deficiencies and
difficulties from the light. Mr. Wickfield, being so weak and
helpless in his hands as to pay you, afterwards, several sums
of interest on a pretended principal which he knew did not
exist, made himself, unhappily, a party to the fraud."

" And at last took the blame upon himself/' added my aunt ;
" and wrote me a mad letter, charging himself with robbery,
and wrong unheard of. Upon which I paid him a visit early
one morning, called for a candle, burnt the letter, and told
him if he ever could right me and himself, to do it ; and if he
couldn't, to keep his own counsel for his daughter's sake. — If
anybody speaks to me, I'll leave the house ! "

We all remained quiet ; Agnes covering her face.

" Well, my dear friend," said my aunt, after a pause, " and
you have really extorted the money back from him ? "

" Why, the fact is," returned Traddles, " Mr. Micawber had
so completely hemmed him in, and was always ready with so
many new points if an old one failed, that he could not escape
from us. A most remarkable circumstance is, that I really
don't think he grasped this sum even so much for the gratifi-
cation of his avarice, which was inordinate, as in the hatred
he felt for Copperfield. He said so to me, plainly. He said
he would even have spent as much, to baulk or injure Copper-
field."

" Ha ! " said my aunt, knitting her brows thoughtfully, and
glancing at Agnes. " And what's become of him ? "

" I don't know. He left here," said Traddles, " with his
mother, who had been clamoring, and beseeching, and disclos-
ing, the whole time. They went away by one of the London
night coaches, and I know no more about him; except that
his malevolence to me at parting was audacious. He seemed
to consider himself hardly less indebted to me, than to Mr,



374 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

Micawber ; which I consider (as I told him) quite a compli-
ment."

" Do you suppose he has any money, Traddles ? " I asked.

" Oh dear, yes, I should think so," he replied, shaking his
head, seriously. " I should say he must have pocketed a good
deal, in one way or other. But, I think you would find, Cop-
perfield, if you had an opportunity of observing his course,
that money would never keep that man out of mischief. He
is such an incarnate hypocrite, that whatever object he pur-
sues, he must pursue crookedly. It's his only compensation
for the outward restraints he puts upon himself. Always
creeping along the ground to some small end or other, he will
always magnify every object in the way; and consequently
will hate and suspect everybody that comes, in the most inno-
cent manner, between him and it. So, the crooked courses will
become crookeder, at any moment, for the least reason or for
none. It's only necessary to consider his history here," said
Traddles, "to know that."

" He's a monster of meanness ! " said my aunt.

" Really I don't know about that," observed Traddles,
thoughtfully. " Many people can be very mean, when they
give their minds to it."

" And now, touching Mi\ Micawber," said my aunt.

"Well, really," said Traddles, cheerfully, "I must, once
more, give Mr. Micawber high praise. But for his having
been so patient and persevering for so long a time, we never
could have hoped to do anything worth speaking of. And T
think we ought to consider that Mr. Micawber did right, for
right's sake, when we reflect what terms he might have made
with Uriah Heep himself, for his silence."

" I think so too," said I.

" Now, what would you give him ? " inquired my aunt.

"Oh! Before you come to that," said Traddles, a little
disconcerted, "I am afraid I thought it discreet to omit (not
being able to carry everything before me) two points, in
making this lawless adjustment — for it's perfectly lawless
from beginning to end — of a difficult affair. Those I. 0. XL's,
and so forth, which Mr. Micawber gave him for the advances
he had — "



OF DAVID GOPPEBFIELD. 375

" Well ! They must be paid," said my aunt.

"Yes, but I don't know when they may be proceeded on,
or where they are," rejoined Traddles, opening his eyes; "and
I anticipate, that, between this time and his departure, Mr.
Micawber will be constantly arrested, or taken in execution."

"Theu he must be constantly set free again, and taken
out of execution," said my aunt. " What's the amount alto-
gether ? "

"Why, Mr. Micawber has entered the transactions — he
calls them transactions — with great form, in a book," rejoined
Traddles, smiling ; " and he makes the amount a hundred and
three pounds, five."

"Now, what shall we give him, that sum included?" said
my aunt. " Agnes, my dear, you and I can talk about division
of it afterwards. What should it be ? Five hundred pounds ? "

Upon this, Traddles and I both struck in at once. We
both recommended a small sum in money, and the payment,
without stipulation to Mr. Micawber, of the Uriah claims as
they came in. We proposed that the family should have
their passage and their outfit, and a hundred pounds ; and
that Mr. Micawber's arrangement for the repayment of the
advances should be gravely entered into, as it might be whole-
some for him to suppose himself under that responsibility. To
this, I added the suggestion, that I should give some explana-
tion of his character and history to Mr. Peggotty, who I knew
could be relied on ; and that to Mr. Peggotty should be
quietly entrusted the discretion of advancing another hundred.
I further proposed to interest Mr. Micawber in Mr. Peggotty,
by confiding so much of Mr. Peggotty's story to him as I
might feel justified in relating, or might think expedient;
and to endeavor to bring each of them to bear upon the other,
for the common advantage. We all entered warmly into
these views ; and I may mention at once, that the principals
themselves did so, shortly afterwards, with perfect good will
and harmony.

Seeing that Traddles now glanced anxiously at my aunt
again, I reminded him of the second and last point to which
he had adverted.

" You and your aunt will excuse me, Copperfield, if I touch



376 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

upon a painful theme, as I greatly fear I shall/ 3 said Traddles,
hesitating ; " but I think it necessary to bring it to your rec-
ollection. On the. day of Mr. Micawber's memorable denuncia-
tion, a threatening allusion was made by Uriah Heep to your
aunt's — husband."

My aunt, retaining her stiff position, and apparent com-
posure, assented with a nod.

"Perhaps," observed Traddles, "it was mere purposeless
impertinence ? "

"No," returned my aunt.

"There was — pardon me — really such a person, and at all
in his power ? " hinted Traddles.

" Yes, my good friend," said my aunt.

Traddles, with a perceptible lengthening of his face, explained
that he had not been able to approach this subject; that it
had shared the fate of Mr. Micawber's liabilities, in not being
comprehended in the terms he had made; that we were no
longer of any authority with Uriah Heep; and that if he
could do us, or any of us, any injury or annoyance, no doubt
he would.

My aunt remained quiet ; until again some stray tears found
their way to her cheeks.

" You are quite right," she said. " It was very thoughtful
to mention it."

"Can I — or Copperfield — do anything?" asked Traddles,
gently.

" Nothing," said my aunt. " I thank you many times. Trot,
my dear, a vain threat ! Let us have Mr. and Mrs. Micawber
back. And don't any of you speak to me ! " With that she
smoothed her dress, and sat, with her upright carriage, look-
ing at the door.

" Well, Mr. and Mrs. Micawber ! " said my aunt, when they
entered. "We have been discussing your emigration, with
many apologies to you for keeping you out of the room so
long; and I'll tell you what arrangements we propose."

These she explained, to the unbounded satisfaction of the
family, — children and all being then present, — and so much
to the awakening of Mr. Micawber's punctual habits in the
opening stage of all bill transactions, that he could not be dis-



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 377

suaded from immediately rushing out, in the highest spirits,
to buy the stamps for his notes of hand. But, his joy received
a sudden check ; for within five minutes, he returned in the
custody of a sheriffs officer, informing us, in a flood of tears,
that all was lost. We, being quite prepared for this event,
which was of course a proceeding of Uriah Heep ; s, soon paid
the money; and in five minutes more Mr. Micawber was
seated at the table, filling up the stamps with an expression
of perfect joy, which only that congenial employment, or the
making of punch, could impart in full completeness to his
shining face. 'To see him at work on the stamps, with the
relish of an artist, touching them like pictures, looking. at
them sideways, taking weighty notes of dates and amounts in
his pocket-book, and contemplating them when finished, with
a high sense of their precious value, was a sight indeed.

" Now, the best thing you can do, sir, if you'll allow me to
advise you," said my aunt, after silently observing him, " is to
abjure that occupation for evermore."

" Madam," replied Mr. Micawber, "it is my intention to
register such a vow on the virgin page of the future. Mrs.
Micawber will attest it. I trust," said Mr. Micawber, sol-
emnly, " that my son Wilkins will ever bear in mind, that he
had infinitely better put his fist in the fire, than use it to
handle the serpents that have poisoned the life-blood of his
unhappy parent ! " Deeply affected, and changed in a moment
to the image of despair, Mr. Micawber regarded the serpents
with a look of gloomy abhorrence (in which his late admira-
tion of them was not quite subdued), folded them up and put
them in his pocket.

This closed the proceedings of the evening. We were weary
with sorrow and fatigue, and my aunt and I Were to return to
London on the morrow. It was arranged that the Micawbers
should follow us, after effecting a sale of their goods to a
broker; that Mr. Wickfield's affairs should be brought to a,
settlement, with all convenient speed, under the direction of
Traddles ; and that Agnes should also come to London, pend-
ing those arrangements. We passed the night at the old house,
which, freed from the presence of the Heeps, seemed purged



378 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

of a disease ; and I lay in my old room, like a shipwrecked
wanderer come home.

We went back next day to my aunt's house — not to mine ;
and when she and I sat alone, as of old, before going to bed,
she said :

" Trot, do you really wish to know what I have had upon
my mind lately ? "

" Indeed I do, aunt. If there ever was a time when I felt
unwilling that you should have a sorrow or anxiety which I
could not share, it is now."

"You have had sorrow enough, child," said my aunt,
affectionately, " without the addition of my little miseries. I
could have no other motive, Trot, in keeping anything from
you."

u I know that well," said I. " But tell me now."

" Would you ride with me a little way to-morrow morning ? "
asked my aunt.

" Of course."

"At nine," said she. "Fll tell you then, my dear."

At nine, accordingly, w T e went out in a little chariot, and
drove to London. We drove a long way- through the streets
until we came to one of the large hospitals. Standing hard by
the building was a plain hearse. The driver recognized my
aunt, and in obedience to a motion of her hand at the window,
drove slowly off ; we following.

"You understand it now, Trot," said my aunt. "He is
gone ! "

"Did he die in the hospital ? "

"Yes."

She sat immovable beside me ; but, again I saw the stray
tears on her face.

" He was there once before," said my aunt presently. " He
was ailing a long time — a shattered, broken man, these many
years. When he knew his state in this last illness, he asked
them to send for me. He was sorry then. Very sorry."

"You went, I know, aunt."

" I went. I was with him a good deal afterwards."

" He died the night before we went to Canterbury ? h
said I.



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 379

My aunt nodded. "ISTo one can harm him now," she said.
" It was a vain threat."

We drove away, out of town, to the churchyard at Hornsey.
"Better here than in the streets," said my aunt. "He was
born here."

We alighted; and followed the plain coffin to a corner I
remember well, where the service was read consigning it to
the dust. t

" Six-and-thirty years ago, this day, my dear," said my aunt,
as we walked back to the chariot, " I was married. God for-
give us all ! "

We took our seats in silence ; and so she sat beside me for a
long time, holding my hand. At length she suddenly burst
into tears, and said :

" He was a fine-looking man when I married him, Trot —
and he was sadly changed ! "

It did not last long. After the relief of tears, she soon
became composed, and even cheerful. Her nerves were a little
shaken, she said, or she would not have given way to it. God
forgive us all !

So we rode back to her little cottage at Highgate, where we
found the following short note, which had arrived by that
morning's post from Mr. Micawber :

" Canterbury,

"Friday.
" My dear Madam, and Copperfield,

" The fair land of promise lately looming on the horizon
is again enveloped in impenetrable mists, and for ever with-
drawn from the eyes of a drifting wretch whose Doom is
sealed !

"Another w r rit has been issued (in His Majesty's High
Court of King's Bench at Westminster), in another cause of
Heep v. Micawber, and the defendant in that cause is the
prey of the sheriff having legal jurisdiction in this bailiwick.

4 Now's the day, and now's the hour,
See the front of battle lower,
See approach proud Edward's power —

Chains and slavery I '



380 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" Consigned to which, and to a speedy end (for mental torture
is not supportable beyond a certain point, and that point I feel
I have attained), my course is run. Bless you, bless you !
Some future traveller, visiting, from motives of curiosity, not
unmingled, let us hope, with sympathy, the place of confine-
ment allotted to debtors in this city, may, and I trust will,
Ponder, as he traces on its wall inscribed with a rusty nail,

t " The obscure initials

"W. M.
"P.S. I re-open this to say that our common friend, Mr.
Thomas Traddles (who has not yet left us, and is looking ex-
tremely well), has paid the debt and costs, in the noble name
of Miss Trotwood; and that myself and family are at the
height of earthly bliss."







CHAPTER XXVI.

TEMPEST.

I now approach an event in my life, so indelible, so awful,
so bound by an infinite variety of ties to all that has preceded
it, in these pages, that, from the beginning of my narrative,
I have seen it growing larger and larger as I advanced, like
a great tower in a plain, and throwing its fore-cast shadow
even on the incidents of my childish days.

For years after it occurred, I dreamed of it often. I have
started up so vividly impressed by it, that its fury has yet
seemed raging in my quiet room, in the still night. I dream
of it sometimes, though at lengthened and uncertain intervals,
to this hour. I have an association between it and a stormy
wind, or the lightest mention of a sea-shore, as strong as any
of which my mind is conscious. As plainly as I behold what
happened, I will try to write it down. I do not recall it, but
see it done ; for it happens again before me.

The time drawing on rapidly for the sailing of the emigrant-
ship, my good old nurse (almost broken-hearted for me, when
we first met) came up to London. I was constantly with her,
and her brother, and the Micawbers (they being very much
together) ; but Emily I never saw.

One evening when the time was close at hand, I was alone
with Peggotty and her brother. Our conversation turned on
Ham. She described to us how tenderly he had taken leave
of her, and how manfully and quietly he had borne himself.
Most of all, of late, when she believed he was most tried. It
was a subject of which the affectionate creature never tired ;
and our interest in hearing the many examples which she,
who was so much with him, had to relate, was equal to hers
in relating them.

My aunt and I were at that time vacating the two cottages
at Highgate ; I intending to go abroad, and she to return to



382 THE PEBSONAL HISTOBY AND EXPEBIENCE

her house at Dover. We had a temporary lodging in Coven t
Garden. As I walked home to it, after this evening's con-
versation, reflecting on what had passed between Ham and
myself when I was last at Yarmouth, I wavered in the original
purpose I had formed, of leaving a letter for Emily when I
should take leave of her uncle on board the ship, and thought
it would be better to write to her now. She might desire, I
thought, after receiving my communication, to send some
parting word by me to her unhappy lover. I ought to give
her the opportunity.

I therefore sat down in my room, before going to bed, and
wrote to her. I told her that I had seen him, and that he had
requested me to tell her what I have already written in its
place in these sheets. I faithfully repeated it. I had no
need to enlarge upon it, if I had had the right. Its deep
fidelity and goodness were not to be adorned by me or any
man. I left it out, to be sent round in the morning ; with a
line to Mr. Peggotty, requesting him to give it to her ; and
went to bed at daybreak.

I was weaker than I knew then; and, not falling asleep
until the sun was up, lay late, and unrefreshed, next day. I
was roused by the silent presence of my aunt at my bedside.
I felt it in my sleep, as I suppose we all do feel such things.

"Trot, my dear," she said, when I opened my eyes, "I
couldn't make up my mind to disturb you. Mr. Peggotty is
here ; shall he come up ? V

I replied yes, and he soon appeared.

"Mas'r Davy," he said, when we had shaken hands, "I
giv Em'ly your letter, sir, and she writ this heer ; and begged
of me fur to ask you to read it, and if you see no hurt in ; t, to
be so kind as take charge on't."

" Have you read it ? " said I.

He nodded sorrowfully, I opened it, and read as follows :

u I have got your message. Oh, what can I write, to thank you for
your good and blessed kindness to me !

" I have put the words close to my heart. I shall keep them till I die.
They are sharp thorns, but they are such comfort. I have prayed over
them, oh, I have prayed so much. When I find what you are, and what
uncle is, I think what God must be, and can cry to him.



OF DAVID COPPJEBFIELD. 383

" Good by for ever. Now, my dear, my friend, good by for ever in
this world. In another world, if I am forgiven, I may wake a child, and
come to you. All thanks and blessings. Farewell, evermore."

This, blotted with tears, was the letter.

"May I tell her as you doen't see no hurt in't, and as
you'll be so kind as take charge on't, Mas'r Davy ? " said
Mr. Peggotty, when I had read it.

" Unquestionably," said I — " but I am thinking — "

« Yes, Mas'r Davy ? "

" I am thinking," said I, " that Fll go down again to Yar-
mouth. There's time, and to spare, for me to go and come
back before the ship sails. My mind is constantly running
on him, in his solitude ; to put this letter of her writing in
his hand at this time, and to enable you to tell her, in the
moment of parting, that he has got it, will be a kindness to
both of them. I solemnly accepted his commission, dear
good fellow, and cannot discharge it too completely. The
journey is nothing to me. I am restless, and shall be better
in motion. I'll go down to-night."

Though he anxiously endeavored to dissuade me, I saw that
he was of my mind ; and this, if I had required to be con-
firmed in my intention, would have had the effect. He went
round to the coach-office, at my request, and took the box-
seat for me on the mail. In the evening I started, by that
conveyance, down the road I had traversed under so many
vicissitudes.

" Don't you think that," I asked the coachman, in the first
stage out of London, " a very remarkable sky ? I don't
remember to have seen one like it."

"Nor I — not equal to it," he replied. "That's wind, sir.
There'll be mischief done at sea, I expect, before long."

It was a murky confusion — here and there blotted with £
color like the color of the smoke from damp fuel — of flying
clouds tossed up into most remarkable heaps, suggesting
greater heights in the clouds than there were depths below
them to the bottom of the deepest hollows in the earth,
through which the wild moon seemed to plunge headlong, as
if, in a dread disturbance of the laws of nature, she had lost
her way and were frightened. There had been a wind all



384 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

day; and it was rising then, with an extraordinary great
sound. In another hour it had much increased, and the sky
was more overcast, and it blew hard.

But, as the night advanced, the clouds closing in and
densely overspreading the whole sky, then very dark, it came
on to blow, harder and harder. It still increased, until our
horses could scarcely face the wind. Many times, in the dark
part of the night (it was then late in September, when the
nights were not short), the leaders turned about, or came to
a dead stop ; and we were often in serious apprehension that
the coach would be blown over. Sweeping gusts of rain came
up before this storm like showers of steel ; and at those times,
when there was any shelter of trees or lee walls to be got, we
were fain to stop, in a sheer impossibility of continuing the
struggle.

When the day broke, it blew harder and harder. I had
been in Yarmouth when the seamen said it blew great guns,
but I had never known the like of this, or anything approach-
ing to it. We came to Ipswich — very late, having had to*
fight every inch of ground since we were ten miles out of
London ; and found a cluster of * people in the market-place,
who had risen from their beds in the night, fearful of falling
chimneys. Some of these, congregating about the. inn-yard
while we changed horses, told us of great sheets of lead having
been ripped off a high church-tower, and flung* into a by-
street, which they then blocked up. Others had to tell of
country people, coming in from' neighboring villages, who had
seen great trees lying torn out of the earth, and whole ricks
scattered about the roads and fields. Still, there was no
abatement in the storm, but it blew iiaraer.

As we struggled on, nearer and nearer to the sea, from
which this mighty wind was blowing dead on shore, its force
became more and more terrific. Long before we saw the
sea, its spray was on our lips, and showered salt rain upon us.
The water was out, over miles and miles of the flat country
adjacent to Yarmouth ; and every sheet and puddle lashed
its banks, and had its stress of little breakers setting heavily
towards us. When we came within sight of the sea, the
waves on the horizon, caught at intervals above the rolling



OF DAVID C0PPEBF1ELD. 385

abyss, were like glimpses of another shore with towers and
buildings. When at last we got into the town, the people came
out to their doors, all aslant, and with streaming hair, making
a wonder of the mail that had come through such a night.

I put up at the old inn, and went down to look at the sea ;
staggering along the street, which was strewn with sand and
sea-weed, and with flying blotches of sea-foam; afraid of
falling slates and tiles ; and holding by people I met at angry
corners. Coming near the beach, I saw, not only the boat-
men, but half the people of the town, lurking behind build-
ings ; some, now and then braving the fury of the storm to
look away to sea, and blown sheer out of their course in
trying to get zigzag back.

Joining these groups, I found bewailing women whose hus-
bands were away in herring or oyster boats, which there was
too much reason to think might have foundered before they
could run in anywhere for safety. Grizzled old sailors were
among the people, shaking their heads as they looked from
water to sky, and muttering to one another; shipowners,
excited and uneasy; children huddling together, and peering
into older faces ; even stout mariners, disturbed and anxious,
levelling their glasses at the sea from behind places of shelter,
as if they were surveying an enemy.

The tremendous sea itself, when I could find sufficient
pause to look at it, in the agitation of the blinding wind, the
flying stones and sand, and the awful noise, confounded me.
As the high watery walls came rolling in, and, at their
highest, tumbled into surf, they looked as if the least would
engulf the town. As the receding wave swept back with a
hoarse roar, it seemed to scoop out deep caves in the beach,
as if its purpose were to undermine the earth. When some
white-headed billows thundered on, and dashed themselves to
pieces before they reached the land, every fragment of the
late whole seemed possessed by the full might of its wrath,
rushing to be gathered to the composition of another monster.
Undulating hills were changed to valleys, undulating valleys
(with a solitary storm-bird sometimes skimming through
them) were lifted up to hills ; masses of water shivered and
shook the beach with a booming sound ; every shape tumultu-
vol. ii — 25



386 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

ously rolled on, as soon as made, to change its shape and
place, and beat another shape and place away ; the ideal shore
on the horizon, with its towers and buildings, rose and fell ;
the clouds flew fast and thick ; I seemed to see a rending and
upheaving of all nature.

Not finding Ham among the people whom this memorable
wind — for it is still remembered down there as the greatest
ever known to blow upon that coast — had brought together, I
made my way to his house. It was shut ; and as no one
answered to my knocking, I went by back ways and by-lanes,
to the yard where he worked. I learned, there, that he had
gone to Lowestoft, to meet some sudden exigency of ship-
repairing in which his skill was required ; but that he would
be back to-morrow morning, in good time.

I went back to the inn; and when I had washed and
dressed, and tried to sleep, but in vain, it was five o'clock in
the afternoon. I had not sat five minutes by the coffee-room
fire, when the waiter coming to stir it, as an excuse for talking,
told me that two colliers had gone down, with all hands, a few
miles away ; and that some other ships had been seen laboring
hard in the Roads, and trying, in great distress, to keep off
shore. Mercy on them, and on all poor sailors, said he, if we
had another night like the last !

I was very much depressed in spirits ; very solitary ; and
felt an uneasiness in Ham's not being there, disproportionate
to the occasion. I was seriously affected, without knowing
how much, by late events ; and my long exposure to the fierce
wind had confused me. There was that jumble in my
thoughts and recollections, that I had lost v the clear arrange-
ment of time and distance. Thus, if I had gone out into the
town, I should not have been surprised, I think, to encounter
some one who I knew must be then in London. So to speak,
there was in these respects a curious inattention in my mind.
Yet it was busy, too, with all the remembrances the place
naturally awakened ; and they were particularly distinct and
vivid.

In this state, the waiter's dismal intelligence about the
ships immediately connected itself, without any effort of my
volition, with my uneasiness about Ham. I was persuaded



•





that I had an apprehension of his returning from Lowestoft
by sea, and being lost. This grew so strong with me, that I
resolved to go back to the yard before I took my dinner, and
ask the boat-builder if he thought his attempting to return by
sea at all likely ? If he gave me the least reason to think so,
I would go over to Lowestoft and prevent it by bringing him.

with me.

I hastily ordered my dinner, and went back to the yard. I
was none too soon ; for the boat-builder, with a lantern in his
hand, was locking the yard-gate. He quite laughed, when I
asked him the question, and said there was no fear ; no man
in his senses, or out of them, would put off in such a gale of
wind, least of all Ham Peggotty, who had been born to sea-
faring.

So sensible of this, beforehand, that I had really felt
ashamed of. doing what I was nevertheless impelled to do, I
went back to the inn. If such a wind could rise, I think it
was rising. The howl and roar, the rattling of the doors and
windows, the rumbling in the chimneys, the apparent rocking
of the very house that sheltered me, and the prodigious tumult
of the sea, were more fearful than in the morniug. But there
was now a great darkness besides; and that invested the storm
with new terrors, real and fanciful.

I could not eat, I could not sit still, I could not continue
steadfast to anything. Something within me, -faintly answer-
ing to the storm without, tossed up the depths of my memory,
and made a tumult in them. Yet, in all the hurry of my
thoughts, wild running with the thundering sea,— the storm
and my uneasiness regarding Ham, were always in the fore-
ground.

My dinner went away almost untasted, and I tried to re-
fresh myself with a glass or two of wine. In vain. I fell into
a dull slumber before the fire, without losing my conscious-
ness, either of the uproar out of doors, or of the place in
which I was. Both became overshadowed by a new and inde-
finable horror ; and when I awoke— or rather when I shook
off the lethargy that bound me in my chair— my whole frame
thrilled with objectless and unintelligible fear.

I walked to and fro. tried to read an old gazetteer, listened



388 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

to the awful noises : looked at faces, scenes, and figures in the
fire. At length, the steady ticking of the undisturbed clock
on the wall, tormented me to that degree that I resolved to go
to bed.

It was reassuring, on such a night, to be told that some of
the inn-servants had agreed together to sit up until morning.
I went to bed, exceedingly weary and heavy ; but, on my lying
down, all such sensations vanished, as if by magic, and I was
broad awake, with every sense refined.

For hours I lay there, listening to the wind and water ; im-
agining, now, that I heard shrieks out at sea ; now, that I dis-
tinctly heard the firing of signal guns ; and now, the fall of
houses in the town. I got up, several times, and looked out;
but could see nothing, except the reflection in the window-panes
of the faint candle I had left burning, and of my own haggard
face looking in at me from the black void.

At length, my restlessness attained to such a pitch, that I
hurried on my clothes, and went down stairs. In the large
kitchen, where I dimly saw bacon and ropes of onions hang-
ing from the beams, the watchers were clustered together, in
various attitudes, about a table, purposely moved away from
the great chimney, and brought near the door. A pretty girl,
who had her ears stopped with her apron, and her eyes upon
the door, screamed when I appeared, supposing me to be a
spirit ; but the others had more presence of mind, and were
glad of an addition to their company. One man, referring to
the topic they had been discussing, asked me whether I thought
the souls of the collier-crews who had gone down, were out in
the storm ?

I remained there, I dare say, two hours. Once, I opened the
yard-gate, and looked into the empty street. The sand, the
sea-weed, and the flakes of foam, were driving by, and I was
obliged to call for assistance before I could shut the gate
again, and make it fast against the wind.

There was a dark gloom in my solitary chamber, when I at
length returned to it ; but I was tired now, and, getting into
bed again, fell — off a tower and down a precipice — into the
depths of sleep. I have an impression that, for a long time,
though I dreamed of being elsewhere and in a variety of scenes,





it was always blowing in my dream. At length, I lost that
feeble hold upon reality, and was engaged with two dear friends,
but who they were I don't know, at the siege of some town in
a roar of cannonading.

The thunder of the cannon was so loud and incessant, that
I could not hear something I much desired to hear, until I
made a great exertion and awoke. It was broad day — eight
or nine o'clock ; the storm raging, in lieu of the batteries ;
and some one knocking and calling at my door*

" What is the matter ? " I cried.

" A wreck ! Close by ! "

I sprung out of bed, and asked what wreck ?

" A schooner, from Spain or Portugal, laden with fruit and
wine. Make haste, sir, if you want to see her ! It's thought,
down on the beach, she'll go to pieces every moment."

The excited voice went clamoring along the staircase ; and
I wrapped myself in my clothes as quickly as I could, and ran
into the street.

Numbers of people were there before me, all running in one
direction, to the beach. I ran the same way, outstripping a
good many, and soon came facing the wild sea.

The wind might by this time have lulled a little, though not
more sensibly than if the cannonading I had dreamed of, had
been diminished by the silencing of half-a-dozen guns oxit of
hundreds. But, the sea, having upon it the additional agita-
tion of the whole night, was infinitely more terrific than when
I had seen it last. Every appearance it had then presented,
bore the expression of being swelled; and the height to which
the breakers rose, and, looking over one another, bore one
another down, and rolled in, in interminable hosts, was most
appalling.

In the difficulty of hearing anything but wind and waves,
and in the crowd, and the unspeakable confusion, and my first
breathless efforts to stand against the weather, I was so con-
fused that I looked out to sea for the wreck, and saw nothing
but the foaming heads of the great waves. A half-dressed
boatman, standing next me, pointed with his bare arm (a
tattoo'd arrow on it, pointing in the same direction) to the
left. Then, great Heaven, I saw it, close in upon us !



390 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

One mast was broken short off, six or eight feet from the
deck, and lay over the side, entangled in a maze of sail and
rigging; and all that ruin, as the ship rolled and beat — which
she did without a moment's pause, and with a violence quite
inconceivable — beat the side as if it would stave it in. Some
efforts were even then being made, to cut this portion of the
wreck away ; for, as the ship, which was broadside on, turned
towards us in her rolling, I plainly descried her people at work
with axes, especially one active figure with long curling hair,
conspicuous among the rest. But, a great cry, which was
audible even above the wind and water, rose from the shore
at this moment; the sea, sweeping over the rolling wreck,
made a clean breach, and carried men, spars, casks, planks,
bulwarks, heaps of such toys, into the boiling surge.

The second mast was yet standing, with the rags of a rent
sail, and a wild confusion of broken cordage flapping to and
fro. The ship had struck once, the same boatman hoarsely
said in my ear, and then lifted in and struck again. I under-
stood him to add that she was parting amidships, and I could
readily suppose so, for the rolling and beating were too tre-
mendous for any human work to suffer long. As he spoke,
there was another great cry of pity from the beach ; four men
arose with the wreck out of the deep, clinging to the rigging
of the remaining mast ; uppermost, the active figure with the
curling hair.

There was a bell on board; and as the ship rolled and
dashed, like a desperate creature driven mad, now showing us
the whole sweep of her deck, as she turned on her beam-ends
towards the shore, now nothing but her keel, as she sprung
wildly over and turned towards the sea, the bell rang ; and its
sound, the knell of those unhappy men, was borne towards
us on the wind. Again we lost her, and again she rose. Two
men were gone. The agony on shore increased. Men groaned,
and clasped their hands; women shrieked, and turned away
their faces. Some ran wildly up and down along the beach,
crying for help where no help could be. I found myself one
of these, frantically imploring a knot of sailors whom I knew,
not to let those two lost creatures perish before our eyes.

They were making out to me, in an agitated way — I don't



OF DAVID GOPPEBFIELD. 391

know how, for the little I could hear I was scarcely composed
enough to understand — that the life-boat had been bravely
manned an hour ago, and could do nothing ; and that as no
man would be so desperate as to attempt to wade off with a
rope, and establish a communication with the shore, there was
nothing left to try ; when I noticed that some new sensation
moved the people on the beach, and saw them part, and Ham
come breaking through them to the front.

I ran to him —as well as I know, to repeat my appeal for
help. But, distracted though I was, by a sight so new to me
and terrible, the determination in his face, and his look, out
to sea — exactly the same look as I remembered in connection
with the morning after Emily's flight — awoke me to a knowl-
edge of his danger. I held him back with both arms; and
implored the men with whom I had been speaking, not to
listen to him, not to do murder, not to let him stir from off
that sand !

Another cry arose on shore ; and looking to the wreck, we
saw the cruel sail, with blow on blow, beat off the lower of the
two men, and fly up in triumph round the active figure left
alone upon the mast.

Against such a sight, and against such determination as that
of the calmly desperate man who was already accustomed to
lead half the people present, I might as hopefully have en-
treated the wind. "Mas'r Davy," he said, cheerily grasping
me by both hands, " if my time is come, 'tis come. If 'tan't,
I'll bide it. Lord above bless you, and bless all ! Mates,
make me ready ! Pm a going off ! n

I was swept away, but not unkindly, to some distance,
where the people around me made me stay ; urging, as I con-
fusedly perceived, that he was bent on going, with help or
without, and that I should endanger the precautions for his
safety by troubling those with whom they rested. I don't
know what I answered, or what they rejoined; but, I saw
hurry on the beach, and men running with ropes from a cap-
stan that was there, and penetrating into a circle of figures
that hid him from me. Then I saw him standing alone, in a
seaman's frock and trowsers : a rope in his hand, or slung to
his wrist : another round his body : and several of the best



392 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

men holding, at a little distance, to the latter, which he laid
out himself, slack upon the shore, at his feet.

The wreck, even to my unpractised eye, was breaking up.
I saw that she was parting in the middle, and that the life of
the solitary man upon the mast hung by a thread. Still, he
clung to it. He had a singular red cap on, — not like a
sailor's cap, but of a finer color; and as the few yielding
planks between him and destruction rolled and bulged, and
his anticipative death-knell rung, he was seen by all of us to
wave it. I saw him do it now, and thought I was going dis-
tracted, when his action brought an old remembrance to my
mind of a once dear friend.

Ham watched the sea, standing alone, with the silence of
suspended breath behind him, and the storm before, until
there was a great retiring wave, when, with a backward glanct
at those who held the rope which was made fast round his
body, he dashed in after it, and in a moment was buffetting
with the water ; rising with the hills, falling with the valleys,
lost beneath the foam; then drawn again to land. They
hauled in hastily.

He was hurt. I saw blood on his face, from where I stood ;
but he took no thought of that. He seemed hurriedly to give
them some directions for leaving him more free — or so I
judged from the motion of his arm — and was gone as before.

And now he made for the wreck, rising with the hills, fall-
ing with the valleys, lost beneath the rugged foam, borne in
towards the shore, borne on towards the ship, striving hard
and valiantly. The distance was nothing, but the power of
the sea and wind made the strife deadly. At length he neared
the wreck. He was so near, that with one more of his vigor-
ous strokes he would be clinging to it, — when, a high, green,
vast hill-side of water, moving on shoreward, from beyond the
ship, he seemed to leap up into it with a mighty bound, and
the ship was gone !

Some eddying fragments I saw in the sea, as if a mere cask
had been broken, in running to the spot where they were
hauling in. Consternation was in every face. They drew him
to my very feet — insensible — dead. He was carried to the
nearest house ; and, no one preventing me now, I remained





near him, busy, while every means of restoration were tried ;
but he had been beaten to death by the great wave, and his
generous heart was stilled for ever.

As I sat beside the bed, when hope was abandoned and all
was done, a fisherman, who had known me when Emily and I
were children, and ever simce, whispered my name at the door.

" Sir," said he, with tears starting to his weather-beaten
face, which, with his trembling lips, was ashy pale, " will you
come over yonder ? "

The old remembrance that had been recalled to me, was in
his look. I asked him, terror-stricken, leaning on the arm he
held out to support me :

" Has a body come ashore ? "

He said, "Yes."

" Do I know it ? w I asked then.

He answered nothing.

But, he led me to the shore. And on that part of it where
she and I had looked for shells, two children — on that part
of it where some lighter fragments of the old boat, blown
down last night, had been scattered by the wind — among the
ruins of the home he had wronged — I saw him lying with his
head upon his arm, as I had often seen him lie at school.



394 TEE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE



CHAPTER XXVn.

THE NEW WOUND, AND THE OLD.

No need, Steerforth, to have said, when we last spoke
together, in that hour which I so little deemed to be . our
parting-hour — no need to have said, "Think of me at my
best ! " I had done that ever ; and could I change now, looking
on this sight !

They brought a hand-bier, and laid him on it, and covered
him with a flag, and took . him up and bore him on towards
the houses. All the men who carried him had known hiru,
and gone sailing with him, and seen him merry and bold.
They carried him through the wild roar, a hush in the midst
of all the tumult ; and took him to the cottage where Death
was already.

But, when they set the bier down on the threshold, they
looked at one another, and at me, and whispered. I knew
why. They felt as if it were not right to lay him down in
the same quiet room.

We went into the town, and took our burden to the inn.
So soon as I could at all collect my thoughts, I sent for Joram,
and begged him to provide me a conveyance in which it could
be got to London in the night. I knew that the care of it, and
the hard duty of preparing his mother to receive it, could only
rest with me ; and I was anxious to discharge that duty as
faithfully as I could.

I chose the night for the journey, that there might be less
curiosity when I left the town. But, although it was nearly
midnight when I came out of the yard in a chaise, followed
by what I had in charge, there were many people waiting.
At intervals, along the town, and even a little way out upon
the road, I saw more ; but at length only the bleak night and
the open country were around me, and the ashes of my youthful
friendship.





Upon a mellow autumn day, about noon, when the ground
was perfumed by fallen leaves, and many more, in beautiful
tints of yellow, red, and brown, yet hung upon the trees,
through which the sun was shining, I arrived at Highgate.
I walked the last mile, thinking as I went along of what I
had to do; and left the carriage that had followed me all
through the night, awaiting orders to advance.

The house, when I came up to it, looked just the same.
Not a blind was raised ; no sign of life was in the dull paved
court, with its covered way leading to the disused door. The
wind had quite gone down, and nothing moved.

I had not, at first, the courage to ring at the gate; and
when I did ring, my errand seemed to me to be expressed in
the very sound of the bell. The little parlor-maid came out,
with the key in her hand; and looking earnestly at me as she
unlocked the gate, said :

" I beg your pardon, sir. Are you ill ? "

" I have been much agitated, and am f atigued."

" Is anything the matter, sir ? — Mr. James ? — n

"Hush!" said I. "Yes, something has happened, that I
have to break to Mrs. Steerforth. She is at home ? "

The girl anxiously replied that her mistress was very seldom
out now, even in a carriage ; that she kept her room ; that she
saw no company, but would see me. Her mistress was up,
she said, and Miss Dartle was with her. What message should
she take up stairs ?

Giving her a strict charge to be careful of her manner, and
only to carry in my card and say I waited, I sat down in the
drawing-room (which we had now reached) until she should
come back. Its former pleasant air of occupation was gone,
and the shutters were half closed. The harp had not been
used for many and many a day. His picture, as a boy, was
there. The cabinet in which his mother had kept his letters
was there. I wondered if she ever read them now ; if she
would ever read them more !

The house was so still, that I heard the girPs light step
up stairs. On her return, she brought a message, to the
effect that Mrs. Steerforth was an invalid and could not come
down ; but that, if I would excuse her being in her chamber,



396 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

she would be glad to see me. In a few moments I stood
before her.

She was in his room ; not in her own. I felt, of course,
that she had taken to occupy it, in remembrance of him ; and
that the many tokens of his old sports and accomplishments,
by which she was surrounded, remained there, just as he had
left them, for the same reason. She murmured, however,
even in her reception of me, that she was out of her own
chamber because its aspect was unsuited to her infirmity ; and
with her stately look repelled the least suspicion of the truth.

At her chair, as usual, was Rosa Dartle. From the first
moment of her dark eyes resting on me, I saw she knew I was
the bearer of evil tidings. The scar sprung into view that
instant. She withdrew herself a step behind the chair, to
keep her own face out of Mrs. Steerforth 5 s observation ; and
scrutinized me with a piercing gaze that never faltered, never
shrunk.

" I am sorry to observe you are in mourning, sir," said Mrs.
Steerforth.

" I am unhappily a widower," said I.

" You are very young to know so great a loss," she returned.
" I am grieved to hear it. I am grieved to hear it. I hope
Time will be good to you."

"I hope Time," said I, looking at her, "will be good to all
of us. Dear Mrs. Steerforth, we must all trust to that, in our
heaviest misfortunes."

The earnestness of my manner, and the tears in my eyes,
alarmed her. The whole course of her thoughts appeared to
stop, and change.

I tried to command my voice in gently saying his name,
but it trembled. She repeated it to herself, two or three
times, in a low tone. Then, addressing me, she said, with
enforced calmness :

" My son is ill."

"Very ill."

u You have seen him ? "

"I have."

" Are you reconciled ? "

I could not say Yes, I could not say No. She slightly



OF I) AVID COPPERFIELD. 397

turned her head towards the spot where Eosa Dartle had been
standing at her elbow, and in that moment I said, by the
motion of my lips, to Rosa " Dead ! "

That Mrs. Steerforth might not be induced to look behind
her, and read, plainly written, what she was not yet prepared
to know, I met her look quickly ; but I had seen Eosa Dartle
throw her hands up in the air with vehemence of despair and
horror, and then clasp them on her face.

The handsome lady — so like, so like ! — regarded me
with a fixed look, and put her hand ,to her forehead. I
besought her to be calm, and prepare herself to bear what I
had to tell ; but I should rather have entreated her to weep,
for she sat like a stone figure.

" When I was last here," I faltered, " Miss Dartle told me
he was sailing here and there. The night before last was a
dreadful one at sea. If he were at sea that night, and near
a dangerous coast, as it is said he was ; and if the vessel that
was seen should really be the ship which — "

"Eosa !" said Mrs. Steerforth, "come to me !"

She came, but with no sympathy or gentleness. Her eyes
gleamed like fir£ as she confronted his mother, and broke into
a frightful laugh.

" Now," she said, " is your pride appeased, you madwoman ?
Now has he made atonement to you — with his life ! Do you
hear? — His life! "

Mrs. Steerforth, fallen back stiffly in her chair, and making
no sound but a moan, cast her eyes upon her with a wide
stare.

" Ay ! " cried Eosa, smiting herself passionately on the
breast, "look at me! Moan, and groan, and look at me!
Look here!" striking the scar, "at your dead child's handy
work ! "

The moan the mother uttered, from time to time, went to
my heart. Always the same. Always inarticulate and
stifled. Always accompanied with an incapable motion of the
head, but with no change of face. Always proceeding from
a rigid mouth and closed teeth, as if the jaw were locked and
the face frozen up in pain.

"Do you remember when he did this?" she proceeded.



398 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE.

" Do you remember when, in his inheritance of your nature,
and in your pampering of his pride and passion, he did this,
and disfigured me for life ? Look "at me, marked until I die
with his high displeasure ; and moan and groan for what you
made him ! n

"Miss Dartle," I entreated her. "For Heaven's sake — "

" I zoill speak ! " she said, turning on me with her lightning
eyes. " Be silent, you ! Look at me, I say, proud mother
of a proud false son ! Moan for your nurture of him, moan
for your corruption of him, moan for your loss of him, moan
for mine ! "

She clenched her hand, and trembled through her spare
worn figure, as if her passion were killing her by inches.

"You resent his selfwill!" she exclaimed. "You, injured
by his haughty temper! You, who opposed to both, when
your hair was gray, the qualities which made both when you
gave him birth ! You, who from his cradle reared him to be
what he was, and stunted what he should have been ! Are
you rewarded, now, for your years of trouble ? "

" Miss Dartle, shame ! cruel ! "

" I tell you," she returned, " I will speak to her. jSTo power
on earth should stop me, while I was standing here ! Have
I been silent all these years, and shall I not speak now ? I
loved him better than you ever loved him ! " turning on her
fiercely. " I could have loved him, and asked no return. If I
had been his wife, I could have been the slave of his caprices
for a word of love a year. I should have been. Who knows
it better than I? You were exacting, proud, punctilious,
selfish. My love would have been devoted — would have trod
your paltry whimpering under foot ! "

With flashing eyes, she stamped upon the ground as if she
actually did it.

" Look here ! " she said, striking the scar again, with a
relentless hand. "When he grew into the better understand-
ing of what he had done, he saw it, and repented of it ! I
could sing to him, and talk to him, and show the ardor that
I felt in all he did, and attain with labor to such knowledge
as most interested him ; and I attracted him. When he was
freshest and truest, he loved me. Yes, he did ! Many a time,



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 399

when you were put off with a slight word, he has taken Me to
his heart ! "

She said it with a taunting pride in the midst of her frenzy
— for it was little less — yet with an eager remembrance of it,
in which the smouldering embers of a gentler feeling kindled
for the moment.

" I descended — as I might have known I should, but that
he fascinated me with his boyish courtship — into a doll, a
trifle for the occupation of an idle hour, to be dropped, and
taken up, and trifled with, as the inconstant humor took him.
When he grew weary, I grew weary. As his fancy died out,
I would no more have tried to strengthen any power I had,
than I would have married him on his being forced to take me
for his wife. We fell away from one another without a word.
Perhaps you saw it, and were not sorry. Since then, I have
been a mere disfigured piece of furniture between you both ;
having no eyes, no ears, no feelings, no remembrances. Moan ?
Moan for what you made him ; not for your love. I tell you
that the time was, when I loved him better than you ever
did!"

She stood with her bright angry eyes confronting the wide
stare, and the set face ; and softened no more, when the moan-
ing was repeated, than if the face had been a picture.

"Miss Dartle," said I, "if you can be so obdurate as not to
feel for this afflicted mother — "

" Who feels for me ? " she sharply retorted. " She has
sown this. Let her moan for the harvest that she reaps
to-day ! "

" And if his faults — " I began.

" Faults ! " she cried, bursting into passionate tears. " Who
dares malign him ? He had a soul worth millions of the
friends to whom he stooped ! "

" No one can have loved him better, no one can hold him
in dearer remembrance than I," I replied. " I meant to say,
if you have no compassion for his mother ; or if his faults —
you have been bitter on them — "

"It's false," she cried, tearing her black hair; "I loved
him ! "

" — cannot," I went on, "be banished from your remem-



400 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

brance, in such an hour ; look at that figure, even as one you
have never seen before, and render it some help ! "

All this time, the figure was unchanged, and looked un-
changeable. Motionless, rigid, staring; moaning in the same
dumb way, from time to time, with the same helpless motion
of the head ; but giving no other sign of life. Miss Dartle
suddenly kneeled down before it, and began to loosen the
dress.

" A curse upon you ! " she said, looking round at me, with
a mingled expression of rage and grief. " It was in an evil
hour that you ever came here ! A curse upon you ! Go ! "

After passing out of the room, I hurried back to ring the
bell, the sooner to alarm the servants. She had then taken
the impassive figure in her arms, and, still, upon her knees,
was weeping over it, kissing it, calling to it, rocking it to and
fro upon her bosom like a child, and trying every tender
means to rouse the dormant senses. !N*o longer afraid of leav-
ing her, I noiselessly turned back again; and alarmed the
house as I went out.

Later in the day, I returned, and we laid him in his
mother's room. She was just the same, they told me ; Miss
Dartle never left her; doctors were in attendance, many
things had been tried; but she lay like a statue, except for
the low sound now and then.

I went through the dreary house, and darkened the win-
dows. The windows of the chamber where he lay, I darkened
last. I lifted up the leaden hand, and held it to my heart ;
and all the world seemed death and silence, broken only by his
mother's moaning.



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 401



CHAPTER XXVIII.

THE EMIGRANTS.

Oke thing more, I had to do, before yielding myself to the
shock of these emotions. It was, to conceal what had occurred,
from those who were going away; and to dismiss them on
their voyage in happy ignorance. In" this, no time was to be
lost.

I took Mr. Micawber aside that same night, and confided to
him the task of standing between Mr. Peggotty and intelligence
of the late catastrophe. He zealously undertook to do so, and
to intercept any newspaper through which it might, without
such precautions, reach him.

u If it penetrates to him, sir," said Mr Micawber, striking
himself on the breast, " it shall first pass through this body ! "

Mr. Micawber, I must observe, in his adaptation of himself
to a new state of society, had acquired a bold buccaneering air,
not absolutely lawless, but defensive and prompt. Qne might
have supposed him a child of the wilderness, long accustomed
to live out of the confines of civilization, and about to return
to his native wilds.

He had provided himself, among other things, with a com-
plete suit of oil-skin, and a straw hat with a very low crown,
pitched or caulked on the outside. In this rough clothing,
with a common mariner's telescope under his arm, and a shrewd
trick of casting up his eye at the sky as looking out for dirty
weather, he was far more nautical, after his manner, than Mr.
Peggotty. His whole family, if I may so express it, were
cleared for action. I found Mrs. Micawber in the closest and
most uncompromising of bonnets, made fast under the chin ;
and in a shawl which tied lier up (as I had been tied up, when
my aunt first received me) like a bundle, and was secured
behind at the waist, in a strong knot. Miss Micawber I found
made snug for stormy weather, in the same manner; with
vol. ii — 26



402 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

nothing superfluous about her. Master Micawber was hardly
visible in a Guernsey shirt, and the shaggiest suit of slops I
ever saw; and the children were done up, like preserved
meats, in impervious cases. Both Mr. Micawber and his
eldest son wore their sleeves loosely turned back at the wrists,
as being ready to lend a hand in any direction, and to " tumble
up," or sing out, " Yeo — Heave — Yeo ! " on the shortest
notice.

Thus Traddles and I found them at nightfall, assembled on
the wooden steps, at that time known as Hungerford Stairs,
watching the departure of a boat with some of their property
on board. I had told Traddles of the terrible event, and it
had greatly shocked him ; but there could be no doubt of the
kindness of keeping it a secret, and he had come to help me
in this last service. It was here that I took Mr. Micawber
aside, and received his promise.

The Micawber family were lodged in a little, dirty, tumble-
down public house, which in those days was close to the stairs,
and whose protruding wooden rooms overhung the river. The
family, as emigrants, being objects of some interest in and
about Hungerford, attracted so many beholders, that we were
glad to take refuge in their room. It was one of the wooden
chambers up stairs, with the tide flowing underneath. My
aunt and Agnes were there, busily making some little extra
comforts, in the way of dress, for the children. Peggotty
was quietly assisting, with the old insensible work-box, yard
measure, and bit of wax-candle before her, that had now out-
lived so much.

It was not easy to answer her inquiries ; still less to whisper
Mr. Peggotty, when Mr. Micawber brought him in, that I had
given the letter, and all was well. But I did both, and made
them happy. If I showed any trace of what I felt, my own
sorrows were sufficient to account for it.

" And when does the ship sail, Mr. Micawber ? " asked my
aunt.

Mr. Micawber considered it necessary to prepare either my
aunt or his wife, by degrees, and said, sooner than he had
expected yesterday.

" The boat brought you word, I suppose ? " said my aunt.



OF DAVID C0PPEBF1ELD. 403

" It did, ma'am," lie returned.

" Well ? " said my aunt. " And she sails — "

" Madam," he replied, " I am informed that we must posi-
tively be on board before seven to-morrow morning."

"Heyday!" said my aunt, "that's soon. Is it a sea-going
fact, Mr. Peggotty ? "

"'"lis so, ma'am. She'll drop down the river with that
theer tide. If Mas'r Davy and my sister comes aboard at
Gravesen', arternoon o' next day, they'll see the last on us."

" And that we shall do," said I, " be sure ! "

" Until then, and until we are at sea," observed Mr. Micaw-
ber, with a glance of intelligence at me, "Mr. Peggotty and
myself will constantly keep a double look-out together, on our
goods and chattels. Emma, my love," said Mr. Micawber,
clearing his throat in his magnificent way, "my friend Mr.
Thomas Traddles is so obliging as to solicit, in my ear, that
he should have the privilege of ordering the ingredients neces-
sary to the composition of a moderate portion of that Beverage
which is peculiarly associated, in our minds, with the Roast
Beef of Old England. I allude to — in short, Punch. Under
ordinary circumstances, I should scruple to entreat the indul-
gence of Miss Trotwood and Miss Wickfield, but — "

"I can only say for myself," said my aunt, "that I will
drink all happiness and success to you, Mr. Micawber, with
the utmost pleasure."

" And I too ! " said Agnes, with a smile.

Mr. Micawber immediately descended to the bar, where he
appeared to be quite at home : and in due time returned with
a steaming jug. I could not but observe that he had been
peeling the lemons with his own clasp-knife, which, as became
the knife of a practical settler, was about a foot long ; and
which he wiped, not wholly without ostentation, on the sleeve
of his coat. Mrs. Micawber and the two elder members of
the family I now found to be provided with similar formidable
instruments, while every child had its own wooden spoon
attached to its body by a strong line. In a similar anticipa-
tion of life afloat, and in the Bush, Mr. Micawber, instead of
helping Mrs. Micawber and his eldest son and daughter to
punch, in wine-glasses, which he might easily have done, for



404 THE PEBSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

there was a shelf-full in the room, served it out to them in
a series of villainous little tin pots ; and I never saw him
enjoy anything so much as drinking out of his own particular
pint pot, and putting it in his pocket at the close of the
evening.

" The luxuries of the old country/' said Mr. Micawber, with
an intense satisfaction in their renouncement, "we abandon.
The denizens of the forest cannot, of course, expect to partici-
pate in the refinements of the land of the Free."

Here a boy came in to say that Mr. Micawber was wanted
down stairs.

" I have a presentiment," said Mrs. Micawber, setting down
her tin pot, "that it is a member of my family ! "

" If so, my dear," observed Mr. Micawber, with his usual
suddenness of warmth on that subject, "as the member of
your family — whoever he, she, or it may be — has kept us
waiting for a considerable period, perhaps the Member may
now wait my convenience."

" Micawber," said his wife, in a low tone, " at such a time
as this — "

" ' It is not meet/ " said Mr. Micawber, rising, " c that every
nice offence should bear its comment ! ' Emma, I stand
reproved."

"The loss, Micawber," observed his wife, "has been my
family's, not yours. If my family are at length sensible of
the deprivation to which their own conduct has, in the past,
exposed them, and now desire to extend the hand of fellow-
ship, let it not be repulsed."

"My dear," he returned, "so be it!"

" If not for their sakes ; for mine, Micawber," said his wife.

" Emma," he returned, " that view of the question is, at such
a moment, irresistible. I cannot, even now, distinctly pledge
myself to fall upon your family's neck ; but the member of
your family, who is now in attendance, shall have no genial
warmth frozen by me."

Mr. Micawber withdrew, and was absent some little time, in
the course of which Mrs. Micawber was not wholly free from
an apprehension that words might have arisen between him
and the Member. At length the same boy reappeared, and



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 405

presented me with a note written in pencil, and headed, in a
legal manner, " Heep v. Micawber." Prom this document, I
learned that Mr. Micawber, being again arrested, was in a
final paroxysm of despair ; and that he begged me to send him
his knife and pint pot, by bearer, as they might prove service-
able during the brief remainder of his existence, in jail. He
also requested, as a last act of friendship, that I would see his
family to the Parish Workhouse, and forget that such a Being
ever lived.

Of course I answered this note by going down with the boy
to pay the money, where I found Mr. Micawber sitting in a
corner, looking darkly at the Sheriff's Officer who had effected
the capture. On his release, he embraced me with the utmost
fervor ; and made an entry of the transaction in his pocket-
book — being very particular, I recollect, about a halfpenny I
inadvertently omitted from my statement of the total.

This momentous, pocket-book was a timely reminder to him
of another transaction. On our return to the room up stairs
(where he accounted for his absence by saying that it had
been occasioned by circumstances over which he had no con-
trol), he took out of it a large sheet of paper, folded small,
and quite covered with long sums, carefully worked. From
the glimpse I had of them, I should say that I never saw such
sums out of a school ciphering-book. These, it seemed, were
calculations of compound interest on what he called "the
principal amount of forty-one, ten, eleven and a half," for
various periods. After a careful consideration of these, and
an elaborate estimate of his resources, he had come to the con-
clusion to select that sum which represented the amount with
compound interest to two years, fifteen calendar months, and
fourteen days, from that date. For this he had drawn a
note-of-hand with great neatness, which he handed over to
Traddles on the spot, su discharge of his debt in full (as
between man and man), with many acknowledgments.

"I have still a presentiment," said Mrs. Micawber, pen-
sively shaking her head, "that my family will appear on
board, before we finally depart."

Mr. Micawber evidently had his presentiment on the subject
too, but he put it in his tin pot and swallowed it.



406 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" If you have any opportunity of sending letters home, on
your passage, Mrs. Micawber." -said my aunt, "you must let us
hear from you, you know."

" My dear Miss Trotwood," she replied, " I shall only be too
happy to think that any one expects to hear from us. I shall
not fail to correspond. Mr. Copperfield, I trust, as an old and
familiar friend, will not object to receive occasional intelli-
gence, himself, from one who knew him when the twins were
yet unconscious ? "

I said that I should hope to hear, whenever she had an
opportunity of writing.

"Please Heaven, there will be many such opportunities,"
said Mr. Micawber. " The ocean, in these times, is a perfect
fleet of ships ; and we can hardly fail to encounter many, in
running over. It is merely crossing," said Mr. Micawber,
trifling with his eye-glass, " merely crossing. The distance is
quite imaginary."

I think, now, how odd it was, but how wonderfully like Mr.
Micawber, that, when he went from London to Canterbury, he
should have talked as if he were going to the farthest limits
of the earth 5 and, when he went from England to Australia, as
if he were going for a little trip across the channel.

" On the voyage, I shall endeavor," said Mr. Micawber,
" occasionally to spin them a yarn ; and the melody of my son
Wilkins will, I trust, be acceptable at the galley-fire. When
Mrs. Micawber has her sea-legs on — an expression in which I
hope there is no conventional impropriety — she will give
them, I dare say, Little Tafflin. Porpoises and dolphins, I
believe, will be frequently observed athwart our Bows, and,
either on the Starboard or the Larboard Quarter, objects of
interest will be continually descried. In short," said Mr. Micaw-
ber, with the old genteel air, "the probability is, all will be
found so exciting, alow and aloft, tjiat when the lookout, sta-
tioned in the main-top, cries Land-ho ! we shall be very con-
siderably astonished ! "

With that he flourished off the contents of his little tin pot,
as if he had made the voyage, and had passed a first-class
examination before the highest naval authorities.

" What I chiefly hope, my dear Mr. Copperfield," said Mrs.





Micawber, "is, that in some branches of our family we may
live again in the old country. Do not frown, Micawber ! I do
not now refer to my own family, but to our children's children.
However vigorous the sapling/' said Mrs. Micawber, shaking
her head, " I cannot forget the parent-tree ; and when our race
attains to eminence and fortune, I own I should wish that for-
tune to flow into the coffers of Britannia."

" My dear," said Mr. Micawber, " Britannia must take her
chance. I am bound to. say that she has never done much for
me, and that I have no particular wish upon the subject."

" Micawber," returned Mrs. Mjcawber, "there you are
wrong. You are going out, Micawber, to this distant clime,
to strengthen, not to weaken, the connection between yourself
and Albion."

"The connection in question, my love," rejoined Mr. Micaw-
ber, "has not laid me, I repeat, under that load of personal
obligation, that I am at all sensitive as to the formation of
another connection."

" Micawber," returned Mrs. Micawber. " There, I again say,
you are wrong. You do not know your power, Micawber. It
is that which will strengthen, even in this step you are about
to take, the connection between yourself and Albion."

Mr. Micawber sat in his elbow-chair, with his eyebrows
raised; half receiving and half repudiating Mrs. Micawber's
views as they were stated, but very sensible of their fore-
sight.

" My dear Mr. Copperfield," said Mrs. Micawber, " I wish
Mr. Micawber to feel his position. It appears to me highly
important that Mr. Micawber should, from the hour of his
embarkation, feel his position. Your old knowledge of me,
my dear Mr. Copperfield, will have told you that I have not
the sanguine disposition of Mr. Micawber. My disposition is,
if I may say so, eminently practical. I know that this is a long
voyage. I know that it will involve many privations and
inconveniences. I cannot shut my eyes to those facts. But,
I also know what Mr. Micawber is. I know the latent power
of Mr. Micawber. And therefore I consider it vitally impor-
tant that Mr. Micawber should feel his position."

"My love," he observed, "perhaps you will allow me to



408 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

remark that it is barely possible that I do feel my position at
the present moment."

"I think not, Micawber," she rejoined. "Not fully. My
dear Mr. Copperfield, Mr. Micawber's is not a common case.
Mr. Micawber is going to a distant country, expressly in order
that he may be fully understood and appreciated for the first
time. I wish Mr. Micawber to take his stand upon that vessel's
prow, and firmly say, ' This country I am come to conquer !
Have you honors ? Have you riches ? Have you posts of
profitable pecuniary emolument ? Let them be brought for-
ward. They are mine ! 9 "

Mr. Micawber, glancing at us all, seemed to think there was
a good deal in this idea.

".I wish Mr. Micawber, if I make myself understood," said
Mrs. Micawber, in her argumentative tone, " to be the Caesar
of his own fortunes. That, my dear Mr. Copperfield, appears
to me to be his true position. From the first moment of this
voyage, I wish Mr. Micawber to stand upon that vessel's prow
and say, 'Enough of delay: enough of disappointment:
enough of limited means. That was in the old country.
This is the new. Produce your reparation. Bring it for-
ward ! ' "

Mr. Micawber folded his arms in a resolute manner, as if
he were then stationed on the figure-head.

"And doing that," said Mrs. Micawber, " — feeling his
position — am I not right in saying that Mr. Micawber will
strengthen, and not weaken, his connection with Britain ?
An important public character arising in that hemisphere,
shall I be told that its influence will not be felt at home ?
Can I be so weak as to imagine that Mr. Micawber, wielding
the rod of talent and of power in Australia, will be nothing
in England ? I am but a woman ; but I should be unworthy
of myself, and of my papa, if I were guilty of such absurd
weakness."

Mrs. Micawber's conviction that her arguments were unan-
swerable, gave a moral elevation to her tone which I think I
had never heard in it before.

"And therefore it is," said Mrs. Micawber, "that I the
more wish, that, at a future period, we may live again on the



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 409

parent soil. Mr. Micawber may be— I cannot disguise from
myself that the probability is, Mr. Micawber will be— a page
of History; and he ought then to be represented in the
country which gave him birth, and did not give him employ-
ment!"

"My love," observed Mr. Micawber, "it is impossible for
me not to be touched by your affection. I am always willing
to defer to your good sense. What will be —will be. Heaven
forbid that I should grudge my native country any portion of
the wealth that may be accumulated by our descendants ! "

"That's well," said my aunt, nodding towards Mr. Peggotty,
" and I drink my love to you all, and every blessing and suc-
cess attend you ! " •

Mr. Peggotty put down the two children he had been
nursing, one on each knee, to join Mr. and Mrs. Micawber in
drinking to all of us in return; and when he and the
Micawbers cordially shook hands as comrades, and his brown
face brightened with a smile, I felt that he would make his
way, establish a good name, and be beloved, go where he

would.

Even the children were instructed, each to dip a wooden
spoon into Mr. Micawber's pot, and pledge us in its contents.
When this was done, my aunt and Agnes rose, and parted
from the emigrants. It was a sorrowful farewell. They were
all crying; the children hung about Agnes to the last; and
we left poor Mrs. Micawber in a very distressed condition,
sobbing and weeping by a dim candle, that must have made
the room look, from the river, like a miserable lighthouse.

I went down again next morning to see that they were
away. They had departed, in a boat, as early as five o'clock.
It was a wonderful instance to me of the gap such partings
make, that although my association of them with the tumble-
down public-house and the wooden stairs dated only from last
night, both seemed dreary and deserted, now that they were

gone.

In the afternoon of the next day, my old nurse and I went
down to Gravesend. - We found the ship in the river, sur-
rounded by a crowd of boats ; a favorable wind blowing; the
signal for sailing at her mast head. I hired a boat directly,



410 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE'

and we put off to her; and getting through the little vprtex
of confusion of which she was the centre, went on board.

Mr. Peggotty was waiting for us on deck. He told me that
Mr. Micawber had just now been arrested again (and for the
last time) at the suit of Heep, and that, in compliance with a
request I had made to him, he had paid the money : which I
repaid him. He then took us down between decks; and
there, any lingering fears I had of his having heard any ru-
mours of what had happened were dispelled by Mr. Micaw-
ber's coming out of the gloom, taking his arm with an air
of friendship and protection, and telling me that they had
scarcely been asunder for a moment, since the night before
last.

It was such a strange scene to me, and so confined and dark,
that, at first, I could make out hardly anything; but, by
degrees, it cleared, as my eyes became more accustomed to the
gloom, and I seemed to stand in a picture by Ostade. Among
the great beams, bulks, and ringbolts of the ship, and the
emigrant-berths, and chests, and bundles, and barrels, and
heaps of miscellaneous baggage — lighted up, here and there,
by dangling lanterns ; and elsewhere by the yellow day-light
straying down a windsail or a hatchway — were crowded
groups of people, making new friendships, taking leave of one
another, talking, laughing, crying, eating, and drinking ; some,
already settled down into the possession of their few feet of
space, with their little households arranged, and tiny children
established on stools, or in dwarf elbow-chairs ; others, de-
spairing of a resting-place, and wandering disconsolately.
Prom babies who had but a week or two of life behind them,
to crooked old men and women who seemed to have but a
week or two of life before them ; and from ploughmen bodily
carrying out soil of England on their boots, to smiths taking
away samples of its soot and smoke upon their skins ; every
age and occupation appeared to be crammed into the narrow
compass of the 'tween decks.

As my eye glanced round this place, I thought I saw sitting,
by an open port, with one of the Micawber children near her,
a figure like Emily's ; it first attracted my attention, by another
figure parting from it with a kiss; and as it glided calmly



OF DAVID COPPJSBFIELD. 411

away through the disorder, reminding me of — Agnes! But
in the rapid motion and confusion, and in the unsettlement of
my own thoughts, I lost it again ; and only knew that the time
was come when all visitors were being warned to leave the
ship j that my nurse was crying on a chest beside me ; and
that Mrs. Gummidge, assisted by some younger stooping
woman in black, was busily arranging Mr. Peggotty's goods.

" Is there any last wured, Mas'r Davy ? ". said he. " Is there
any one forgotten thing afore we part ? "

" One thing ! " said I. " Martha ! "

He touched the younger woman I have mentioned on the
shoulder, and Martha stood before me.

"Heaven bless you, you good man!" cried L "You take
her with you ! "

She answered for him, with a burst of tears. I could speak
no more, at that time, but I wrung his hand ; and if ever I
have loved and honored any man, I loved and honored that
man in my soul.

The ship was clearing fast of strangers. The greatest trial
that I had, remained. I told him what the noble spirit that
was gone, had given me in charge to say at parting. It moved
him deeply. But when he charged me, in return, with many
messages of affection and regret for those deaf ears, he moved
me more.

The time was come. I embraced him, took my weeping
nurse upon my arm, and hurried away. On deck, I took leave
of poor Mrs. Micawber. She was looking distractedly about
for her family, even then ; and her last words to me were, that
she never would desert Mr. Micawber.

We went over the side into our boat, and lay at a little dis-
tance to see the ship wafted on her course. It was then calm,
radiant sunset. She lay between us, and the red light ; and
every taper line and spar was visible against the glow. A
sight at once so beautiful, so mournful, and so hopeful, as the
glorious ship, lying, still, on the flushed water, with all the
life on board her crowded at the bulwarks, and there cluster-
ing, for a moment, bare-headed and silent, I never saw.

Silent, only for a moment. As the sails rose" to the wind,
and the ship began to move, there broke from all the boats



412 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

three resounding cheers, which those on board took up, and
echoed back, and which were echoed and re-echoed. My heart
burst out when I heard the sound, and beheld the waving of
the hats and handkerchiefs — and then I saw her !

Then, I saw her, at her uncle's side, and trembling on his
shoulder. He pointed to us with an eager hand ; and she saw
us, and waved her last good by to me. Aye, Emily, beautiful
and drooping, cling to him with the utmost trust of thy bruised
heart ; for he has clung to thee, with all the might of his great
love !

Surrounded by the rosy light, and standing high upon the
deck, apart together, she clinging to him, and he holding her,
they solemnly passed away. The night had fallen on the
Kentish hills when we were rowed ashore — and fallen darkly
upon me.



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 413









CHAPTER XXIX.

ABSENCE.

It was a long and gloomy night that gathered on me,
haunted by the ghosts of many hopes, of many dear remem-
brances, many errors, many unavailing sorrows and regrets.

I went away from England ; not knowing, even then, how
great the shock was, that I had to bear. I left all who were
dear to me, and went away ; and believed that I had borne it,
and it was past. As a man upon a field of battle will receive
a mortal hurt, and scarcely know that he is struck, so I, when
I was left alone with my undisciplined heart, had no conception
of the wound with which it had to strive.

The knowledge came upon me, not quickly, but little by lit-
tle, and grain by grain. The desolate feeling with which I
went abroad, deepened and widened hourly. At first it was a
heavy sense of loss and sorrow, wherein I could distinguish
little else. By imperceptible degrees, it became a hopeless con-
sciousness of all that I had lost — love, friendship, interest; of
all that had been shattered — my first trust, my first affection,
the whole airy castle of my life ;- of all that remained — a ruined
blank and waste, lying wide around me, unbroken, to the dark
horizon.

If my grief were selfish, I did not know it to be so. I
mourned for my child-wife, taken from, her blooming world, so
young. I mourned for him who might have won the love and
admiration of thousands, as he had won mine long ago. I
mourned for the broken heart that had found rest in the
stormy sea ; and for tht wandering remnants of the simple
home, where I had heard the night-wind blowing, when I was
a child.

From the accumulated sadness into which I fell, I had at
length no hope of ever issuing again. I roamed from place to
place, carrying my burden with me everywhere. I felt its whole



414 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

weight now ; and I drooped beneath, it, and I said in my heart
that it could never be lightened.

When this despondency was at its worst, I believed that I
should die. Sometimes, I thought that I would like to die at
home ; and actually turned back on my road, that I might get
there soon. At other times, I passed on farther away, from
city to city, seeking I know not what, and trying to leave I
know not what behind.

It is not in my power to retrace, one by one, all the weary
phases of distress of mind through which I passed. There
are some dreams that can only be imperfectly and vaguely de-
scribed ; and when I oblige myself to look back on this time
of my life, I seem to be recalling such a dream. I see myself
passing on among the novelties of foreign towns, palaces, '
cathedrals, temples, pictures, castles, tombs, fantastic streets
— the old abiding places of History and Fancy — as a dreamer
might ; bearing my painful load through all, and hardly con-
scious of the objects as they fade before me. Listlessness to
everything, but brooding sorrow, was the night that fell on my
undisciplined heart. Let me look up from it — as at last I
did, thank Heaven ! — and from its long, sad, wretched dream,
to dawn.

For many months I travelled with this ever-darkening cloud
upon my mind. Some blind reasons that I had for not
returning home — reasons then struggling within me, vainly,
for more distinct expression — kept me on my pilgrimage.
Sometimes, I had proceeded restlessly from place to place,
stopping nowhere ; sometimes, I had lingered long in one
spot. I had had no purpose, no sustaining soul within me,
anywhere.

I was in Switzerland. I had come out of Italy, over one of
the great passes of the Alps, and had since wandered with a
guide among the by-ways of the mountains. If those awful
solitudes had spoken to my heart, I did not know it. I had
found sublimity and wonder in the dread heights and precipices,
in the roaring torrents, and the wastes of ice and snow; but as
yet, they had taught me nothing else.

I came, one evening before sunset, down into a valley, where
I was to rest. In the course of my descent to it, by the wind-



OF DAVID COPP&BFIELD. 415

ing track along the mountain-side, from which I saw it shining
far below, I think some long unwonted sense of beauty and
tranquillity, some softening influence awakened by its peace,
moved faintly in my breast. I remember pausing once, with
a kind of sorrow that was not all oppressive, not quite despair-
ing. I remember almost hoping that some better change was
possible within me.

I came into the valley, as the evening sun was shining on
the remote heights of snow, that closed it in, like eternal
clouds. The bases of the mountains forming the gorge in
which the little village lay, were richly green; and high
above this gentler vegetation, grew forests of dark fir, cleav-
ing the wintry snow-drift, wedge-like, and stemming the ava-
lanche. Above these, were range upon range of craggy steeps,
gray rock, bright ice, and smooth verdure-specks of pasture,
all gradually blending with the crowning snow. Dotted here
and there on the mountain's side, each tiny dot a home, were
lonely wooden cottages, so dwarfed by the towering heights
that they appeared too small for toys. So did even the clus-
tered village in the valley, with its wooden bridge across the
stream, where the stream tumbled over broken rocks, and
roared away among the trees. In the quiet air there was a
sound of distant singing — shepherd voices ; but, as one bright
evening cloud floated midway along the mountain' s-side, I
could almost have believed it came from there, and was not
earthly music. All at once, in this serenity, great Nature
spoke to me ; and soothed me to lay down my weary head upon
the grass, and weep as I had not wept yet, since Dora died !

I had found a packet of letters awaiting me but a few
minutes before, and had strolled out of the village to read
them while my supper was making ready. Other packets had
missed me, and I had received none for a long time. Beyond
a line or two, to say that I was well, and had arrived at such
a place, I had not had fortitude or constancy to write a letter
since I left home.

The packet was in my hand. I opened it, and read the
writing of Agnes.

She was happy and useful, was prospering as she had hopea.
That was all she told me of herself. The rest referred to me.



416 THE PUB SON AL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

She gave me no advice ; she urged no diity on me ; she only
told me, in her own fervent manner, what her trust in me
was. She knew (she said) how such a nature as mine would
turn affliction to good. She knew how trial and emotion
would exalt and strengthen it. She was sure that in my
every purpose I should gain a firmer and a higher tendency,
through the grief I had undergone. She, who so gloried in
my fame, and so looked forward to its augmentation, w^ell
knew that I would labor on. She knew that in me, sorrow
could not be weakness, but must be strength. As the endur-
ance of my childish days had done its part to make me what
I was, so greater calamities would nerve me on, to be yet
better than I was ; and so, as they had taught me, would I
teach others. She commended me to God, who had taken my
innocent darling to His rest ; and in her sisterly affection
cherished me always, and was always at my side go where I
would ; proud of what I had done, but infinitely prouder yet
of what I was reserved to do.

I put the letter in my breast, and thought what had I been
an hour ago ! When I heard the voices die away, and saw the
quiet evening cloud grow dim, and all the colors in the valley
fade, and the golden snow upon the mountain tops become a
remote part of the pale night sky, yet felt that the night was
passing from my mind, and all its shadows clearing, there was
no name for the love I bore her, dearer to me, henceforward,
than ever until then.

I read her letter, many times. I wrote to her before I
slept. I told her that I had been in sore need of her help ;
that without her I was not, and I never had been, what she
thought me ; but, that she inspired me to be that, and I would
try.

I did try. In three months more, a year would have passed
since the beginning of my sorrow. I determined to make no
resolutions until the expiration of those three months, but to
try. I lived in that valley, and its neighborhood, all the time.

The three months gone, I resolved to remain away from
home for some time longer ; to settle myself for the present
in Switzerland, which was growing dear to me in the remem-
brance of that evening ; to resume my pen ; to work.





I resorted humbly whither Agnes had commended me ; T
sought out Mature, never sought in vain ; and I admitted to
my breast the human interest I had lately shrunk from. It
was not long, before I had almost as many friends in the
valley as in Yarmouth : and when I left it, before the winter
set in, for Geneva, and came back in the spring, their cordial
greetings had a homely sound to me, although they were not
conveyed in English words.

I worked early and late, patiently and hard. I wrote a
Story, with a purpose growing, not remotely, out of my
experience, and sent it to Traddles, and he arranged for its
publication very advantageously for me ; and the tidings of
my growing reputation began to reach me from travellers
whom I encountered by chance. After some rest and change
I fell to work, in my old ardent way, on a new fancy, which
took strong possession of me. As I advanced in the execution
of this task, I felt it more and more, and roused my utmost
energies to do it well. This was my third work of fiction.
It was not half written, when, in an interval of rest, I thought
of returning home.

For a long time, though studying and working patiently, I
had accustomed myself to robust exercise. My health, severely
impaired when I left England, was quite restored. I had
seen much. I had been in many countries, and I hope I had
improved my store of knowledge.

I have now recalled all that I think it needful to recall,
here, of this term of absence — with one reservation. I have
made it, thus far, with no purpose of suppressing any of my
thoughts ; for, as I have elsewhere said, this narrative is my
written memory. I have desired to keep the most secret
current of my mind apart, and to the last. I enter on it now.

I cannot so completely penetrate the mystery of my own
heart, as to know when I began to think that I might have set
its earliest and brightest hopes on Agnes. I cannot say at
what stage of my grief it first became associated with the
reflection, that, in my wayward boyhood, I had thrown away
the treasure of her love. I believe I may have heard some
whisper of that distant thought, in the old unhappy loss or
want of something never to be realized, of which I had been
vol. ii — 27



418 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

sensible. But the thought came into my mind as a new
reproach and new regret, when I was left so sad and lonely
in the w T orld.

If, at that time, I had been much with her, I should, in the
weakness of my desolation, have betrayed this. It was what
I remotely dreaded when I was first impelled to stay away
from England. I could not have borne to lose the smallest
portion of her sisterly affection ; yet, in that betrayal, I should
have set a constraint between us hitherto unknown.

I could not forget that the feeling with which she now
regarded me had grown up in my own free choice and course.
That if she had ever loved me with another love — and I some-
times thought the time was when she might have done so — I
had cast it away. It was nothing, now, that I had accustomed
myself to think of her, when we were both mere children, as
one who was far removed from my wild fancies. I had
bestowed my passionate tenderness upon another object; and
what I might have done, I had not done ; and what Agnes
was to me, I and her own noble heart had made her.

In the beginning of the change that gradually worked in* me,
when I tried to get a better understanding of myself and be a
better man, I did glance, through some indefinite probation, to
a period when I might possibly hope to cancel the mistaken
past, and to be so blessed as to marry her. But, as time wore
on, this shadowy prospect faded, and departed from me. If
she had ever loved me, then, I should hold her the more sacred,
remembering the confidences I had reposed in her, her know-
ledge of my errant heart, the sacrifice she must have made to
be my friend and sister, and the victory she had won. If she
had never loved me, could I believe that she would love me
now?

I had always felt my weakness, in comparison with her
constancy and fortitude ; and now I J elt it more and more.
Whatever I might have been to her, or she to me, if I had
been more worthy of her long ago, I was not now, and she was
not. The time was past. I had let it go by, and had
deservedly lost her.

That I suffered much in these contentions, that they filled
me with unhappiness and remorse, and yet that I had 9-



OF ±)AVID C0PPEBFIEL1) 419

sustaining sense that it was required of me, '.n right and honor,
to keep away from myself, with shame, the thought of turning
to the dear girl in the withering of my hopes, from whom I
had frivolously turned when they were bright and fresh — •
which consideration was at the root of every thought I had
concerning her — is all equally true. I made no effort to
conceal from myself, now, that I loved her, that I was devoted
to her ; but I brought the assurance home to myself, that it
was now too late, and that our long-subsisting relation must
be undisturbed.

I had thought, much and often, of my Dora's shadowing
out to me what might have happened, in those years that were
destined not to try us. I had considered how the things that
never happen, are often as much realities to .us, in their
effects, as those that are accomplished. The very years she
spoke of, were realities now, for my correction; and would
have been, one day, a little later perhaps, though we had
parted in our earliest folly. I endeavored to convert what
might have been between myself and Agnes, into a means of
making me more self -den;/ ing, more resolved, more conscious
of myself, and my defeats and errors. Thus, through the
reflection that it might Lave been, I arrived at the conviction
that it could never be.

These, with their perplexities and inconsistencies, were
the shifting quicksands of my mind, from the time of my
departure to the time of my return home, three years after-
wards. Three years had elapsed since the sailing of the
emigrant ship; when, at that same hour of sunset, and in
the same place, I stood on the deck of the packet vessel that
brought me home, looking on the rosy water where I had seen
the image of that ship reflected.

Three years. Long in the aggregate, though short as they
went by. And home was very dear to me, and Agnes too —
but she was not mine — she was never to be mine. She
might have been, but that was past !



420 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE



CHAPTER XXX.

RETURN.

I landed in London on a wintry autumn evening. It was
dark and raining, and I saw more fog and mud in a minute
than I had seen in a year. I walked from the Custom House
to the Monument before I found a coach ; and although the
very house-fronts, looking on the swollen gutters, were like
old friends to me, I could not but admit that they were very
dingy friends.

I have often remarked — I suppose everybody has — that
one's going away from a familiar place, would seem to be the
signal for change in it. As I looked out of the coach-window,
and observed that an old house on Fish-street Hill, which had
stood untouched by painter, carpenter, or bricklayer, for a
century, had been pulled down in my absence ; and that a
neighboring* street, of time-honored insalubrity and incon-
venience, was being drained and widened ; I half expected to
find St. Paul's Cathedral looking older.

Eor some changes in the fortunes of my friends, I was
prepared. My aunt had long been re-established at Dover,
and Traddles had begun to get into some little practice at the
Bar, in the very first term after my departure. He had
chambers in Gray's Inn, now ; and had told me, in his last
letters, that he was not without hopes of being soon united to
the dearest girl in the world.

They expected me home before Christmas ; but had no idea
of my returning so soon. I had purposely misled them, that
I might have the pleasure of taking them by surprise. And
yet, I was perverse enough to feel a chill and disappointment
in receiving no welcome, and rattling, alone and silent, through
the misty streets.

The well-known shops, however, with their cheerful lights,
did something for me ; and when I alighted at the door of the





Gray's Inn Coffee-house, I had recovered my spirits. It re-
called, at first, that so-different time when I had put up at the
Golden Cross, and reminded me of the changes that had come
10 pass since then ; but that was natural.

"Do you know where Mr. Traddles lives in the Inn?" I
asked the waiter, as I warmed myself by the coffee-room fire.

" Holborn Court, sir. Number two."

" Mr. Traddles has a rising reputation among the lawyers, I
believe ? " said I.

"Well, sir," returned the waiter, "probably he has, sir;
but I am not aware of it myself."

This waiter, who was middle-aged and spare, looked for help
to a waiter of more authority — a stout, potential old man,
with a double-chin, in black breeches and stockings, who came
out of a place like a churchwarden's pew, at the end of the
coffee-room, where he kept company with a cash-box, a Direc-
tory, a Law-list, and other books and papers.

" Mr. Traddles," said the spare waiter. " Number two in

the Court."

The potential waiter waved him away, and turned, gravely,

to me.

" I was inquiring," said I, " whether Mr. Traddles at num-
ber two in the Court, has not a rising reputation among the
lawyers ? "

" Never heard his name," said the waiter, in a rich, husky

voice.

I felt quite apologetic for Traddles.

" He's a young man, sure ? " said the portentous waiter,
fixing his eyes severely on me. " How long has he been in
the Inn ? "

"Not above three years," said I.

The waiter, who I supposed had lived in his churchwarden's
pew for forty years, could not pursue such an insignificant
subject. He asked me what I would have for dinner ?

I felt I was in England again, and really was quite cast

down on Traddles's account. There seemed to be no hope for

him. I meekly ordered a bit of fish and a steak, and stood

before the fire musing on his obscurity.

' As I followed the chief waiter with my eyes, I could not



422 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

iielp thinking that the garden in which he had gradually blown
to be the flower he was, was an arduous place to rise in. It
had such a prescriptive, stiff-necked, long-established, solemn,
elderly air. I glanced about the room, which had had its
sanded floor sanded, no doubt, in exactly the same manner
when the chief waiter was a boy — if he ever was a boy, which
appeared improbable; and at the shining tables, where I saw
myself reflected, in unruffled depths of old mahogany ; and at
the lamps, without a flaw in their trimming or cleaning; and
at the comfortable green curtains, with their pure brass rods,
snugly enclosing the boxes ; and at the two large coal fires,
brightly burning ; and at the rows of decanters, burly as if
with the consciousness of pipes of expensive old port wine
below ; and both England, and the law, appeared to me to be
very difficult indeed to be taken by storm. I went up to my
bed-room to change my wet clothes ; and the vast extent of
that old wainscotted apartment (which was over the archway
leading to the Inn, I remember), and the sedate immensity of
the four-post bedstead, and the indomitable gravity of the
chests of drawers, all seemed to unite in sternly frowning on
the fortunes of Traddles, or on any such daring youth. I came
down again to my dinner ; and even the slow comfort of the
meal, and the orderly silence of the place — which was bare of
guests, the Long Vacation not yet being over — were eloquent
on the audacity of Traddles, and his small hopes of a liveli-
hood for twenty years to come.

I had seen nothing like this since I went away, and it quite
dashed my hopes for my friend. The chief waiter had had
enough of me. He came near me no more ; but devoted him-
self to an old gentleman in long gaiters, to meet whom a pint
of special port seemed to come out of the cellar of its own
accord, for he gave no order. The second waiter informed me,
in a whisper, that this old gentleman was a retired convey-
ancer living in the Square, and worth a mint of money, which
it was expected he would leave to his laundress's daughter;
likewise that it was rumored that he had a service of plate in
a bureau, all tarnished with lying by, though more than one
spoon and a fork had never yet been beheld in his chambers
by mortal vision. By this time, I quite gave Traddles up for





lost ; and settled in my own mind that there was no hope for
him.

Being very anxious to see the dear old fellow, nevertheless.
I despatched my dinner, in a manner not at all calculated to
raise me in the opinion of the chief water, and hurried out by
the back way. Number two in the Court was soon reached \
and an inscription on the door-post informing me that Mr.
Traddles occupied a set . of chambers on the top story, I
ascended the staircase. A crazy old staircase I found it to be,
feebly lighted on each landing by a club-headed little oil wick,
dying away in a little dungeon of dirty glass.

In the course of my stumbling up stairs, I fancied I heard
a pleasant sound of laughter; and not the laughter of an
attorney or barrister, or attorney's clerk or barrister's clerk,
but of two or three merry girls. Happening, however, as I
stopped to listen, to put my foot in a hole where the Honorable
Society of Gray's Inn had left a plank deficient, I fell down
with some noise, and when I recovered my footing all was
silent.

Groping my way more carefully, for the rest of the journey,
my heart beat high when I found the outer door, which had
Mr. Traddles painted on it, open. I knocked. A consider-
able scuffling within ensued, but nothing else. I therefore
knocked again,

A small sharp-looking lad, half-footboy and half -clerk, who
was very much out of breath, but who looked at me as if he
defied me to prove it legally, presented himself.

" Is Mr. Traddles within ? V I said.

"Yes, sir, but he's engaged."

" I want to see him."

After a moment's survey of me, the sharp-looking lad
decided to let me in; and opening the door wider for that
purpose, admitted me, first, into a little closet of a hall, and
next into a little sitting-room ; where I came into the presence
of my old friend (also out of breath), seated at a table, and
bending over papers.

"Good God!" cried Traddles, looking up. "It's Copper-
field ! " and rushed into my arms, where I held him tight.

"All well, my dear Traddles ? "



424 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

V All well, my dear, dear Copperfield, and nothing but good
news ! "

We cried with pleasure, both of us.

" My dear fellow," said Traddles, rumpling his hair in his
excitement, which was a most unnecessary operation, "my
dearest Copperfield, my long-lost and most welcome friend,
how glad I am to see you ! How brown you are ! How glad
I am! Upon my life and honor, I never was so rejoiced, my
beloved Copperfield, never ! "

I was equally at a loss to express my emotions. I was quite
unable to speak, at first.

"My dear fellow!" said Traddles. "And grown so fa-
mous ! My glorious Copperfield ! Good gracious me, when
did you come, where have you came from, what have you been
doing ? "

Never pausing for an answer to anything he said, Traddles,
who had clapped me into an easy chair* by the fire, all this
time impetuously stirred the fire with one hand, and pulled at
my neck-kerchief with the other, under some wild delusion
that it was a great coat. Without putting down the poker, he
now hugged me again ; and I hugged him ; and, both laugh-
ing, and both wiping our eyes, we both sat down, and shook
hands across the hearth.

"To think," said Traddles, "that you should have been so
nearly coming home as you must have been, my dear old boy,
and not at the ceremony ! "

" What ceremony, my dear Traddles ? "

" Good gracious me ! " cried Traddles, opening his eyes in
his old way. "Didn't you get my last letter ? "

" Certainly not, if it referred to any ceremony."

"Why, my dear Copperfield," said Traddles, sticking his
hair upright with both hands, and then putting his hands on
his knees, " I am married ! "

"Married ! " I cried joyfully !

"Lord bless me, yes!" said Traddles — "by the Be v.
Horace — to Sophy — down in Devonshire. Why, my dear
boy, she's behind the window curtain ! Look here ! "

To my amazement, the dearest girl in the world came at
that same instant, laughing and blushing, from her place of





concealment. And a more cheerful, amiable, honest, happy,
bright-looking bride, I believe (as I could not help saying on
the spot) the world never saw. I kissed her as an old
acquaintance should, and wished them joy with all my might
of heart.

" Dear me/' said Traddles, " what a delightful re-union this
is ! You are so extremely brown, my deaf Copperfield ! God
bless my soul, how happy I am ! "

"And so am I," said I.

" And I am sure I am ! " said the blushing and laughing
Sophy.

" We are all as happy as possible ! " said Traddles. " Even
the girls are happy. Dear me, I declare I forgot them ! "

"Forgot?" said I.

"The girls," said Traddles. "Sophy's sisters. They are
staying with us. They have come to have a peep at London.
The fact is, when — was it you that tumbled up stairs, Cop-
perfield ? "

" It was," said I, laughing.

"Well then, when you tumbled up stairs," said Traddles,
"I was romping with the girls. In point of fact, we were
playing at Puss in the Corner. But as that wouldn't do in
Westminster Hall, and as it wouldn't look quite professional
if they were seen by a client, they decamped. And they are
now — listening, I have no doubt," said Traddles, glancing at
the door of another room.

"I am sorry," said I, laughing afresh, "to have occasioned
such a dispersion."

"Upon my word," rejoined Traddles, greatly delighted, "if
you had seen them running away, and running back again,
after you had knocked, to pick up the combs they had dropped
out of their hair, and going on in the maddest manner, you
wouldn't have said so. My love, will you fetch the girls ? "

Sophy tripped away, and we heard her received in the
adjoining room with a peal of laughter.

"Eeally musical, isn't it, my dear Copperfield?" said
Traddles. " It's very agreeable to' hear. It quite lights up
these old rooms. To an unfortunate bachelor of a fellow who
has lived alone all his life, you know, it's positively delicious.



426 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

It's charming. Poor things, they have had a great loss in
Sophy — who, I do assure you, Copperfield, is, and ever was,
the dearest girl! — and it gratifies me beyond expression to
find them in such good spirits. The society of girls is a very
delightful thing, Copperfield. It's not professional, but it's
very delightful."

Observing that he slightly faltered, and comprehending that
in the goodness of his heart he was fearful of giving me some
pain by what he had said, I expressed my concurrence with a
heartiness that evidently relieved and pleased him greatly.

" But then," said Traddles, " our domestic arrangements are,
to say the truth, quite unprofessional altogether, my dear
Copperfield. Even Sophy's being .here, is unprofessional.
And we have no other place of abode. We have put. to sea in
a cockboat, but we are quite prepared to rough it. And
Sophy's an extraordinary manager ! You'll be surprised how
those girls are stowed away. I am sure I hardly know how
it's done."

" Are many of the young ladies with you ? " I inquired.

"The eldest, the Beauty is here," said Traddles, in a low
confidential voice, " Caroline. And Sarah's here — the one I
mentioned to you as having something the matter with her
spine, you know. Immensely better ! And the two youngest
that Sophy educated are with us. And Louisa's here."

" Indeed ! " cried I.

"Yes," said Traddles. "Now the whole set — I mean the
chambers — is only three rooms ; but Sophy arranges for the
girls in the most wonderful way, and they sleep as comfort-
ably as possible. Three in that room," said Traddles, point-
ing. "Two in that."

I could not help glancing round, in search of the accommo-
dation remaining for Mr. and Mrs. Traddles. Traddles under-
stood me.

"Well !" said Traddles, "we are prepared to rough it, as I
said just now, and we did improvise a bed last week, upon the
floor here. But there's a little room in the roof — a very nice
room, when you're up there — which Sophy papered herself,
to surprise me ; and that's our room at present. It's a capital
little gipsy sort of place. There's quite a view from it."





" And you are happily married at last, my dear Traddles,"
said I. " How rejoiced lam!"

,v Thank you, my dear Copperfield," said Traddles, as we
shook hands once more. "Yes, I am as happy as it's possible
to be. There's your old friend, you see," said Traddles, nod-
ding triumphantly at the flower-pot and stand; "and there's
the table with the marble top! All the other furniture is
plain and serviceable, you perceive. And as to plate, Lord
bless you, we haven't so much as a tea-spoon."
" All to be earned ? " said I, cheerfully.
"Exactly so," replied Traddles, "all to be earned. Of
course we have something in the shape of tea-spoons, because
we stir our tea. But they're Britannia metal."

" The silver will be the brighter when it comes," said I.
"The very thing we say!" cried Traddles. "You see, my
dear Copperfield," falling again into the low confidential tone,
" after I had delivered my argument in Doe dem. Jipes versus
Wigzell, which did me great service with the profession, I
went down into Devonshire, and had some serious conversation
in private with the Eeverend Horace. I dwxlt upon the fact
that Sophy— who I do assure you, Copperfield, is the dearest
girl!—"

" I am certain she is ! " said I.

"She is, indeed!" rejoined Traddles. "But I am afraid
I am wandering from the subject. Did I mention the Eeverend
Horace?"

" You said that you dwelt upon the fact — "
" True ! Upon the fact that Sophy and I had been engaged
for a long period, and that Sophy, with the permission of her
parents, was more than content to take me — in short," said
Traddles, with his old frank smile, " on our present Britannia-
metal footing. Very well. I then proposed to the Eeverend
Horace — who is a most excellent clergyman, Copperfield, and
ought to be a Bishop; or at least ought to have enough to live
upon, without pinching himself— that if I could turn the
corner, say of two hundred and fifty pounds, in one year; and
could see my way pretty clearly to that, or something better,
next year ; and could plainly furnish a little place like this,
besides ; then, and in that case, Sophy and I should be united.



428 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

I took the liberty of representing that we had been patient
for a good many years ; and that the circumstance of Sophy's
being extraordinarily useful at home, ought not to operate
with her affectionate parents, against her establishment in life
— don't you see ?"

" Certainly it ought not/' said I.

"I am glad you think so, Copperfield," rejoined Traddles,
" because, without any imputation on the Eeverend Horace,
T do think parents, and brothers, and so forth, are sometimes
rather selfish in such cases. Well ! I also pointed out, that
my most earnest desire was to be useful to the family ; and
that if I got on in the world, and anything should happen to
him — I refer to the Eeverend Horace — "

" I understand," said I.

" — Or to Mrs. Crewler — it would be the utmost gratifica-
tion of my wishes, to be a parent to the girls. He replied in
a most admirable manner, exceedingly flattering to my feel-
ings, and' undertook to obtain the consent of Mrs. Crewler to
this arrangement. They had a dreadful time of it with her.
It mounted from her legs into her chest, and then into her
head — "

"What mounted ? " I asked.

" Her grief," replied Traddles, with a serious look. "Her
feelings generally. As I mentioned on a former occasion, she
is a very superior woman, but has lost the use of her limbs.
Whatever occurs to harass her, usually settles in her legs ; but
on this occasion it mounted to the chest, and then to the head,
and, in short, pervaded the whole system in a most alarming
manner. However, they brought her through it by unremit-
ting and affectionate attention ; and we were married yesterday
six weeks. You have no idea what a Monster I felt, Copper-
field, when I saw the whole family crying and fainting away
in every direction ! Mrs. Crewler couldn't see me before we
left — couldn't forgive me, then, for depriving her of her child
— but she is a good creature, and has done so since. I had a
delightful letter from her, only this morning.

" And in short, my dear friend," said I, " you feel as blest
as you deserve to feel ! "

" Oh ! That's your partiality ! " laughed Traddles. "But,





indeed, I am in a most enviable state. I work hard, and read
Law insatiably. I get up at five every morning, and don't
mind it at all. I hide the girls in the day-time, and make
merry with them in the evening. And I assure you I am
quite sorry that they are going home on Tuesday^ which is
the day before the first day of Michaelmas Term. But here,"
said Traddles, breaking off in his confidence, and speaking
aloud, "are the girls! Mr. Copperfield, Miss Crewler — Miss
Sarah — Miss Louisa — Margaret and Lucy ! "

They were a perfect nest of roses ; they looked so whole-
some and fresh. They were all pretty, and Miss Caroline was
very handsome; but there was a loving, cheerful, fireside
quality in Sophy's bright looks, which was better than that,
and which assured me that my friend had chosen well. We
all sat round the fire ; while the sharp boy, who I now divined
had lost his breath in putting the papers out, cleared them
away again, and produced the tea-things. After that, he
retired for the night, shutting the outer door upon us with a
bang. Mrs. Traddles, with perfect pleasure and composure
beaming from her household eyes, having made the tea, then
quietly made the toast as she sat in a corner by the fire.

She had seen Agnes, she told me, while she was toasting.
" Tom " had taken her down into Kent for a wedding trip,
and there she had seen my aunt, too; and both my aunt and
Agnes were well, and they had all talked of nothing but me.
'< Tom "had never had me out of his thoughts, she really
believed, all the time I had been away. "Tom" was the
authority for everything. " Tom " was evidently the idol of
her life ; never to be shaken from his pedestal by any commo-
tion ; always to be believed in, and done homage to with the
whole faith of her heart, come what might.

The deference which both she and Traddles showed towards
the Beauty, pleased me very much. I don't know that I
thought it very reasonable ; but I thought it very delightful,
and essentially a part of their character. If Traddles ever
for an instant missed the tea-spoons that were still to be won,
I have no doubt it was when he handed the Beauty her tea.
If his sweet-tempered wife could have got up any self-assertion
against any one, I am satisfied it could only have been because



430 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

she was the Beauty's sister. A few slight indications of a
rather petted and capricious manner, which I observed in the
Beauty, were manifestly considered, by Traddles and his wife,
as her birthright and natural endowment. If she had been
born a Queen Bee, and they laboring Bees, they could not have
been more satisfied of that.

But their self-forgetfulness charmed me. Their pride in
these girls, and .their submission of themselves to all their
whims, was the pleasantest little testimony to their own worth
I could have desired to see. If Traddles were addressed as "a
darling," once in the course of that evening; and besought to
bring something here, or carry something there, or take some-
thing up, or put something down, or find something, or fetch
something, he was so addressed, by one or other of his sisters-
in-law, at least twelve times in an hour. Neither could they
do anything without Sophy. Somebody's hair fell down, and
nobody but Sophy could put it up. Somebody forgot how a
particular tune went, and nobody but Sophy could hum that
tune right. Somebody wanted to recall the name of a place
in Devonshire, and only Sophy knew .it. Something was
wanted to be written home, and Sophy alone could be trusted
to write before breakfast in the morning! Somebody broke
down in a piece of knitting, and no one but Sophy was* able
to put the defaulter in the right direction. They were entire
mistresses of the place, and Sophy and Traddles waited on
them. How many children Sophy could have taken care of
in her time, I can't imagine ; but she seemed to be famous for
knowing every sort of song that ever was addressed to a child
in the English tongue ; and she sang dozens to order with the
v clearest little voice in the world, one after another (every
sister issuing directions for a different tune, and the Beauty
generally striking in last), so that I was quite fascinated.
The best of all was, that, in the midst of their exactions, all
the sisters had a great tenderness and respect both for Sophy
and Traddles. I am sure, when I took my leave, and Traddles
was coming out to walk with me to the coffee-house, I thought
I had never seen an obstinate head of hair, or any other head
of hair, rolling about in such a shower of kisses.

Altogether, it was a scene I could not help dwelling on with





pleasure, for a long time after I got back and had wished
Traddles good night. If I had beheld a thousand roses blow-
ing in a top set of chambers, in that withered Gray's Inn, they
could not have brightened it half so much. The idea of
those Devonshire girls, among the dry law-stationers and the
attorney's offices; and of the tea and toast, and children's
songs, in that grim atmosphere of pounce and parchment, red-
tape, dusty wafers, ink-jars, brief and draft paper, law reports,
writs, declarations, and bills of costs, seemed almost as pleas-
antly fanciful as if I had dreamed that the Sultan's famous
family had been admitted on the roll of attorneys, and had
brought the talking-bird, the singing-tree, and the golden
water into Gray's Inn Hall. Somehow, I found that I had
taken leave of Traddles for the night, and come back to the
coffee-house, with a great change in my despondency about
him. I began to think he would get on, in spite of all the
many orders of chief waiters in England.

Drawing a chair before one of the coffee-room fires to think
about him at my leisure, I gradually fell from the considera-
tion of his happiness to tracing prospects in the live-coals, and
to thinking, as they broke and changed, of the principal
vicissitudes and separations that had marked my life. I had
not seen a coal fire, since I had left England three years ago :
though many a wood fire had I watched, as it crumbled into
hoary ashes, and mingled with the feathery heap upon the
hearth, which not inaptly figured to me, in my despondency,
my own dead hopes.

I could think of the past now, gravely, but not bitterly ; and
could contemplate the future in a brave spirit. . Home, in its
best sense, was for me no more. She in whom I might have
inspired a dearer love, I had taught to be my sister. She
would marry, and would have new claimants on her tender-
ness : and in doing it, would never know the love for her that
had grown up in my heart. It was right that I should pay
the forfeit of my headlong passion. What I reaped, I had
sown.

I was thinking. And had I truly disciplined my heart to
this, and could I resolutely bear it, and calmly hold the place
in her home which she had calmly held in mine, — when I



432 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

found my eyes resting on a countenance that might have
arisen out of the fire, in its association with my early remem-
brances.

Little Air. Chillip the Doctor, to whose good offices I was
indebted in the very first chapter of this history, sat reading a
newspaper in the shadow of an opposite corner. He was tol-
erably stricken in years by this time ; but, being a mild, meek,
calm little man, had worn so easily, that I thought he looked
at that moment just as he might have looked when he sat in
our parlor, waiting for me to be born.

Mr. Chillip had left Blunderstone six or seven years ago,
and I had never seen him since. He sat placidly perusing the
newspaper, with his little head on one side, and a glass of
warm sherry negus at his elbow. He was so extremely con-
ciliatory in his manner that he seemed to apologize to the very
newspaper for taking the liberty of reading it.

I walked up to where he was sitting, and said, "How do
you do, Air. Chillip ? "

He was greatly fluttered by this unexpected address from a
stranger, and replied, in his slow way, " I thank you, sir, you
are very good. Thank you, sir. I hope you are well."

"You don't remember me ? " said I.

"Well, sir," returned Mr. Chillip, smiling very meekly, and
shaking his head as he surveyed me. " I have a kind of an
impression that something in your countenance is familiar to
me, sir ; but I couldn't lay my hand upon your name, really."

"And yet you knew it, long before I knew it myself," I
returned.

"Did I indeed, sir ?" said Mr. Chillip. "Is it possible that
I had the honor, sir, of officiating when — ? "

"Yes," said I.

"Dear me!" cried Mr. Chillip. "Bat no doubt you are a
good deal changed since then, sir ? "

"Probably," said I.

"Well, sir," observed Mr. Chillip, "I hope you'll excuse me,
if I am compelled to ask the favor of your v name."

On my telling him my name, he was really moved. He
quite shook hands with me — which was a violent proceeding
for him, his usual course being to slide a tepid little fish-slice,



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 433

an inch or two in advance of his hip, and evince the greatest
discomposure when anybody grappled with it. Even now, he
put his.hani in his coat pocket as soon as he could disengage
it, and seemed relieved when he had got it safe back.

"Dear me, sir?" said Mr. Chillip, surveying me with his
head on one side. "And it's Mr. Copperfield, is it? Well,
sir, I think I should have known you, if I had taken the lib-
erty of looking more closely at you. There's a strong resem-
blance between you and your poor father, sir."

"I never had the happiness of seeing my father," I
observed.

"Very true, sir," said Mr. Chillip, in a soothing tone. "And
very much to be deplored it was, on all accounts ! We are not
ignorant, sir," said Mr. Chillip, slowly shaking his little head
again, "down in our part of the country, of your fame. There
must be great excitement here, sir," said Mr. Chillip, tapping
himself on the forehead with his forefinger. "You must find
it a trying occupation, sir ! "

" What is your part of the country now ? " I asked, seating
myself near him.

"I am established within a few miles of Bury St. Edmunds,
sir," said Mr. Chillip. " Mrs. Chillip coming into a little prop-
erty in that neighborhood, under her father's will, I bought a
practice down there, in which you will be glad to hear I am
doing well. My daughter is growing quite a tall lass now, sir,"
said Mr. Chillip, giving his little head another little shake.
"Her mother let down two tucks in her frocks only last
week. Such is time, you see, sir ! "

As the little man put his now empty glass to his lips, when
he made this reflection, I proposed to him to have it refilled,
and I would keep him company with another. "Well, sir,"
he returned, in his slow way, "it's more than I am accus-
tomed to; but I can't deny myself the pleasure of your
conversation. It seems but yesterday that I had the honor of
attending you in the measles. You came through them
charmingly, sir ! "

I acknowledged this compliment, and ordered the negus,
which was soon produced. "Quite an uncommon dissipa-

vol. ii — 28



434 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

tion ! " said Mr. Chillip, stirring it, " but I can't resist so
extraordinary an occasion. You have no family, sir ? "

I shook my head.

" I was aware that you sustained a bereavement, sir, some
time ago," said Mr. Chillip. "I heard it from your father-
in-law's sister. Very decided character there, sir ? "

" Why, yes," said I, " decided enough. Where did you see
her, Mr. Chillip?"

"Are you not aware, sir," returned Mr. Chillip, with his
placidest smile, " that your father-in-law is again a neighbor
of mine ? "

*7Jo/' said I.

" He is indeed, sir ! " said Mr. Chillip. " Married a young
lady of that part, with a very good little property, poor thing.
— And this action of the brain now, sir? Don't you find it
fatigue you ? " said Mr. Chillip, looking at me like an admiring
Robin.

I waived that question, and returned to the Murdstones.
" I was aware of his being married again. Do you attend the
family ? " I asked.

"Xot regularly. I have been called in," he replied.
" Strong phrenological development of the organ of firmness,
in Mr. Murdstone and his sister, sir."

I replied with such an expressive look, that Mr. Chillip was
emboldened by that, and the negus together, to give his head
several short shakes, and thoughtfully exclaim, "Ah, dear
me ! We remember old times, Mr. Copperfield ! "

" And the brother and sister are pursuing their old course,
are they ? " said I.

"Well, sir," replied Sir. Chillip, "a medical man, being
so much in families, ought to have neither eyes nor ears for
anything but his profession. Still, I must say, they are very
severe, sir : both as to this life and the next."

"The next will be regulated without much reference to
them, I dare say," I returned : " what are they doing as to
this ? "

Mr. Chillip shook his head, stirred his negus, and sipped it.

" She was a charming woman, sir ! " he observed in a plain-
tive manner.



OF DAVID GOFFEEFIELD. 435

"The present Mrs. Murdstone ? "

"A charming woman indeed, sir," said Mr. Chillip ; "as
amiable, I am sure, as it was possible to be ! Mrs. Chillip's
opinion is, that her spirit has been entirely broken since her
marriage, and that she is all but melancholy mad. And
the ladies," observed Mr. Chillip, timorously, "are great
observers, sir."

"I suppose she was to be subdued and broken to their
detestable mould, Heaven help her!" said I. "And she
has been."

"Well, sir, there were violent quarrels at first, I assure
you," said Mr. Chillip; "but she is quite a shadow now.
Would it be considered forward if I was to say to you, sir,
in confidence, that since the sister came to help, the brother
and sister between them have nearly reduced her to a state
of imbecility."

I told him I could easily believe it.

" I have no hesitation in saying," said Mr. Chillip, forti-
fying himself with another sip of negus, " between you and
me, sir, that her mother died of it — or that tyranny, gloom,
and worry have made Mrs. Murdstone nearly imbecile. She
was a lively young woman, sir, before marriage, and their
gloom and austerity destroyed her. They go about with
her, now, more like her keepers than her husband and
sister-in-law. That was Mrs. Chillip's remark to me, only
last week. And I assure you, sir, the ladies are great
observers. Mrs. Chillip herself is a great observer ! "

"Does he gloomily profess to be (I am ashamed to use the
word in such association) religious still ? " I inquired.

"You anticipate, sir," said Mr. Chillip, his eyelids getting
quite red with the unwonted stimulus in which he was
indulging. " One of Mrs. Chillip's most impressive remarks.
Mrs. Chillip," he proceeded, in the calmest and slowest
manner, "quite electrified me, by pointing out that Mr.
Murdstone sets up an image of himself, and calls it the
Divine Nature. You might have knocked me down on the
flat of my back, sir, with the feather of a pen, I assure you,
when Mrs. Chillip said so. The ladies are great observers,
sir ? "



436 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" Intuitively," said I, to his extreme delight.

" I am very happy to receive such support iu my opinion,
sir/' he rejoined. "It is not often that I venture to give a
non-medical opinion, I assure you. Mr. Murdstone delivers
public addresses sometimes, aud it is said, — in short, sir, it is
said by Mrs. Chillip, — that the darker tyrant he has lately
been, the more ferocious is his doctrine."

" I believe Mrs. Chillip to be perfectly right," said I.

" Mrs. Chillip does go so far as to say," pursued the meek-
est of little men, much encouraged, " that what such people
miscall their religion, is a vent for their bad humors and arro-
gance. And do you know I must say, sir," he continued, mildly
laying his head on one side, " that I don't find authority for
Mr. and Miss Murdstone in the New Testament ? "

" I never found it either ! " said I.

" In the mean time, sir," said Mr. Chillip, " they are much
disliked ; and as they are very free in consigning everybody
who dislikes them to perdition, we really have a good deal of
perdition going on in our neighborhood ! However, as Mrs.
Chillip says, sir, they undergo a continual punishment; for
they are turned inward, to feed upon their own hearts, and
their own hearts are very bad feeding. Now, sir, about that
brain of yours, if you'll excuse my returning to it. Don't you
expose it to a good deal of excitement, sir ? "

I found it not difficult, in the excitement of Mr. Chillip's
own brain, under his potations of negus, to divert his attention
from this topic to his own affairs, on which, for the next half
hour, he was quite loquacious ; giving me to understand, among
other pieces of information, that he was then at the Gray's Inn
Coffee-house to lay his professional evidence before a Commis-
sion of Lunacy, touching the state of mind of a patient who
had become deranged from excessive drinking.

"And I assure you, sir," he said, "I am extremely nervous
on such occasions. I could not support being what is called
Bullied, sir. It would quite unman me. Do you know it was
some time before I recovered the conduct of that alarming lady,
on the night of your birth, Mr. Copperfield ? "

I told him that I was going down to my aunt, the Dragon of
that night, early in the morning ; and that she was one of the





most tender-hearted and excellent of women, as he would know
full well if he knew her better. The mere notion of the pos-
sibility of his ever seeing her again, appeared to terrify him.
He replied, with a small pale smile, " Is she so, indeed, sir ?
Really?" and almost immediately called for a candle, and
went to bed, as if he were not quite safe anywhere else. He
did not actually stagger under the negus ; but I should think
his placid little pulse must have made two or three more
beats in a minute, than it had done since the great night of
my aunt's disappointment, when she struck at him with her
bonnet.

Thoroughly tired, I went to bed too, at midnight ; passed
the next day on the Dover coach ; burst safe and sound into
my aunt's old parlor while she was at tea (she wore spectacles
now) ; and was received by her, and Mr. Dick, and dear old
Peggotty, who acted as housekeeper, with open arms and tears
of joy. My aunt was mightily amused, when we began to talk
composedly, by my account of my meeting with Mr. Chillip,
and of his holding her in such dread remembrance ; and both
she and Peggotty had a great deal to say about my poor mother's
second husband^ and "that murdering woman of a sister," —
on whom I think no pain or penalty would have induced my
aunt to bestow any Christian or Proper Name, or any other
designation.



488 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE



CHAPTER XXXI.

AGNES.

My aunt and I, when we were left alone, talked far into the
^ight. How the emigrants never wrote home, otherwise than
cheerfully and hopefully; how Mr. Micawber had actually
remitted divers small sums of money, on account of those
" pecuniary liabilities," in reference to which he had been so
business-like as between man and man ; how Janet, returning
into my aunt's service when she came back to Dover, had
finally carried out her renunciation of mankind by entering
into wedlock with a thriving tavern-keeper ; and how my aunt
had finally set her seal on the same great principle, by aiding
and abetting the bride, and crowning the marriage-ceremony
with her presence ; were among our topics — already more or
less familiar to me through the letters I had had. Mr. Dick,
as usual, was not forgotten. My aunt informed me how he
incessantly occupied himself in copying everything he could
lay his hands on, and kept King Charles the First at a respect-
ful distance by that semblance of employment; how it was
one of the main joys and rewards of her life that he was free
and happy, instead of pining in monotonous restraint ; and
how (as a novel general conclusion) nobody but she could ever
fully know what he was.

"And when, Trot," said my aunt, patting the back of my
hand, as we sat in our old way before the fire, " when are you
going over to Canterbury ? "

"I shall get a horse, and ride over to-morrow morning, aunt,
unless you will go with me."

" No ! " said my aunt, in her short abrupt way. " I mean
to stay where I am."

Then, I should ride, I said. I could not have come through
Canterbury to-day without stopping, if I had been coming to
any one but her.



OF DAVID GOPPEBFIELD. 439

She was pleased, but answered, "Tut, Trot; my old bones
would have kept till to-morrow ! " and softly patted my hand
again, as I sat looking thoughtfully at the fire.

Thoughtfully, for I could not be here once more, and so
near Agnes, without the revival of those regrets with which I
had so long been occupied. Softened regrets they might be,
teaching me what I had failed to learn when my younger life
was all before me, but not the less regrets. " Oh, Trot," I
seemed to hear my aunt say once more; and I understood her
better now — " Blind, blind, blind ! "

We both kept silence for a few minutes. When I raised
my eyes, I found that she was steadily observant of me. Per-
haps she had followed the current of my mind ; for it seemed
to me an easy one to track now, wilful as it had been once.

"You will find her father a white-haired old man," said my
aunt, "though a better man in all other respects — a reclaimed
man. Neither will you find him measuring all human inter-
ests, and joys, and sorrows, with his one poor little inch-rule
now. Trust me, child, such things must shrink very much,
before they can be measured off in that way."

"Indeed they must," said I.

" You will find her," pursued my aunt, " cs good, as beauti-
ful, as earnest, as disinterested, as she has always been. If I
knew higher praise, Trot, I would bestow it on her."

There was no higher praise for her ; no higher reproach for
me. 0, how had I strayed so far away !

" If she trains the young girls whom she has about her, to
be like herself," said my aunt, earnest even to the filling of
her eyes with tears, "Heaven knows, her life will be well
employed ! Useful and happy, as she said that day ! How
could she be otherwise than useful and happy ! "

"Has Agnes any — " I was thinking aloud, rather than
speaking.

" Well ? Hey ? Any what ? " said my aunt, sharply.

"Any lover," said I.

" A score," cried my aunt, with a kind of indignant pride.
" She might have married twenty times, my dear, since you
have been gone ! "



440 THE PEBSONAL HISTOBT AND EXPEBIENCE

"No doubt/' said I. "No doubt. But has she any lover
who is worthy of her ? Agnes could care for no other."

My aunt sat musing for a little while, with her chin upon
her hand. Slowly raising her eyes to mine, she said :

" I suspect she has an attachment, Trot."

" A prosperous one ? " said I.

" Trot," returned my aunt gravely, " I can't say. I have no
right to tell you even so much. She has never confided it to
me, but I suspect it."

She looked so attentively and anxiously at me (I even saw
her tremble), that I felt now, more than ever, that she had
followed my late thoughts. I summoned all the resolutions
I had made, in all those many days and nights, and all those
many conflicts of my heart.

" If it should be so," I began, " and I hope it is — "

"I don't know that it is," said my aunt curtly. "You
must not be ruled by my suspicions. You must keep them
secret. They are very slight, perhaps. I have no right to
speak."

" If it should be so," I repeated, " Agnes will tell me at her
own good time. A sister to whom I have confided so much,
aunt, will not be reluctant to confide in me."

My aunt withdrew her eyes from mine, as slowly as she had
turned them upon me ; and covered them thoughtfully with
her hand. By and by she put her other hand on my shoulder ;
and so we both sat looking into the past, without saying another
word, until we parted for the night.

I rode away, early in the morning, for the scene of my old
school days. I cannot say that I was yet quite happy, in the
hope that I was gaining a victory over myself ; even in the
prospect of so soon looking on her face again.

The well-remembered ground was soon traversed, and I
came into the quiet streets, where every stone was a boy's book
to me. I went on foot to the old house, and went away with
a heart too full to enter. I returned ; and looking, as I passed,
through the low window of the turret-room where first Uriah
Heep, and afterwards Mr. Micawber, had been wont to sit, saw
that it was a little parlor now, and that there was no office.
Otherwise the staid old house was, as to its cleanliness and



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 441

order, still just as it had been when I first saw it. I requested
the new maid who admitted me, to tell Miss Wickfield that a
gentleman who waited on her from a friend abroad, was there ;
and I was shown up the grave old staircase (cautioned of the
steps I knew so well), into the unchanged drawing-room. The
books that Agnes and I had read together, were on their
shelves ; and the desk where I had labored at my lessons,
many a night, stood yet at the same old corner of the table.
All the little changes that had crept in when the Heeps were
there, were changed again. Everything was as it used to be,
in the happy time.

I stood in a window, and looked across the ancient street at
the opposite houses, recalling how I had watched them on wet
afternoons, when I first came there ; and how I had used to
speculate about the people who appeared at any of the win-
dows, and had followed them with my eyes up and down stairs,
while women went clinking along the pavement in pattens,
and the dull rain fell in slanting lines, and poured out of the
waterspout yonder, and flowed into the road. The feeling
with which I used to watch the tramps, as they came into the
town on those wet evenings, at dusk, and limped past, with
their bundles drooping over their shoulders at the ends of
sticks, came freshly back to me; fraught, as then, with the
smell of damp earth, and wet leaves and briar, and the sensa-
tion of the very airs that blew upon me in my own toilsome
journey.

The opening of the little door in the panelled wall made me
start and turn. Her beautiful serene eyes met mine as she
came towards me. She stopped, and laid her hand upon her
bosom, and I caught her in my arms.

"Agnes ! my dear girl ! I have come too suddenly upon you."

"No, no ! I am so rejoiced to see you, Trotwood ! "

"Dear Agnes, the happiness it is to me, to see you once
again ! "

I folded her to my heart, and for a little while we were
both silent. Presently we sat down, side by side ; and her
angel-face was turned upon me with the welcome I had dreamed
of, waking and sleeping, for whole years.

She was so true, she was so beautiful, she was so good, — I



442 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

owed her so much gratitude, she was so dear to me, that I could
find no utterance for what I felt. I tried to bless her, tried to
thank her, tried to tell her (as I had often done in letters)
what an influence she had upon me ; but all my efforts were
in vain. My love and joy were dumb.

With her own sweet tranquillity, she calmed my agitation ;
led me back to the time of our parting ; spoke to me of Emily,
whom she had visited, in secret, many times ; spoke to me ten-
derly of Dora's grave. With the unerring instinct of her
noble heart, she touched the chords of my memory so softly
and harmoniously, that not one jarred within me; I could
listen to the sorrowful, distant music, and desire to shrink
from nothing it awoke. How could I, when, blended with it
all, was her dear self, the better angel of my life ?

" And you, Agnes," I said, by and by. u Tell me of your-
self. You have hardly ever told me of your own life, in all
this lapse of time ! "

" What should I tell ? " she answered, with her radiant
smile. u Papa is well. You see us here, quiet in our own
home ; our anxieties set at rest, our home restored to us : and
knowing that, dear Trotwood, you know all."

"All, Agnes? "said I.

She looked at me, with some fluttering wonder in her face.

"Is there nothing else, Sister ? " I said.

Her color, which had just now faded, returned, and faded
again. She smiled ; with a quiet sadness, I thought ; and
shook her head.

I had sought to lead her to what my aunt had hinted at ;
for, sharply painful to me as it must be to receive that confi-
dence, I was to discipline my heart, and do my duty to her.
I saw, however, that she was uneasy, and I let it pass.

" You have much to do, dear Agnes ? *

" With my school ? " said she, looking up again, in all her
bright composure.

" Yes. It is laborious, is it not ? "

" The labor, is so pleasant," she returned, " that it is scarcely
grateful in me to call it by that name."

" Nothing good is difficult to you," said I.





Her color came and went once more ; and once more, as she
bent her head, I saw the same sad smile.

"You will wait and see papa," said Agnes, cheerfully, "and
pass the day with us ? Perhaps you will sleep in your own
room ? "We always call it yours."

I could not do that, having promised to ride back to my
aunt's, at night; but I would pass the day there, joyfully.

"I must be a prisoner for a little while," said Agnes, "but
here are the old books, Trotwood, and the old music."

"Even the old flowers are here," said I, looking round; "or

the old kinds."

"I have found a pleasure," returned Agnes, smiling, "while
you have been absent, in keeping everything as it used to be
when we were children. For we were very happy then, I

think."

" Heaven knows we were ! " said I.

"And every little thing that has reminded me of my
brother," said Agnes, with her cordial eyes turned cheerfully
upon me, "has been a welcome companion. Even this,"
showing me the basket-trifle, full of keys, still hanging at her
side, " seems to jingle a kind of old tune ! "

She smiled again, and went out at the door by which she

had come. . ,

It was for me to guard this sisterly affection with religious
care. It was all that I had left myself, and it was a treasure.
If I once shook the foundations of the sacred confidence and
usage, in virtue of which it was given to me, it was lost, and
could never be recovered. I set this steadily before myself.
The better I loved her, the more it behoved me never to

forget it.

I walked through the streets ; and, once more seeing my
old adversary the butcher — now a constable, with his staff
hanging up in the shop — went down to look at the place
where I had fought him ; and there meditated on Miss Shep-
herd and the eldest Miss Larkings, and all the idle loves and
likings, and dislikings, of that time. Nothing seemed to have
survived that time but Agnes; and she, ever a star above me,
was brighter and higher.

When I returned, Mr. Wickfield had come home, from a



444 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

garden he had, a couple of miles or so out of the town, where he
now employed himself almost every day. I found him as my
aunt had described him. We sat down to dinner, with some
half-dozen little girls ; and he seemed but the shadow of his
handsome picture on the wall.

The tranquillity and peace belonging, of old, to that quiet
ground in my memory, pervaded it again. When dinner was
done, Mr. Wickfield taking no wine, and I desiring none, we
went up stairs ; where Agnes and her little charges sang and
played, and worked. After tea the children left us ; and we
three sat together, talking- of the bygone days.

" My part in them," said Mr. Wickfield. shaking his white
head, "has much matter for regret — for deep regret, and
deep contrition, Trotwood, you well know. But I would not
cancel it, if it were in my power."

I could readily believe that, looking at the face beside him.

"I should cancel with it," he pursued, "such patience and
devotion, such fidelity, such a child's love, as I must not for-
get, no ! even to forget myself."

u I understand you, sir," I softly said. "I hold it — I have
always held it — in veneration."

"But no one knows, not even you," he returned, "how
much she has done, how much she has undergone, how hard
she has striven. Dear Agnes ! "

( She had put her hand entreatingly on his arm, to stop him ;
and was very, very pale.

" Well, well ! " he said with a sigh, dismissing, as I then
saw, some trial she had borne, or was yet to bear, in connection
with what my aunt had told me. " Well ! I have never told
you, Trotwood, of her mother. Has any one ? "

"Never, sir."

"It's not much — though it was much to suffer. She mar-
ried me in opposition to her father's wish, and he renounced
her. She prayed him to forgive her, before my Agnes came
into this world. He was a very hard man, and her mother
had long been dead. He repulsed her. He broke her heart."

Agnes leaned upon his shoulder, and stole her arm about
iris neck.

" She had an affectionate and gentle heart," he said ; " and






OF DAVID C0PPEBF1ELD. 445

it was broken. I knew its tender nature very well. No one
could, if I did not. She loved me dearly, but was never happy.
She was always laboring, in secret, under this distress ; and
being delicate and downcast at the time of his last repulse —
for it was not the first, by many — pined away and died.
She left me Agnes, two weeks old; and the gray hair that
you recollect me with, when you first came."

He kissed Agnes on her cheek.

"My love for my dear child was a diseased love, but my
mind was all unhealthy then. I say no more of that. I am
not speaking of myself, Trotwood, but of her mother, aud of
her. If I give you any clue to what I am, or "to what I have
been, you will unravel it, I know. What Agnes is, I need
not say. I have always read something of her poor mother's
story, in her character; and so I tell it you to-night, when we
three are again together, after such great changes. I have
told it all."

His bowed head, and her angel face and filial duty, derived
a more pathetic meaning from it than they had had before.
If I had wanted anything by which to mark this night of our
reunion, I should have found it in this.

Agnes rose up from her father's side, before long ; and going
softly to her piano, played some of the old airs to which we
had often listened in that place.

"Have you any intention of going away again ?" Agnes
asked me, as I was standing by.

u What does my sister say to that ? "

"I hope not."

"Then I have no such intention, Agnes."

" I think you ought not, Trotwood, since you ask me," she
said, mildly. " Your growing reputation and success enlarge
your power of doing good ; and if I could spare my brother,"
with her eyes upon me, " perhaps the time could not."

" What I am, you have made me, Agnes. You should know
best."

c i I made you Trotwood ? "

" Yes ! Agnes, my dear girl ! " I said, bending over her. " I
tried to tell you, when we met to-day, something that has been
in my thoughts since Dora died. You remember, when you



446 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

came down to me in our little room — pointing upward,
Agnes ? "

" Oh, Trotwood ! " she returned, her eyes filled with tears.
" So loving, so confiding, and so young ! Can I ever forget ? w

" As you were then, my sister, I have often thought since,
you have ever been to me. Ever pointing upward, Agnes;
ever leading me to something better; ever directing me to
higher things ! "

She only shook her head ; through her tears I saw the same
sad quiet smile.

"And I am so grateful to you for it, Agnes, so bound to
you, that ther^is no name for the affection of my heart. I
want you to know, yefc don't know how to tell you, that all
my life long I shall look up to you, and be guided by you, as
I have been through the darkness that is past. Whatever
betides, whatever new ties you may form, whatever changes
may come between us, I shall always look to you, and love
you,, as I do now, and have always done. You will always
be my solace and my resource as you have always been.
Until I die, my dearest sister, I shall see you always before
me, pointing upward ! "

She put her hand in mine, and told me she was proud of
me, and of what I said; although I praised her very far
beyond her worth. Then she went on softly playing, but
without removing her eyes from me.

"Do you know, what I have heard to-night, Agnes," said
I, " strangely seems to be a part of the feeling with which I
regarded you when I saw you first — with which I sat beside
you in my rough school-days ? "

"You knew I had no mother," she replied with a smile,
"and felt kindly towards me."

" More than that, Agnes, I knew, almost as if I had known
this story, that there was something inexplicably gentle and
softened, surrounding you; something that might have been
sorrowful in some one else (as I can now understand it was),
but was not so in you."

She softly played on, looking at me still.

"Will you laugh at my cherishing such fancies, Agnes ? "

"No!"



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 447

" Or at my saying that I really believe I felt, even then,
that you could be faithfully affectionate against all discourage-
ment, and never cease to be so, until you cease to live ? — Will
you laugh at such a dream ? "

" Oh, no ! Oh, no ! "

For an instant, a distressful shadow crossed her face ; but,
even in the start it gave me, it was gone ; and she was playing
on, and looking at me with her own calm smile.

As I rode back in the lonely night, the wind going by me
like a restless memory, I thought of this, and feared she was
not happy, /was not happy ; but, thus far, I had faithfully
set the seal upon the Past, and, thinking of her, pointing
upward, thought of her as pointing to that sky above me,
where, in the mystery to come, I might yet love her with a
love unknown on earth, and tell her what the strife had been
within me when I loved her here.



448 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE



CHAPTEE XXXII.

I AM SHOWN TWO INTERESTING PENITENTS.

For a time — at all events until my book should be com-
pleted, which would be the work of several months — I took
up my abode in my aunt's house at Dover ; and there, sitting
in the window from which I had looked out at the moon upon
the sea, when that roof first gave me shelter, I quietly pursued
my task.

In pursuance of my intention of referring to my own fictions
only when their course should incidentally connect itself with
the progress of my story, I do not enter on the aspirations,
the delights, anxieties, and triumphs of my art. That I truly
devoted myself to it with my strongest earnestness, and
bestowed upon it every energy of my soul, I have already
said. If the books I have written be of any worth, they will
supply the rest. I shall otherwise have written to poor pur-
pose, and the rest will be of interest to no one.

Occasionally I went to London ; to lose myself in the swarm
of life there, or to consult with Traddles on some business
point. He had managed for me, in my absence, with the
soundest judgment ; and my worldly affairs were prospering.
As my notoriety began to bring upon me an enormous quantity
of letters from people of whom I had no knowledge — chiefly
about nothing, and extremely difficult to answer — I agreed
with Traddles to have my name painted up on his door. There,
the devoted postman on that beat delivered bushels of letters
for me ; and there, at intervals, I labored through them, like
a Home Secretary of State without the salary.

Among this correspondence, there dropped in, every now
and then, an obliging proposal from one of the numerous
outsiders always lurking about the Commons, to practise
under cover of my name (if I would take the necessary steps
remaining to make a proctor of myself), and pay me a percent-



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 449

age on the profits. But I declined these offers ; being already
aware that there were plenty of such covert practitioners in
existence, and considering the Commons quite bad enough,
without my doing anything to make it worse.

The girls had gone home, when my name burst into bloom
on Traddles's door; and the sharp boy looked, all day, as if he
had never heard of Sophy, shut up in a back room, glancing
down from her work into a sooty little strip of garden with a
pump in it. But, there I always found her, the same bright
housewife; often humming her Devonshire ballads when no
strange foot was coming up the stairs, and blunting the sharp
boy in his official closet with melody.

I wondered, at first, why I so often found Sophy writing in
a copy-book ; and why she always shut it up when I appeared,
and hurried it into the table-drawer. But the secret soon
came out. One day, Traddles (who had just come home
through the drizzling sleet from Court) took a paper out of his
desk, and asked me what I thought of that handwriting ?

" Oh, don't Tom ! " cried Sophy, who was warming his slip-
pers before the fire.

"My dear/ 5 returned Tom, in a delighted state, "why not?
What do you say to that writing, Copperfield?"

"It's extraordinarily legal and formal," said I. "I don't
think I ever saw such a stiff hand."

"Not like a lady's hand, is it ? " said Traddles.
"A lady's!" I repeated. "Bricks and mortar are more
like a lady's hand ! "

Traddles broke into a rapturous laugh, and informed me
that it was Sophy's writing; that Sophy had vowed and
declared he would need a copying-clerk soon, and she would
be that clerk ; that she had acquired this hand from a pattern ;
and that she could throw off — I forget how many folios an
hour. Sophy was very much confused by my being told all
this, and said that when " Tom " was made a judge he wouldn't
be so ready to proclaim it. Which "Tom" denied; averring
that he should always be equally proud of it, under all cir-
cumstances.

"What a thoroughly good and charming wife she is, my
dear Traddles ! " said I, when she had gone away, laughing.
vol. ii — 29



450 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" My dear Copperfield," returned Traddles, " she is, without
any exception, the dearest girl ! The way she manages this
place; her punctuality, domestic knowledge, economy, and
order ; her cheerfulness, Copperfield ! "

"Indeed, you have reason to commend her!" I returned.
"You are a happy fellow. I believe you make yourselves,
and each other, two of the happiest people in the world."

"I am sure we are two of the happiest people,", returned
Traddles. "I admit that, at all events. Bless my soul, when
I see her getting up by candle-light on these dark mornings,
busying herself in the day's arrangements, going out to market
before the clerks come into the Inn, caring for no weather,
devising the most capital little dinners out of the plainest
materials, making puddings and pies, keeping everything in
its right place, always so neat and ornamental herself, sitting
up at night with me if it's ever so late, sweet-tempered and
encouraging always, and all for me, I positively sometimes
can't believe it, Copperfield ! "

He was tender of the very slippers she had been warming,
as he puti them on, and stretched his feet enjoyingly upon the
fender.

"I positively sometimes can't believe it," said Traddles.
" Then, our pleasures ! Dear me, they are inexpensive, but
they are quite wonderful ! When we are at home here, of an
evening, and shut the outer door, and draw those curtains —
which she made — where could we be more snug? When its
fine, and we go out for a walk in the evening, the streets
abound in enjoyment for us. We look into the glittering win-
dows of the jewellers' shops; and I show Sophy, which of
the diamond-eyed serpents, coiled up on white satin rising
grounds, I would give her if I could afford it ; and Sophy
shows me which of the gold watches that are caped and
jewelled and engine-turned, and possessed of the horizontal
lever-escape-movement, and all sorts of things, she would buy
for me if she could afford it ; and we pick out the spoons and
forks, fish-slices, butter-knives, and sugar-tongs, we should
both prefer if we could both afford it ; and really we go away
as if we had got them ! Then, when we stroll into the
squares, and great streets, and see a house to let, sometimes



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 451

we look up at it, and say, how would that do, if I was made a
nidge? And we parcel it out — such a room for us, such
rooms for the girls, and so forth ; until we settle to our satis-
faction that it would do, or it wouldn't do, as the case may be.
Sometimes, we go at half-price to the pit of the theatre — the
very smell of which is cheap, in my opinion, at the money —
and there we thoroughly enjoy the play : which Sophy believes
every word of, and so do I. In walking home, perhaps we
buy a little bit of something at a cook's-shop, or a little lob-
ster at the fishmongers, and bring it here, and make a splen-
did supper, chatting about what we have seen. Now, you
know, Copperfield, if I was Lord Chancellor, we couldn't do

this!''

"You would do something, whatever you were, my dear
Traddles," thought I, "that would be pleasant and amiable!
And by the way," I said aloud, "I suppose you never draw
any skeletons now ? " _

"Eeally," replied Traddles, laughing, and reddening, 1
can't wholly deny that I do, my dear Copperfield. Tor, being
in one of the back rows of the King's Bench the other day,
with a pen in hand, the fancy came into my head to try how
I had preserved that accomplishment. And I am afraid
there's a skeleton — in a wig — on the ledge of the desk."

After we had both laughed heartily, Traddles wound up by
looking with a smile at the fire, and saying, in his forgiving
way, " Old Creakle ! "

" I have a letter from that old — Rascal here," said 1. * or
I never was less disposed to forgive him the way he used to
batter Traddles, than when I saw Traddles so ready to forgive

him himself . _

"From Creakle the schoolmaster?" exclaimed Traddles.

"No!"

"Among the persons who are attracted to me in my rising
fame and fortune," said I, looking over my letters, "and who
discover that they were always much attached to me, is the
self-same Creakle. He is not a schoolmaster now, Traddles.
He is retired. He is a Middlesex Magistrate."

I thought Traddles might be surprised to hear it, but he
was not so at all.



452 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" How do you suppose lie comes to be a Middlesex Magis-
trate ? " said I.

" Oh dear me ! " replied Traddles ; " it would be very diffi-
cult to answer that question. Perhaps he voted for somebody,
or lent money to somebody, or bought something of somebody,
or otherwise obliged somebody, or jobbed for somebody, who
knew somebody who got the lieutenant of the county to
nominate him for the commission."

"On the commission he is, at any rate," said I. "And he
writes to me here, that he will be glad to show me, in opera-
tion, the only true system of prison discipline ; the only
unchallengeable way of making sincere and lasting converts
and penitents — which, you know, is by solitary confinement.
What do you say J? "

" To the system ? " inquired Traddles, looking grave.

"No. To my accepting the offer, and your going with
me?"

"I don't object," said Traddles.

"Then FU write to say so. You remember (to say nothing
of our treatment) this same Creakle turning his son out of
doors, I suppose, and the life he used to lead his wife and
daughter ? "

" Perfectly," said Traddles.

" Yet, if you'll read his letter, you'll find he is the tenderest
of men to prisoners convicted of the whole calendar of fel-
onies," said 1 5 "though I can't find that his tenderness extends
to any other class of created beings."

Traddles shrugged his shoulders, and was not at all sur-
prised. I had not expected him to be, and was not surprised
myself; or my observation of similar practical satires would
have been but scanty. We arranged the time of our visit, and
I wrote accordingly to Mr. Creakle that evening.

On the appointed day — I think it was the next day, but no
matter — Traddles and I repaired to the prison where Mr.
Creakle was powerful. It was an immense and solid building,
erected at a vast expense. I could not help thinking, as we
approached the gate, what an uproar would have been made
in the country, if any deluded man had proposed to spend one
half the money it had cost, on the erection of an industrial



OF DAVID GOPPERFIELD. 453

school for the young, or a house of refuge for the deserving
old.

In an office that might have been on the ground-floor of the
Tower of Babel, it was so massively constructed, we were
presented to our old schoolmaster ; who was one of a group,
composed of two or three of the busier sort of magistrates,
and some visitors they had brought. He received me, like a
man who had formed my mind in bygone years, and had
always loved me tenderly. On my introducing Traddles, Mr.
Creakle expressed, in like manner, but in an inferior degree,
that he had always been Traddles's guide, philosopher, and
friend. Our venerable instructor was a great deal older, and
not improved in appearance. His face was as fiery as ever ;
his eyes were as small, and rather deeper set. The scanty,
wet-looking gray hair, by which I remembered him, was
almost gone; and the thick veins in his bald head were none
the more agreeable to look at.

After some conversation among these gentlemen, from which
I might have supposed that there was nothing in the world to
be legitimately taken into account but the supreme comfort of
prisoners, at any expense, and nothing on the wide earth to be
done outside prison-doors, we began our inspection. It being
then just dinner-time, we went, first into the great kitchen,
where every prisoner's dinner was in course of being set out
separately (to be handed to him in his cell), with the regu-
larity and precision of clock-work. I said aside, to Traddles,
that I wondered whether it occurred to anybody, that there
was a striking contrast between these plentiful repasts of
choice quality, and the dinners, not to say of paupers, but of
soldiers, sailors, laborers, the great bulk of the honest, work-
ing community ; of whom not one man in five hundred ever
dined half so well. But I learned that the " system " required
high living; and, in short, to dispose of the system, once for
all,"" I found that on that head and on all others, "the system"
put an end to all doubts, and disposed of all anomalies.
"JSTobody appeared to have the least idea that there was any
other system, but the system, to be considered.

As we were going through some of the magnificent passages,
I inquired of Mr. Creakle and his friends what were supposed



454 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

to be the main advantages of this all-governing and universally
over-riding system? I found them to be the perfect isolation
of prisoners — so that no one man in confinement there, knew
anything about another 5 and the reduction of prisoners to a
wholesome state of mind, leading to sincere contrition and
repentance.

jSTow, it struck me, when we began to visit individuals in
their cells, and to traverse the passages in which those cells
were, and to have the manner of the going to chapel and so
forth, explained to us ; that there was a strong probability of
the prisoners knowing a good deal about each other, and of
their carrying on a pretty complete system of intercourse.
This, at the time I write, has been proved, I believe, to be
the case ; but, as it would have been flat blasphemy against the
system to have hinted such a doubt then, I looked out for the
penitence as diligently as I could.

And here again, I had great misgivings. I found as preva-
lent a fashion in the form of the penitence, as I had left out-
side in the forms of the coats and waistcoats in the windows
of the tailors' shops. I found a vast amount of profession,
varying very little in character : varying very little (which I
thought exceedingly suspicious), even in words. I found a
great many foxes, disparaging whole vineyards of inaccessible
grapes ; but I found very few foxes whom I would have
trusted within reach of a bunch. Above all, I found that the
most professing men were the greatest objects of interest;
and that their conceit, their vanity, their want of excitement,
and their love of deception (which many of them possessed to
an almost incredible extent, as their histories showed), all
prompted to these professions, and were all gratified by them.

However, I heard so repeatedly, in the course of our goings
to and fro, of a certain Number Twenty Seven, who was the
Favorite, and who really appeared to be a Model Prisoner^
that I resolved to suspend my judgment until I should see
Twenty Seven. Twenty Eight, I understood, was also a
bright particular star; but it was his misfortune to have his
glory a little dimmed by the extraordinary lustre of Twenty
Seven. I heard so much of Twenty Seven, of his pious admo-
nitions to everybody around him, and of the beautiful letters



OF DAVID GOPPEBFIELD. 455

he constantly wrote to his mother (whom he seemed to con-
sider in a very bad way), that I became quite impatient to see

him.

I had to restrain my impatience for some time, on account
of Twenty Seven being reserved for a concluding effect. But,
at last, we came to the door of his cell ; and Mr. Creakle, look-
ing through a little hole in it, reported to us, in a state of
the greatest admiration, that he was reading a Hymn Book.

There was such a rush of heads immediately, to see Number
Twenty Seven reading his Hymn Book, that the little hole
was blocked up, six or seven heads deep. To remedy this
inconvenience, and give us an opportunity of conversing with
Twenty Seven in all his purity, Mr. Creakle directed the door
of the cell to be unlocked, and Twenty Seven to be invited out
into the passage. This was done, and whom should. Traddles
and I then behold, to our amazement, in this converted Num-
ber Twenty Seven, but Uriah Heep !

He knew us directly; and said, as he came out— with the

old writhe, —

"How do you do, Mr. Copperfield? How do you do, Mr.

Traddles?" *

This recognition caused a general admiration in the party.
I rather thought that every one was struck by his not being
proud, and taking notice of us.

" Well, Twenty Seven," said Mr. Creakle, mournfully ad-
miring him. " How do you find yourself to-day ? "

« I am very umble, sir ! " replied Uriah Heep.

* You are always so, Twenty Seven," said Mr. Creakle.

Here another gentleman asked, with extreme anxiety: "Are
you quite comfortable ? "

"Yes, I thank you, sir !" said Uriah Heep, looking in that
direction. "Far more comfortable here, than ever I was
outside. I see my follies now, sir. That's what makes me
comfortable."

Several gentlemen were much affected ; and a third ques-
tioner, forcing himself to the front, inquired with extreme
feeling : " How do you find the beef ? "

" Thank you, sir," replied Uriah, glancing in the new direc-
tion of this voice, "it was tougher yesterday than I could



456 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

wish ; but it's my duty to bear. I have committed follies,
gentlemen," said Uriah, looking round with a meek smile,
" and I ought to bear the consequences without repining."

A murmur, partly of gratification at Twenty Seven's celes-
tial state of mind, and partly of indignation against the Con-
tractor who had given him* any cause of complaint (a note of
which was immediately made by Mr. Creakle), having sub-
sided, Twenty Seven stood in the midst of us, as if he felt
himself the principal object of merit in a highly meritorious
museum. That we, the neophytes, might have an excess of
light shining upon us all at once, orders were given to let out
Twenty Eight.

I had been so much astonished already, that I only felt a
kind of resigned wonder when Mr. Littimer walked forth,
reading a good book !

"Twenty Eight," said a gentleman in spectacles, who had
not yet spoken, " you complained last week, my good 'fellow,
of the cocoa. How has it been since ? "

"I thank you, sir," said Mr. Littimer, "it has been better
made. If I might take the liberty of saying so, sir, I don't
think the milk which is boiled with it is quite genuine ; but I
am aware, sir, that there is great adulteration of milk, in
London, and that the article in a pure state is difficult to be
obtained."

It appeared to me that the gentleman in spectacles backed
his Twenty Eight against Mr. Creakle's Twenty Seven, for
each of them took his own man in hand.

" What is your state of mind, Twenty Eight ? " said the
questioner in spectacles.

" I thank you, sir," returned Mr. Littimer ; " I see my
follies now, sir. I am a good deal troubled when I think of
the sins of my former companions, sir ; but I trust they may
find forgiveness."

"You are quite happy yourself?" said the questioner,
nodding encouragement.

"I am much obliged to you, sir," returned Mr. Littimer.
"Perfectly so."

" Is there anything at all on your mind, now ? " said the
questioner. " If so, mention it, Twenty Eight."



^^i/syis,



, fit A&*







OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 457

" Sir," said Mr. Littimer, without looking up, " if my eyes
have not deceived me, there is a gentleman present who was
acquainted with me in my former life. It may be profitable
to that gentleman to know, sir, that I attribute my past fol-
lies, entirely to having lived a thoughtless life in the service
of young men; and to having allowed myself to be led by
them into weaknesses, which I had not the strength to resist.
I hope that gentleman will take warning, sir, and will not be
offended at my freedom. It is for his good. I am conscious
of my own past follies. I hope he may repent of all the
wickedness and sin, to which he has been a party."

I observed that several gentlemen were shading their eyes,
each, with one hand, as if they had just come into church.

" This does you credit, Twenty Eight," returned the ques-
tioner. " I should have expected it of you. Is there anything
else ? "

"Sir," returned Mr. Littimer, slightly lifting up his eye-
brows, but not his eyes, "there was a young woman who
fell into dissolute courses, that I endeavored to save, sir, but
could not rescue. I beg that gentleman, if he has it in his
power, to inform that young woman from me that I forgive
her her bad conduct towards myself; and that I call her to
repentance — if he will be so good."

" I have no doubt, Twenty Eight," returned the questioner,
" that the gentleman you refer to feels very strongly — as we
all must — what you have so properly said. We will not
detain you."

" I thank you, sir," said Mr. Littimer. " Gentlemen, I wish
you a good day, and hoping you and your families will also
see your wickedness, and amend! "

With this, Number Twenty Eight retired, after a glance
between him and Uriah, as if they were not altogether un-
known to each other, through some medium of communica-
tion ; and a murmur went round the group, as his door shut
upon him, that he was a most respectable man, and a beau-
tiful case.

"Now, Twenty Seven," said Mr. Creakle, entering on a clear
stage with his man, " is there anything that any one can do for
you ? If so 5 mention it."



458 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

" I would uinbly ask, sir/' returned Uriah, with a jerk of
his malevolent head, " for leave to write again to mother."

u It shall certainly be granted," said Mr. Creakle.

u Thank you, sir ! I am anxious about mother. I am afraid
she ain't safe."

Somebody incautiously asked, what from ? But there was a
scandalized whisper of " Hush ! "

"Immortally safe, sir," returned Uriah, writhing in the
direction of the voice. "I should wish mother to be got into
my state. I never should have been got into my present state
if I hadn't come here. I wish mother had come here. It
would be better for everybody, if they got took up, and was
brought here."

This sentiment gave unbounded satisfaction — greater satis-
faction, I think, than anything that had passed yet.

" Before I come here," said Uriah, stealing a look at us, as
if he would have blighted the outer world to which we
belonged, if he could, " I was given to follies ; but now I am
sensible of my follies. There's a deal of sin outside. There's
a deal* of sin in mother. There's nothing but sin everywhere

— except here."

" You are quite changed ? " said Mr. Creakle.

" Oh dear, yes, sir ! " cried this hopeful penitent.

"You wouldn't relapse, if you were going out?" asked
somebody else.

" Oh de-ar no, sir ! "

" "Well ! " said Mr. Creakle, " this is very gratifying. You
have addressed Mr. Copperfield, Twenty Seven. Do you wish
to say anything further to him ? "

"You knew me a long time before I came here and was
changed, Mr. Copperfield," said Uriah, looking at me ; and a
more villanous look I never saw, even on his visage. " You
knew me when, in spite of my follies, I was umble among
them that was proud, and meek among them that was violent

— you was violent to me yourself, Mr. Copperfield. Once, you
struck me a blow in the face, you know."

General commiseration. Several indignant glances directed
at me.

"But I forgive you, Mr. Copperfield," said Uriah, making



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 459

his forgiving nature the subject of a most impious and awful
parallel, which I shall not record. "I forgive everybody. It
would ill become me to bear malice. I freely forgive you, and
I hope you'll curb your passions in future. I hope Mr. W.
will repent, and Miss W., and all of that sinful lot. You've
been visited with affliction, and I hope it may do you good ;
but you'd better have come here. Mr. W. had better have
come here, and Miss W. too. The best wish I could give you,
Mr. Copperfield, and give all of you gentlemen, is, that you
could be took up and brought here. When I think of my past
follies, and my present state, I am sure it would be best for
you. I pity all who ain't brought here ! "

He sneaked back into his cell, amidst a little chorus of appro-
bation; and both Traddles and I experienced a great relief
when he was locked in.

It was a characteristic feature in this repentance, that I was
fain to ask what these two men had done, to be there at all.
That appeared to be the last thing about which they had any-
thing to say. I addressed myself to one of the two warders,
who, I suspected, from certain latent indications in their faces,
knew pretty well what all this stir was worth.

"Do you know," said I, as we walked along the passage,
"what felony was Number Twenty Seven's last 'folly' ?"
The answer was that it was a Bank case.
" A fraud on the Bank of England ? " I asked.
" Yes, sir. Fraud, forgery, and conspiracy. He and some
others. He set the others on. It was a deep plot for a large
sum. Sentence, transportation for life. Twenty Seven was
the knowingest bird of the lot, and had very nearly kept him-
self safe ; but not quite. The Bank was just able to put salt
upon his tail — and only just."

"Do you know Twenty Eight's offence ? "
"Twenty Eight," returned my informant, speaking through-
out in a low tone, and looking over his shoulder as we walked
along the passage, to guard himself from being overheard, in
such an unlawful reference to these Immaculates, by Creakle
and the rest; "Twenty Eight (also transportation) got a place,
and robbed a young master of a matter of two hundred and
fifty pounds in money and valuables, the night before they



460 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

were going abroad. I particularly recollect his case from his
being took by a dwarf."

" A what ? "

" A little woman. I have forgot her name."

"Not Mowcher?"

"That's it! He had eluded pursuit, and was going to
America in a flaxen wig and whiskers, and such a complete
disguise as never you see in all your born days ; when the lit-
tle woman, being in Southampton, met him walking along the
street — picked him out with her sharp eye in a moment —
ran betwixt his legs to upset him — and held on to him like
grim Death."

"Excellent Miss Mowcher !" cried I.

" You'd have said so, if you had seen her, standing on a chair
in the witness-box at his trial, as I did," said my friend. " He
cut her face right open, and pounded her in the most brutal
manner, when she took him ; but she never loosed her hold
till he was locked up. She held so tight to him, in fact, that
the officers were obliged to take 'em both together. She gave
her evidence in the gamest way, and was highly complimented
by the Bench, and cheered right home to her lodgings. She said
in Court that she'd have took him single-handed (on account
of what she knew concerning him), if he had been Samson.
And it's my belief she would ! "

It was mine too, and I highly respected Miss Mowcher for it.

We had now seen all there was to see. It would have been
in vain to represent to such a man as the Worshipful Mr. Creakle,
that Twenty Seven and Twenty Eight were perfectly consistent
and unchanged ; that exactly what they were then, they had
always been ; that the hypocritical knaves were just the sub-
jects to make that sort of profession in such a place ; that they
knew its market- value at least as well as we did, in the imme-
diate service it would do them when they were expatriated ;
in a word, that it was a rotten, hollow, painfully-suggestive
piece of business altogether. We left them to their system
and themselves, and went home wondering.

" Perhaps it's a good thing, Traddles," said I, " to have an
unsound Hobby ridden hard ; for it's the sooner ridden to death."

" I hope so," replied Traddles.



OF DAVID COPPFBFIELD. 461



CHAPTEE XXXIIL

A LIGHT SHINES ON MY WAY.

The year came round to Christmas-time, and I had been at
home above two months. I had seen Agnes frequently. How-
ever loud the general voice might be in giving me encourage-
ment, and however fervent the emotions and endeavors to
which it roused me, I heard her lightest word of praise as I
heard nothing else.

At least once a week, and sometimes oftener, I rode over
there, and passed the evening. I usually rode back at night ;
for the old unhappy sense was always hovering about me now
— most sorrowfully when I left her — and I was glad to be up
and out, rather than wandering over the past in weary wake-
fulness or miserable dreams. I wore away the longest part of
many wild sad nights, in those rides ; reviving, as I went, the
thoughts that had occupied me in my long absence.

Or, if I were to say rather that I .listened to the echoes of
those thoughts, I should better express the truth. They spoke
to me from afar off. I had put them at a distance, and ac-
cepted my inevitable place. When I read to Agnes what I
wrote ; when I saw her listening face ; moved her to smiles or
tears ; and heard her cordial voice so earnest on the shadowy
events of that imaginative world in which I lived ; I thought
what a fate mine might have been — but only thought so, as I
had thought after I was married to Dora, what I could have
wished my wife to be.

My duty to Agnes, who. loved me with a love, which, if I
disquieted, I wronged most selfishly and poorly, and could
never restore ; my matured assurance that I, who had worked
out my own destiny, and won what I had impetuously set my
heart on, had no right to murmur, and must bear ; comprised
what I felt and what I had learned. But I loved her : and
now it even became some consolation to me, vaguely to con-



462 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

ceive a distant day when I might blamelessly avow it, when
all this should be over ; when I could say, " Agnes, so it was
when I came home; and now I am old, and I never have
loved since ! "

She did not once show me any change in herself. What
she always had been to me, she still was ; wholly unaltered.

Between my aunt and me there had been something, in this
connection, since the night of my return, which I cannot call
a restraint, or an avoidance of the subject, so much as an
implied understanding that we thought of it together, but did
not shape our thoughts into words. When, according to our
old custom, we sat before the fire at night, we often fell into
this train ; as naturally, and as consciously to each other, as
if we had unreservedly said so. But we preserved an unbroken
silence. I believed thajb she had read, or partly read, my
thoughts that night ; and that she fully comprehended why I
gave mine no more distinct expression.

This Christmas-time being come, and Agnes having reposed
no new confidence in me, a doubt that had several times arisen
in my mind — whether she could have that perception of the
true state of my breast, which restrained her with the appre-
hension of giving me pain — began to oppress me heavily. If
that were so, my sacrifice- was nothing; my plainest obligation
to her unfulfilled ; and every poor action I had shrunk from,
I was hourly doing. I resolved to set this right beyond all
doubt ; — if such a barrier were between us, to break it down
at once with a determined hand.

It was — what lasting reason have I to remember it ! — a
cold, harsh, winter day. There had been snow, some hours
before ; and it lay, not deep, but hard-frozen on the ground.
Out at sea, beyond my window, the wind blew ruggedly from
the north. I had been thinking of it, sweeping over those
mountain wastes of snow in Switzerland, then inaccessible to
any human foot ; and had been speculating which was the
lonelier, those solitary regions, or a deserted ocean.

" Riding to-day, Trot ? " said my aunt, putting her head ia
at the door.

"Yes," said I, "I am going over to Canterbury. It's n
good day for a ride."



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 463

"I hope your horse may think so too," said my aunt;
"but at present he is holding down his head and his ears,
standing before the door there, as if he thought his stable
preferable."

My aunt, I may observe, allowed my horse on the forbidden
ground, but had not at all relented toward the donkeys.

" He will be fresh enough, presently ! " said I.

" The ride will do his master good, at all events," observed
my aunt, glancing at the papers on my table. "Ah, child, you
pass a good many hours here ! I never thought, when I used
to read books, what work it was to write them."

"It's work enough to read them, sometimes," I returned.
"As to the writing, it has its own charms, aunt."

" Ah ! I see ! " said my aunt. " Ambition, love of appro-
bation, sympathy, and much more, I suppose ? Well : go along
with you ! "

" Do you know anything more," said I, standing composedly
before her — she had patted me on the shoulder, and sat down
in my chair, " of that attachment of Agnes ? "

She looked up in my face a little while, before replying :

" I think I do, Trot."

" Are you confirmed in your impression ? " I inquired.

"I think I am, Trot."

She looked so steadfastly at me : with a kind of doubt, or
pity, or suspense in her affection : that I summoned the
stronger determination to show her a perfectly cheerful face.

" And what is more, Trot — " said my aunt.

"Yes!"

" I think Agnes is going to be married."

" God bless her ! " said I, cheerfully.

" God bless her ! " said my aunt, " and her husband too ! "

I echoed it, parted from my aunt, went lightly down stairs,
mounted, and rode away. There was greater reason than
before to do what I had resolved to do.

How well I recollect the wintry ride ! The frozen particles
of ice, brushed from the blades of grass by the wind, and
borne across my face ; the hard clatter of the horse's hoofs,
beating a tune upon the ground; the stiff -tilled soil; the
snow-drift, lightly eddying in the chalk-pit as the breeze



464 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

ruffled it ; the smoking team with the wagon of old hay,
stopping to breathe on the hill-top, and shaking their bells
musically ; the whitened slopes and sweeps of Down-land
lying against the dark sky, as if they were drawn on a huge
slate !

I found Agnes alone. The little girls had gone to their
own homes now, and she was alone by the fire, reading. She
put down her book on seeing me come in ; and having wel-
comed me as usual, took her work-basket and sat in one of the
old-fashioned windows.

I sat beside her on the window-seat, and we talked of what
I was doing, and when it would be done, and of the progress
I had made since my last visit. Agnes was very cheerful;
and laughingly predicted that I should soon become too famous
to be talked to, on such subjects.

" So I make the most of the present time, you see," said
Agnes, " and talk to you while I may."

As I looked at her beautiful face, observant of her work,
she raised her mild clear eyes, and saw that I was looking at
her.

" You are thoughtful to-day, Trotwood ! "

" Agnes, shall I tell you what about ? I came to tell you."

She put aside her work, as she was used to do when we
were seriously discussing anything ; and gave me her whole
attention.

" My dear. Agnes, do you doubt my being true to you ?

u oSTo ! " she answered, with a look of astonishment.

" Do you doubt my being what I always have been to you ? "

" No ! " she answered, as before.

" Do you remember that I tried to tell you, when I came
home, what a debt of gratitude I owed you, dearest Agnes, and
how fervently I felt towards you ? "

"I remember it," she said, gently, "very well."
You have a secret," said I. " Let me share it, Agnes."

She cast down her eyes, and trembled.

"I could hardly fail to know, even if I had not heard — but
from other lips than yours, Agnes, which seems strange — that
there is some one upon whom you have bestowed the treasure
of your love. Do not shut me out of what concerns your



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 465

happiness so nearly ! Jf you can trust me as you say you can,
and as I know you niay, let me be your friend, your brother, in
this matter, of all others ! "

With an appealing, almost a reproachful, glance, she rose
from the window ; and hurrying across the room as if without
knowing where, put her hands before her face, and burst into
such tears as smote me to the heart.

And yet they awakened something in me, bringing promise
to my heart. Without my knowing why, these tears allied
themselves with the quietly sad- smile which was so fixed in
my remembrance, and shook me more with hope than fear or
sorrow.

" Agnes ! Sister ! Dearest ! What have I done ! "

"Let me go away, Trotwood. I am not well. I am not
myself. I will speak to you by and by — another time. I will
write to you. Don't speak to me now. Don't ! don't ! "

I sought to recollect what she had said, when I had spoken
to her on that former night, of her affection needing no
return. It seemed a very world that I must search through in
a moment.

" Agnes, I cannot bear to see you so, and think that I have
been the cause. My dearest girl, dearer to me than anything
in life, if you are unhappy, let me share your unhappiness.
If you are in need of help or counsel, let me try to give it to
you. If you have indeed a burden on your heart, let me try
to lighten it. For whom do I live now, Agnes, if it is not
for you ! "

" Oh, spare me ! I am not myself ! Another time ! " was
all I could distinguish.

Was it a selfish error that was leading me away ? Or, having
once a clue to hope, was there something opening to me that
I had not dared to think of ?

" I must say more. I cannot let you leave me so ! For
Heaven's sake, Agnes, let us not mistake each other after all
these years, and all that has come and gone with them ! I must
speak plainly. If you have any lingering thought that I
could envy the happiness you will confer; that I could not
resign you to a dearer protector, of your own choosing ; that
I could not, from my removed place, be a contented witness of
vol. ii — 30



466 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

your joy; dismiss it, for I don't deserve it! I have not
suffered quite in vain. You have not taught me quite in vain.
There is no alloy of self in what I feel for you."

She was quiet now. In a little time, she turned her pale
face towards me, and said in a low voice, broken here and
there, but very clear,

"I owe it to your pure friendship for me, Trotwood — -
which, indeed, I do not doubt — to tell you, you are mistaken.
I can do no more. If I have sometimes, in the course of years,
wanted help and counsel, they have come to me. If I have
sometimes been unhappy, the feeling has passed away. If I
have ever had a burden on my heart, it has been lightened
for me. If I have any secret, it is — no new one; and is —
not what you suppose. I cannot reveal it, or divide it. It
has long been mine, and must remain mine."

" Agnes ! Stay ! A moment ! *

She was going away, but I detained her. I clasped my
arm about her waist. " In the course of years ! " " It is
not a new one ! " New thoughts and hopes were whirling
through my mind, and all the colors of my life were chang-
ing.

" Dearest Agnes ! Whom I so respect and honor — whom 1
so devotedly love ! When I came here to-day, I thought that
nothing could have wrested this confession from me. I thought
I could have kept it in my bosom all our lives, till we were
old. But, Agnes, if I have indeed any new-born hope that I
may ever call you something more than Sister, widely different
from Sister ! — "

Her tears fell fast; but they were not like those she had
lately shed, and I saw my Iiope brighten in them.

* Agnes ! Ever my guide, and best support ! If you had
been more mindful of yourself, and less of me, when we grew
up here together, I think my heedless fancy never would have
wandered from you. But you ivere so much better than I, so
necessary to me in every boyish hope and disappointment,
that to have you to confide in, and rely upon in everything,
became a second nature, supplanting for the time the first and
greater one of loving you as I do ! "

Still weeping, but not sadly — joyfully ! And clasped in my



OF DAVID COPPEEFIELD. 467

arms as she had never been, as I had thought she never was
to be!

" When I loved Dora— fondly, Agnes, as you know—"

" Yes ! " she cried, earnestly. " I am glad to know it ! "

"When I loved her — even then, my love would have been
incomplete, without your sympathy. I had it, and it was
perfected. And when I lost her, Agnes, what should I have
been without you, still ! "

Closer in my arms, nearer to my heart, her trembling hand
upon my shoulder, her sweet eyes shining through her tears,
on mine !

"I went away, dear Agnes, loving you. I stayed away,
loving you. I returned home, loving you ! "

And now, I tried to tell her of the struggle I had had, and
the conclusion I had come to. I tried to lay my mind before
her, truly and entirely. I tried to show her, how I had hoped
I had come into the better knowledge of myself and of her ;
how I had resigned myself to what that Better knowledge
brought ; and how I had come there, even that day, in my
fidelity to this. If she did so love me (I said) that she could
take me for her husband, she could do so, on no deserving of
mine, except upon the truth of my love for her, and the trou-
ble in which it had ripened to be what it was ; and hence it
was that I revealed it. And 0, Agnes, even out of thy true
eyes, in that same time, the spirit of my child-wife looked
upon me, saying it was well ; and winning me, through thee,
to tenderest recollections of the Blossom that had withered in
its bloom !

"I am so blest, Trotwood — my heart is so overcharged —
but there is one thing I must say."
"Dearest, what?"

She laid her gentle hands upon my shoulders, and looked
calmly in my face.

"Do you know, yet, what it is ? "

"I am afraid to speculate on what it is. Tell me, my dear."

u I have loved you all my life ! "

0, we were happy, we were happy ! Our tears were not for
the trials (hers so much the greater) through which we had



468 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

come to be thus, but for the rapture of being thus, never to be
divided more !

We walked, that winter evening, in the fields together ; and
the blessed calm within us seemed to be partaken by the frosty
air. The early stars began to shine while we were lingering
On, and looking up to them we thanked our Gob for having
guided us to this tranquillity.

We stood together in the same old-fashioned window at
night, when the moon was shining; Agnes with her quiet
eyes raised up to it ; I following her glance. Long miles of
road then opened out before my mind ; and, toiling on, I saw
a ragged way-worn boy forsaken and neglected, who should
come to call even the heart now beating against mine, his own.

It was nearly dinner-time next day when we appeared before
my aunt. She was up in my study, Peggotty said : which it
was her pride to keep in readiness and order for me. We found
her, in her spectacles, sitting by the fire.

" Goodness me ! " said my aunt, peering through the dusk,
" who's this you're bringing home ? V

" Agnes/' said I.

As we had arranged to say nothing at first, my aunt was
not a little discomfited. She darted a hopeful glance at me,
when I said " Agnes ; " but seeing that I looked as usual, she
took off her spectacles in despair, and rubbed her nose with them.

She greeted Agnes heartily, nevertheless ; and we were soon
in the lighted parlor down stairs, at dinner. My aunt put on
her spectacles twice or thrice, to take another look at me, but"
as often took them off again, disappointed, and rubbed her nose
with them. Much to the discomfiture of Mr. Dick, who knew
this to be a bad symptom.

"By the by, aunt," said I, after dinner; "I have been
speaking to Agnes about what you told me."

"Then, Trot," said my aunt, turning scarlet, "you did
wrong, and broke your promise."

" You are not angry, aunt, I trust ? I am sure you won't be,
when you learn that Agnes is not unhappy in any attachment."

" Stuff and nonsense ! " said my aunt.

As my aunt appeared to be annoyed, I thought the best



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 469

way was to cut her annoyance short. I took Agnes in my
arm to the back of her chair, and we both leaned over her.
My aunt with one clap of her hands, and one look through her
spectacles, immediately went into hysterics, for the first and
only time in all my knowledge of her.

The hysterics called up Peggotty. The moment my aunt
was restored, she flew at Peggotty, and calling her a silly old
creature, hugged her with all her might. After that, she
hugged Mr. Dick (who was highly honored, but a good deal
surprised) ; and after that, told them why. Then we were all
happy together.

I could not discover whether my aunt, in her last short con-
versation with me, had fallen on a pious fraud, or had really
mistaken the state of my mind. It was quite enough, she
said, that she had told me Agnes was going to be married ;
and that I now knew better than any one how true it was.

We were married within a fortnight. Traddles and Sophy,
and Doctor and Mrs. Strong, were the only guests at our quiet
wedding. We left them full of joy ; and drove away together.
Clasped in my embrace, I held the source of every worthy
aspiration I had ever had ; the centre of myself, the circle of
my life, my own, my wife ; my love of whom was founded on
a rock !

"Dearest husband!" said Agnes. "Now that I may call
you by that name, I have one thing more to tell you."

" Let me hear it, love."

" It grows out of the night when Dora died. She sent you
for me."

"She did."

" She told me that she left me something. Can you think
what it was ? "

I believed I could. I drew the wife who had so long loved
me, closer to my side.

"She told me that she made a last request to me, and left
me a last charge."

"And it was — "

" That only I would occupy this vacant place."

And Agnes laid her head upon my breast, and wept ; and
I wept with her, though we were so happy.



470 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE



CHAPTER XXXIV.

A VISITOR.

What I have purposed to record is nearly finished; but
there is yet an incident conspicuous in my memory, on which
it often rests with delight, and without which one thread in
the .web I have spun, would have a ravelled end.

I had advanced in fame and fortune, my domestic joy was
perfect, I had been married ten happy years. Agnes and I
were sitting by the fire, in our house in London, one night in
spring, and three of our children were playing in the room,
when I was told that a stranger wished to see me.

He had been asked if he came on business, and had answered
No ; he had come for the pleasure of seeing me, and had come
a long way. He was an old man, my servant said, and looked
like a farmer.

As this sounded mysterious to the children, and moreover
was like the beginning of a favorite story Agnes used to tell
them, introductory to the arrival of a wicked old Fairy in a
cloak who hated everybody, it produced some commotion.
One of our boys laid his head in his mother's lap to be out of
harm's way, and little Agnes (our eldest child) left her doll in
a chair to 1 present her, and thrust out her little heap of
golden curls from between the window-curtains, to see what
happened next.

" Let him come in here ! " said I

There soon appeared, pausing in the dark doorway as he
entered, a hale, gray-haired old man. Little Agnes, attracted
by his looks, had run to bring him in, and I had not yet clearly
seen his face, when my wife, starting up, cried out to me, in a
pleased and agitated voice, that it was Mr. Peggotty ! *

It teas Mr. Peggotty. An old man now, but in a ruddy,
hearty, strong old age. When our first emotion was over,
and he sat before the fire with the children on his knees, and





the blaze shining on his face, he looked, to me, as vigorous
and robust, withal as handsome, an old man, as ever I had
seen.

" Mas'r Davy," said he. And the old name in the old tone
fell so naturally on my ear ! " Mas'r Davy, 'tis a joyful hour
as I see you, once more 'long with your own trew wife I*

" A joyful hour indeed, old friend ! H cried I.

"And these heer pretty ones/' said Mr. Peggotty. "To
look at these heer flowers ! Why, Mas'r Davy, you was but
the heighth of the littlest of these, when I first see you ! When
Em'ly war n't no bigger, and our poor lad were but a lad ! "

"Time has changed me more than it has changed you since
then," said I. "But let these dear rogues go to bed; and as
no house in England but this must hold you, tell me where to
send for your luggage (is the old black bag among it, that
went so far, I wonder !), and then, over a glass of Yarmouth
grog, we will have the tidings of ten years ! "

" Are you alone ? " asked Agnes.

"Yes, ma'am," he said, kissing her hand, "quite alone."

We sat him between us, not knowing how to give him wel-
come enough; and as I began to listen to his old familiar
voice, I could have fancied he was still pursuing his long
journey in search of his darling niece.

"It's a mort of water," said Mr. Peggotty, "fur to come
across, and.on'y stay a matter of fower weeks. But water
('specially when 'tis salt) comes natural to me ; and friends is
dear, and I am heer. — Which is verse," said Mr. Peggotty,
surprised to find it out, "though I hadn't such intentions."

" Are you going back those many thousand miles, so soon ? "
asked Agnes.

" Yes, ma'am," he returned. " I giv the promise to Em'ly,
afore I come away. You see, I doen't grow younger as the
years conies round, and if I hadn't sailed as 'twas, most like I
shouldn't never have done't. And it's alius been on my mind,
as I must come and see Mas'r Davy and your own sweet bloom-
ing self, in your wedded happiness, afore I got to be too old."

He looked at us, as if he could never feast his eyes on us
sufficiently. Agnes laughingly put back some scattered locks
of his gray hair, that he might see us better.



472 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

"And now tell us," said I, "everything relating to your
fortunes."

"Our fortuns, Mas'r Davy/' he rejoined, "is soon told.
We haven't fared nohows, but fared to thrive. We've alius
thrived. We've worked as we ought to't, and maybe we lived
a leetle hard at first or so, but we have alius thrived. What
with sheep-farmings and what with stock-farming, and what
with one thing and what with t' other, we are as well to do,
as well could be. Theer's been kinder a blessing fell upon
us/' said ATr. Peggotty, reverentially inclining his head, " and
we've done nowt but prosper. That is, in the long run. If
not yesterday, why then to-day. If not to-day, why then
to-morrow."

"And Emily ?" said Agnes and I, both together.

" Em'ly," said he, " arter you left her, ma'am — and I never
heerd her saying of her prayers at night, t' other side the can-
vas screen, when we was settled in the Bush, but what I
heerd your name — and arter she and me lost sight of Mas'r
Davy, that theer shining sundown — was that low, at first,
that, if she had know'd then what Mas'r Davy kep from us so
kind and thowtful, 'tis my opinion she'd have drooped away.
But theer was some poor folks aboard as had illness among
'em, and she took care of them; and theer was the children in
our company, and she took care of them; and so she got to be ,
busy, and to be doing good, and that helped her."

"When did she first hear of it ?" I asked.

"I kep it from her arter I heerd on't/' said Mr. Peggotty,
"going on nigh a year. We was living then in a solitary
place, but among the beautifullest trees, and with the roses a
covering our Beein to the roof. Theer come along one day,
when I was out a working on the land, a traveller from our
own Norfolk or Suffolk in England (I doen't rightly mind
which), and of course we took him in, and giv him to eat and
drink, and made him welcome. We all do that, all the colony
over. He'd got an old newspaper with him, and some other
account in print of the storm. That's how she know'd it.
When I come home at night, I found she know'd it."

He dropped his voice as he said these words, and the gravity
I so well remembered overspread his face.



OF DAVID COPPEBFIELD. 473

"Did it change her much ? " we asked.

" Ay, for a good long time," he said, shaking his head; "if
not to this present hour. But I think the solitoode done her
good. And she had a deal to mind in the way of poultry
and the like, and minded of it, and come through. I wonder,"
he said thoughtfully, "if you could see my Em'ly now, Mas'r
Davy, whether you'd know her ! "

" Is she so altered ? " I inquired.

"I doen't know. I see her ev'ry day, and doen't know;
but, odd-times, I have thowt so. A slight figure," said Mr.
Peggotty, looking at the fire, " kiender worn ; soft, sorrowful,
blue eyes; a delicate face; a pritty head, leaning a little
down; a quiet voice and way — timid almost. That's Em'ly!"

We silently observed him as he sat, still looking at the fire.

"Some thinks," he said, "as her affection is ill-bestowed;
some, as her marriage was broke off by death. No one knows
how 'tis. She might have married well a mort of times,
'but, uncle/ she says to me, < that's gone forever.' Cheerful
along with me ; retired when others is by ; fond of going any
distance fur to teach a child, or fur to tend a sick person, or
fur to do some kindness tow'rds a young girl's wedding (and
she's done a many, but has never seen one) ; fondly loving of
her uncle ; patient ; liked by young and old ; sowt out by all
that has any trouble. That's Em'ly ! "

He drew his hand across his face, and with a half-si^ppressed
sigh looked up from the fire.

" Is Martha with you yet ? " I asked.

"Martha," he replied, "got married, Mas'r Davy, in the
second year. A young man, a farm-laborer, as come by us on
his way to market with his mas'r's drays — a journey of over
five hundred mile, theer and back — made offers fur to take
her fur his wife (wives is very scarce theer), and then to set
up fur their two selves in the Bush. She spoke to me fur to
tell him her trew story. I did. They was married, and they
live fower hundred mile away from any voices but their own
and the singing birds."

" Mrs. Gummidge ? " I suggested.

It was a pleasant key to touch, for Mr. Peggotty suddenly
burst into a roar of laughter, and rubbed his hands up and



174 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

down his legs, as he had been accustomed to do when he
enjoyed himself in the long-shipwrecked boat.

" Would you believe it ! " he said. " Why, someun even
made offers fur to marry her! If a ship's cook that was turn-
ing settler, Mas'r Davy, didn't make offers fur to marry Missis
Gum midge, I'm Gormed — and I can't say no fairer than
that!"

I never saw Agnes laugh so. This sudden ecstasy on the
part of Mr. Peggotty was so delightful to her, that she could
not. leave off laughing; and the more she laughed the more
she made me laugh, and the greater Mr. Peggotty's ecstasy
became, and the more he rubbed his legs.

"And what did Mrs. Gummidge say ?" I asked, when I was
grave enough.

"If you'll believe me," returned Mr. Peggotty, "Missis
Gummidge, 'stead of saying < thank you, I'm much obleeged to
you, I ain't a going fur to change my condition at my time of
life/ up'd with a bucket as was standing by, and laid it over
that theer ship's cook's head 'till he sung out fur help, and I
went in and reskied of him."

Mr. Peggotty burst into a great roar of laughter, and Agnes
and I both kept him company.

"But I must say this for the good creetur," he resumed,
wiping his face when we were quite exhausted ; " she has been
all she said she'd be to us, and more. She's the willingest,
the trewest, the honestest-helping woman, Mas'r Davy, as ever
draw'd the breath of life. I have never know'd her to be lone
and lorn, for a single minute, not even when the colony was
all afore us, and we was new to it. And thinking of the old
'un is a thing she never done, I do assure you, since she left
England!"

"Now, last, not least, Mr. Micawber," said I. "He has
paid off every obligation he incurred here — even to Traddles's
bill, you remember, my dear Agnes — and therefore we may
take it for granted that he is doing well. But what is the
latest news of him ? "

Mr. Peggotty, with a smile, put his hand in his breast-
pocket, and produced a flat-folded, paper parcel, from which
he took out, with much oare, a little odd-looking newspaper.





"You are to unnerstan', Mas'r Davy/' said he, "as we have
left the Bush now, being so well to do; and have gone right
away round to Port Middlebay Harbor, wheer theer's what we

call a town."

" Mr. Micawber was in the Bush near you ? " said I.

"Bless you, yes," said Mr. Peggotty, "and turned to, with
a will. I never wish to meet a better gen'linan for turning to,
with a will. Fve seen that theer bald head of his, a per-
spiring in the sun, Mas'r Davy, 'till I a'most thowt it would
have melted away. And now he's a magistrate."

" A Magistrate, eh ? " said I.

Mr. Peggotty pointed to a certain paragraph in the news-
paper, where I read aloud as follows, from the "Port Middle-,
bay Times":

" XW The public dinner to our distinguished fellow-colonist
and townsman, Wilkins Micawber, Esquire, Port Middle-
bay District Magistrate, came off yesterday in the large room
of the Hotel, which was crowded to suffocation. It is esti-
mated that not fewer than forty-seven persons must have been
accommodated with dinner at one time, exclusive of the
company in the passage and on the stairs. The beauty,
fashion, and exclusiveness of Port Middlebay, flocked to do
honor to one so deservedly esteemed, so highly talented, and
so widely popular. Doctor Mell (of Colonial Salem-House
Grammar School, Port Middlebay) presided, and on his right
sat the distinguished guest. After the removal of the cloth,
and the singing of Kon Nobis (beautifully executed, and in
which we were at no loss to distinguish the bell-like notes of
that gifted amateur, Wilkins Micawber, Esquire, Junior),
the usual loyal and patriotic toasts were severally given and
rapturously received. Dr. Mell, in a speech replete with feel-
ing, then proposed < Our distinguished Guest, the ornament of
our town. May he never leave us but to better himself, and
may his success among us be such as to render his bettering
himself impossible ! ' The cheering with which the toast was
received defies description. Again and again it rose and fell,
like the waves of ocean. At length all was hushed, and
Wilkins Micawber, Esquire, presented himself to return



476 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

thanks. Far be it from us, in the present comparatively im-
perfect state of the resources of our establishment, to en-
deavor to follow our distinguished townsman, through the
smoothly flowing periods of his polished and highly ornate
address ! Suffice it to observe, that it was a master-piece of
eloquence ; and that those passages in which he more particu-
larly traced his own successful career to its source, and
warned the younger portion of his auditory from the shoals
of ever incurring pecuniary liabilities which they were unable
to liquidate, brought a tear into the manliest eye present.
The remaining toasts were Dr. Mell ; Mrs. Micawber (who
gracefully bowed her acknowledgments from the side-door,
where a galaxy of beauty was elevated on chairs, at once to
witness and adorn the gratifying scene) ; Mrs. Ridger Begs
(late Miss Micawber) ; Mrs. Mell; Wilkins Micawber,
Esquire, Junior (who convulsed the assembly by humor-
ously remarking that he found himself unable to return
thanks in a speech, but would do so, with their permission, in
a song) ; Mrs. Micawber's Family (well known, it is need-
less to remark, in the mother country), &c, &c, &c. At the
conclusion of the proceedings the tables were cleared as if by
art-magic for dancing. Among the votaries of Terpsichore,
who disported themselves until Sol gave warning for depart-
ure, Wilkins Micawber, Esquire, Junior, and the lovely and
accomplished Miss Helena, fourth daughter of Dr. Mell, were
particularly remarkable."

I was looking back to the name of Dr. Mell, pleased to have
discovered, in these happier circumstances, Mr. Mell, formerly
poor pinched usher to my Middlesex magistrate, when Mr.
Peggotty, pointing to another part of the paper, my eyes
rested on my own name, and I read thus :



"the eminent author.
"My Dear Sir,

"Years have elapsed, since I had an opportunity
of ocularly perusing the lineaments, now familiar to the imag-
inations of a considerable portion of the civilized world.



OF DAVID COPPEEFIELD. 477

"But, my dear sir, though estranged (by the force of cir-
umstances over which I have had no control) from the per-
sonal society of the friend and companion of my youth, I have
not been unmindful of his soaring flight. Nor have I been

debarred,

Though seas between us braid ha' roared,

(Bukns) from participating in the intellectual feasts he has
spread before us.

" I cannot, therefore, allow of the departure from this place
of an individual whom we mutually respect and esteem,
without, my dear sir, taking this public opportunity of thank-
ing you, on my own behalf, and, I may undertake to add, on
that* of the whole of the Inhabitants of Port Middlebay, for
the gratification of which you are the ministering agent.

"Go on, my dear sir! You are not unknown here, you
are not unappreciated. Though < remote/ we are neither
< unfriended/ < melancholy/ nor (I may add) < slow/ Go on,
my dear sir, in your Eagle course ! The inhabitants of Port
Middlebay may at least aspire to watch it, with delight, with
entertainment, with instruction !

"Among the eyes elevated towards you from this portion
of the globe, will ever be found, while it has light and life,

"The
"Eye
"Appertaining to

"WlLKINS MlCAWBER,

" Magistrate."

I found, on glancing at the remaining contents of the
newspaper, that Mr. Micawber was a diligent and esteemed
correspondent of that Journal. There was another letter
from him in the same paper, touching a bridge ; there was an
advertisement of a collection of similar letters by him, to be
shortly republished, in a neat volume, " with considerable
additions;" and, unless I am very much mistaken, the Leading
Article was his also.

We talked much of Mr. Micawber, on many other evenings
while Mr. Peggotty remained with us. He lived with us
during the whole term of his stay, — which, I think, was



478 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

something less than a month, — and his sister and my aunt
came to London to see him. Agnes and I parted from him
aboard-ship, when he sailed ; and we shall never part from
him more, on earth.

But before he left, he went with me to Yarmouth, to see a
little tablet I had put up in the churchyard to the memory of
Ham. While I was copying the plain inscription for him at
his request, I saw him stoop, and gather a tuft of grass from
the grave, and a little earth.

"For Em'ly," he said, as he put it in his breast. "I promised,
Mas'r Davy,"







CHAPTEE XXXV.

A LAST RETROSPECT.

And now my written story ends. I look back, once more
— for the last time — before I close these leaves.

I see myself, with Agnes at my side, journeying along the
road of life. I see our children and our friends around us ;
and I hear the roar of many voices, not indifferent to me as I
travel on.

What faces are the most distinct to me in the fleeting
crowd ? Lo, these ; all turning to me as I ask my thoughts
the question !

Here is my aunt, in stronger spectacles, an old woman of
fourscore years and more, but upright yet, and a steady walker
of six miles at a stretch in winter weather.

Always with her, here comes Peggotty, my good old nurse,
likewise in spectacles, accustomed to do needlework at night
very close to the lamp, but never sitting down to it without a
bit of wax candle, a yard measure in a little house, and a
work-box with a picture of St. Paul's upon the lid.

The cheeks and arms of Peggotty, so hard and red in my
childish days, when I wondered why the birds didn't peck her
in preference to apples, are shrivelled now; and her eyes,
that used to darken their whole neighborhood in her face,
are fainter (though they glitter still) ; but her rough fore-
finger, which I once associated with a pocket nutmeg-grater,
is just the same, and when I see my least child catching at it
as it totters from my aunt to her, I think of our little parlor
at home, when I could scarcely walk. My aunt's old disap-
pointment is set right, now. She is godmother to a real
living Betsey Trotwood; and Dora (the next in order) says
she spoils her.

There is something bulky in Peggotty's pocket. It is
nothing smaller than the Crocodile-Book, which is in rather



480 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

a dilapidated condition by this time, with divers of the leaves
torn and stitched across, but which Peggotty exhibits to the
children as a precious relic. I find it very curious to see
my own infant face looking up at me from the Crocodile
stories; and to be reminded by it of my old acquaintance
Brooks of Sheffield.

Among my boys, this summer holiday time, I see an old
man making giant kites, and gazing at them in the air, with a
delight for which there are no words. He greets me rap-
turously, and whispers, with many nods and winks, "Trot-
wood, you will be glad to hear that I shall finish the Memorial
when I have nothing else to do, and that your aunt's the most
extraordinary woman in the world, sir ! "

Who is this bent lady, supporting herself by a stick, and
showing me a countenance in which there are some traces of
old pride and beauty, feebly contending with a querulous, im-
becile, fretful wandering of the mind ? She is in a garden ;
and near her stands a sharp, dark, withered woman, with a
white scar on her lip. Let me hear what they say.

" Eosa, I have forgotten this gentleman's name."

Eosa bends over her, and calls to her, H Mr. Copperfield."

"I am glad to see you, sir. I am sorry to observe you are
in mourning. I hope Time will be good to you."

Her impatient attendant scolds her, tells her I am not in
mourning, bids her look again, tries to rouse her.

" You have seen my son, sir," says the elder lady. " Are
you reconciled ? "

Looking fixedly at me, she puts her hand to her forehead,
and moans. Suddenly, she cries, in a terrible voice, "Eosa,
come to me. He is dead ! " Eosa, kneeling at her feet, by
turns caresses her, and quarrels with her ; now fiercely telling
her, " I loved him better than you ever did ! " — now soothing
her to sleep on her breast, like a sick child. Thus I leave
them ; thus I always find them ; thus they wear their time
away, from year to year.

"What ship comes sailing home from India, and what Eng-
lish lady is this, married to a growling old Scotch Croesus with
great flaps of ears. Can this be Julia Mills ?

Indeed it is Julia Mills, peevish and fine, with a black man





to carry cards and letters to her on a golden salver, and a
copper-colored woman in linen, -with a bright handkerchief
round her head, to serve her Tiffin in her dressing-room. But
Julia keeps no diary in these days; never sings Affection's
Dirge; eternally quarrels with the old Scotch Croesus, who is
a sort of yellow bear with a tanned hide. Julia is steeped in
money to the throat, and talks and thinks of nothing else. I
liked her better in the Desert of Sahara.

Or perhaps this is the Desert of Sahara ! Tor, though Julia
has a stately house, and mighty company, and sumptuous din-
ners every day, I see no green growth near her ; nothing that
can ever come to fruit or flower. What Julia calls " society/'
I see ; among it Mr. Jack Maldon, from his Patent Place,
sneering at the hand that gave it him, and speaking to me of
the Doctor, as "so charmingly antique." But when society
is the name for such hollow gentlemen and ladies, Julia, and
when its breeding is professed indifference to everything that
can advance or can retard mankind, I think we must have lost
ourselves in that same Desert of Sahara, and had better find
the way out.

And lo, the Doctor, always our good friend, laboring at his
Dictionary (somewhere about the letter D), and happy in
his home and wife. Also the old soldier, on a considerably
reduced footing, and by no means so influential as in days of
yore !

Working at his chambers in the Temple, with a busy aspect,
and his hair (where he is not bald/) made more rebellious
than ever by the constant friction of his lawyer's wig, I come,
in a later time, upon my dear old Traddles. His table is
covered with thick piles of papers ; and I say, as I look
around me :

f If Sophy were your clerk, now, Traddles, she would have
enough to do ! "

" You may say that, my dear Copperfield ! But those were
capital days, too, in Holborn Court ! Were they not ? "

" When she told you you would be a Judge ? But it was
not the town talk then ! "

"At all events," says Traddles, "if I ever am one — "

" Why, you know you will be."

VOL. II — 31



482 THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE

"Well, my dear Copperfield, when I am one, I shall tell the
story, as I said I would."

We walk away, arm-in-arm. I am going to have a family
dinner with Traddles. It is Sophy's birthday ; and, on our
road, Traddles discourses to me of the good fortune he has
enjoyed.

"I really have been able, my dear Copperfield, to do all
that I had most at heart. There's the Reverend Horace
promoted to that living at four hundred and fifty pounds a
year ; there are our two boys receiving the very best educa-
tion, and distinguishing themselves as steady scholars and
good fellows ; there are three of the girls married very com-
fortably ; there are three more living with us ; there are three
more keeping house for the Reverend Horace since Mrs.
Crewler's decease; and all of them happy."

"Except — " I suggest.

"Except the Beauty," says Traddles. "Yes. It was very
unfortunate that she should marry such a vagabond. But
there was a certain dash and glare about him that caught her.
However, now we have got her safe at our house, and got rid
of him, we must cheer her up again."

Traddles's house is one of the very houses — or it easily
may have been — which he and Sophy used to parcel out, in
their evening walks. It is a large house ; but Traddles keeps
his papers in his dressing-room, and his boots with his papers ;
and he and Sophy squeeze themselves into upper rooms,
reserving the best bed-rooms for the Beauty and the girls.
There is no room to spare in the house; for more of "the
girls" are here, and always are here, by some accident or
other, than I know how to count. Here, when we go in, is
a crowd of them, running down to the door, and handing
Traddles about to be kissed, until he is out of breath. Here,
established in perpetuity, is the poor Beauty, a widow with a
little girl ; here, at dinner on Sophy's birthday, are the three
married girls with their three husbands, and one of the hus-
band's brothers, and another husband's cousin, and another
husband's sister, who appears to me to be engaged to the
cousin. Traddles, exactly the same simple, unaffected fellow
as he ever was, sits at the foot of the large table like a Patri-





arch; and Sophy beams upon him, from the head, across a
cheerful space that is certainly not glittering with Britannia
metal.

And now, as I close my task, subduing my desire to linger
yet, these faces fade away. But, one face, shining on me like
a Heavenly light by which I see all other objects, is above
them and beyond them all. And that remains.

I turn my head, and see it, in its beautiful serenity, beside
me. My lamp burns low, and I have written far into the
night ; but the dear presence, without which I were nothing,
bears me company.

Agnes, my soul, so may thy face be by me when I
close my life indeed; so may I, when realities are melting
from me like the shadows which I now dismiss, still find thee
near me, pointing upward !