Few realize that even at the present stage of civilization in this world,
there are souls who, like the priests of the ancient temples, walk the
earth and watch and guard the sacred fires that burn upon the altar of
humanity. Purified ones they are, who have renounced the life of this
sphere in order to guard and protect the Flame, that spiritual principle
in man, now hidden beneath the ruins of his fallen temple.

As we think of the nations that are past, of Greece and Rome and the
grandeur that was Egypt’s, we sigh as we recall the story of their fall;
and we watch the nations of today, not knowing which will be the next to
draw its shroud around itself and join that great ghostly file of peoples
that are dead.

But everywhere, even in the rise and fall of nations, we see through the
haze of materiality, justice; everywhere we see reward, not of man but of
the invincible One, the eternal Flame.

A great hand reaches out from the unseen and regulates the affairs of
man. It reaches out from that great spiritual Flame which nourishes all
created things, the never dying fire that burns on the sacred altar of
Cosmos--that great fire which is the spirit of God.

If we turn again to the races now dead, we shall, if we look, find the
cause of their destruction. =The light had gone out.= When the flame
within the body is withdrawn, the body is dead. When the light was taken
from the altar, the temple was no longer the dwelling place of a living
God.

Degeneracy, lust, and passion, hates and fears, crept into the souls of
Greece and Rome, and Black Magic overshadowed Egypt; the light upon the
altar grew weaker and weaker. The priests lost the Word, the name of the
Flame. Little by little the Flame flickered out, and as the last spark
grew cold, a mighty nation died, buried beneath the dead ashes of its own
spiritual fire.

But the Flame did not die. Like spirit of which it is the essence, it
cannot die, because it is life, and life cannot cease to be. In some
wilderness of land or sea it rested once again, and there rose a mighty
nation around that flame. So history goes on through the ages. As long
as a people are true to the Flame, it remains, but when they cease to
nourish it with their lives, it goes on to other lands and other worlds.

Those who worship this Flame are now called heathens. Little do we
realize that we are heathen ourselves until we are baptised of the Holy
Spirit, which is Fire, for fire is Light, and the children of the Flame
are the Sons of Light, even as God is Light.

There are those who have for ages labored with man to help him to kindle
within himself this spark, which is his divine birthright. It is these
who by their lives of self-sacrifice and service have awakened and tended
this fire, and who through ages of study have learned the mystery it
contained, that we now call the “Initiates of the Flame.”

For ages they have labored with mankind to help him to uncover the light
within himself, and on the pages of history they have left their seal,
the seal of Fire.

Unhonored and unsung they have labored with humanity, and now their
lives are used as fairy stories to amuse children, but the time will yet
come when the world shall know the work they did, and realize that our
present civilization is raised upon the shoulders of the mighty demigods
of the past. We stand as Faust stood, with all our lore, a fool no wiser
than before, because we refuse to take the truths they gave us and the
evidence of their experiences. Let us honor these Sons of the Flame, not
by words, but by so living that their sacrifice shall not be in vain.
They have shown us the way, they have led man to the gateway of the
unknown, and there in their robes of glory passed behind the Veil. Their
lives were the key to their wisdom, as it must always be. They have gone,
but in history they stand, milestones on the road of human progress.

Let us watch these mighty ones as they pass silently by. First, Orpheus,
playing upon the seven stringed lyre of his own being, the music of the
spheres. Then Hermes, the thrice greatest, with his emerald tablet of
divine revelation. Through the shades of the past we dimly see Krishna,
the illuminated, who on the battlefield of life taught man the mysteries
of his own soul. Then we see the sublime Buddha, his yellow robe not
half so glorious as the heart it covered, and our own dear Master, the
man Jesus, his head surrounded with a halo of Golden Flame, and his brow
serene with the calm of mastery. Then Mohammed, Zoroaster, Confucius,
Odin, and Moses, and others no less worthy pass by before the eyes of the
student. They were the Sons of Flame. From the Flame they came, and to
the Flame they have returned. To us they beckon, and bid us join them,
and in our robes of self-earned glory to serve the Flame they love.

They were without creed or clan; they served but the one great ideal.
From the same place they all came, and to the same place they have
returned. There was no superiority there. Hand in hand they labor for
humanity. Each loves the other, for the power that has made them masters
has shown them the =Brotherhood= of all life.

In the pages that follow we will try to show this great thread, the
spiritual thread, the thread of living fire that winds in and out through
all religions and binds them together with a mutual ideal and mutual
needs. In the story of the Grail and the Legends of King Arthur we find
that thread wound around the Table of the King and the Temple of Mount
Salvart. This same thread of life that passes through the roses of the
Rosicrucians, winds among the pedals of the Lotus, and among the temple
pillars of Luxor. THERE IS BUT ONE RELIGION IN ALL THE WORLD, and that
is the worship of God, the spiritual Flame of the universe. Under many
names He is known in all lands, but as Iswari or Ammon or God, He is the
same, the Creator of the universe, and fire is His universal symbol.

We are the Flame-Born Sons of God, thrown out as sparks from the wheels
of the infinite. Around this Flame we have built forms which have hidden
our light, but as students we are increasing this light by love and
service, until it shall again proclaim us Suns of the Eternal.

Within us burns that Flame, and before Its altar the lower man must bow,
a faithful servant of the Higher. When he serves the Flame he grows, and
the light grows until he takes his place with the true Initiates of the
universe, those who have given all to the Infinite, in the name of the
Flame within.

Let us find this Flame and also serve it, realizing that it is in all
created things, that all are one because all are part of that eternal
Flame, the fire of spirit, the life and power of the universe.

Upon the altar of this Flame, to the true creator of this book, the
writer offers it, and dedicates it to the one Fire which blazes forth
from God, and is now hidden within each living thing.

[Illustration]




FOREWORD

_THE GREATEST OF MYSTERY SCHOOLS_


_The World is the schoolroom of God. Our being in school does not make us
learn, but within that school is the opportunity for all learning. It has
its grades and its classes, its sciences and its arts, and admission to
it is the birthright of man. Its graduates are its teachers, its pupils
are all created things. Its examples are Nature, and its rules are God’s
laws. Those who would go into the greater colleges and universities must
first, day by day, and year by year, work through the common school of
life, and present to their new teachers the diplomas they have won, upon
which is written the name that none may read save those who have received
it._

_The hours may seem long, and the teachers cruel, but each of us must
walk that path, and the only ones ready to go onward are those who have
passed through the gateway of experience_,

_GOD’S GREAT SCHOOL FOR MAN_.

[Illustration: The Cube Altar:

Of the elements of the earth is this altar composed. It is the great
cube of matter. On or in this altar burns a Flame. It is this Flame that
is the spirit of all created things. =Man, know thyself.= Thou art the
Flame, and thy bodies are the living altar.]




CHAPTER I.

THE FIRE UPON THE ALTAR


As far back as our history goes we find that fire has played an important
part in the religious ceremonial of the human race. In practically every
religion we find the sacred altar fires, which were guarded by the
priests and vestals with greater care than their own lives. In the Bible
we find many references made to the sacred fires which were used as one
form of devotion by the ancient Israelites. The Altar of Burnt Offerings
is as old as the human race, and dates from the time when the first man,
lifting himself out of the mists of ancient Lemuria, first saw the sun,
the great Fire Spirit of the universe. Among the followers of Zoroaster,
the Persian Initiate, fire has been used for centuries in honor of the
great Fire God, Ormuzd, who is said by them to have created the universe.

[Illustration: The Everburning Lamp:

Know that the Flame that burns within thee and lights thy way is the
ever burning lamp of the ancients. As their lamps were fed by the purest
of oil, so thy spiritual Flame must be fed by a life of purity and
altruism.]

There are two paths or divisions of humanity whose history is closely
related to that of the Wisdom Teachings. They embody the doctrines of
fire and water, the two opposites of nature. Those who follow the path of
faith or the heart, use water, and are known as the Sons of Seth, while
those who follow the path of the mind and action are the Children of
Cain, who was the son of Samael, the Spirit of Fire. Today we find the
latter among the alchemists, the hermetic philosophers, the Rosicrucians,
and the Freemasons.

It is well for us to understand that we ourselves are the cube altar upon
which and in which burns the altar fire. For many centuries the Initiate
of fire has been nourishing and guarding the Spiritual Flame within
himself, as the ancient priests watched day and night the altar fires of
Vesta’s temple.

The ever burning lamp of the alchemist, which having burned thousands of
years without fuel in the catacombs of Rome, is but a symbol of this same
spiritual fire within himself. In the picture we see the ever burning
lamp which was carried by the Initiate in his wandering. It represents
the spinal column of man, at the top of which is flickering a little
blue and red flame. As the lamp of the ancients was fed and kept burning
by the purest of olive oil, so man is transmitting within himself and
cleansing in the laver of purification the life essences, which, when
turned upward, provide fuel for the ever burning lamp within himself.

[Illustration: The Masonic Censor:

As the perfume rising from the incense burner was acceptable in the
sight of the Lord, so may our words and actions ever be a sweet incense
acceptable in the sight of the Most High.]

Upon the altars of the ancients were offered sacrifices to their gods.
The ancient Hierophant offered up sacrifices of spices and incense. The
Masonic brother of today still has among his symbols the incense burner
or censer, but few of the brothers recognize themselves in this symbol.
The ancients symbolized under such things as this the development of the
individual, and as the tiny spark burning among the incense cubes slowly
consumes all, so the Spiritual Flame within the student is slowly burning
away and transmuting the base metals and properties within himself, and
offering up the essence thereof as the smoke upon the altar of Divinity.
It is said that King Solomon, when he completed his temple, offered bulls
as a sacrifice to the Lord, by burning them upon the temple altar. Those
who believe in a harmless life wonder why so many references are made in
the Bible to animal sacrifice.

The student realizes that the animal sacrifices are those of the
celestial zodiac, and that when the Ram or the Bull was offered upon the
altar, it represented the qualities in man which come through Aries, the
celestial Ram, and Taurus, the Bull in the zodiac. In other words, the
Initiate, passing through his tests and purification, is offering upon
the altar of his own higher being the lower animal instincts and desires
within himself. Among the Masonic brothers we also find what is called
the Symbol of Mortality. It is a spade, a coffin, and an open grave,
while upon the coffin has been laid a sprig of acacia, or evergreen.
In the picture we see the spade of the grave digger, which has been
considered the symbol of death for centuries.

[Illustration: The Grave Digger’s Spade:

Let us take the spade that now digs our grave through the passions and
emotions of life and use it to unearth the secret room far below the
rubbish of the fallen temple of the human soul.]

In the Book of Thoth, that strange document which has descended to man at
his present stage of evolution as a deck of playing cards, we find a very
wonderful symbolism. Of all the suits of cards, that of the spade is the
only suit in which all the court cards face away from the pip. In all the
other kings and queens, the faces are looking at the little marker in the
corner of the card, but in the spade suit, they look away from it. Now
it is said that the spade has been taken from the acorn, but the occult
student has a different idea. He sees in the spade, which has for ages
been the symbol of death, a certain part of his own anatomy. If you will
again turn to the picture of the spade, you will see, if you have ever
studied anatomy, that the grave digger’s spade is the spinal column, and
the spade-shaped piece which is used on the deck of cards, is nothing
more nor less than the sacrum bone.

[Illustration]

This bone forms the base of the spinal column, and is also the spear of
the Passion. Through it and the foramana which pierce it, pass the roots
of the spinal nerve, which indeed are the roots of the Tree of Life. It
is the center through which are nourished and fed the lower vertebrae
of the spine, and the sacrum and coxygeal bones that dig the graves for
all created things. This point has been beautifully symbolized by the
grave digger’s spade, which has been used by the brothers of many mystic
organizations for ages. The currents and forces working through these
lower spinal nerves must be transmuted and lifted upward to feed the
altar fire at the positive or upper end of the spine.

[Illustration: The Candle:

This is the light that has gone out. It is the candle that is hidden
under the bushel. This is the true light that forever dispels the
darkness of ignorance and uncertainty. Let the light shine forth through
a purified body and a balanced mind. For this light is the life of our
brother creatures.]

The centering of thought or emotion upon higher or lower things, as the
case may be, determines where thin life energy will be expended. If
the lower emotions predominate, the flame upon the altar burns low and
flickers out, because the forces which feed it have been concentrated
upon the lower centers. But when altruism predominates, then the lower
forces are raised upward and pass through the purification which makes
possible their being used as fuel for the ever burning lamp. Thus we
see why it was a great sin to let the lamp go out, for the pillar of
flames which hovers over the Tabernacle, purified and prepared after the
directions of the Most High, is the Spiritual Flame that, hovering above
man, lights his way wherever he may go.

The sun of our solar system, that is, the Spiritual Sun behind the
physical globe, is one of these Flames. It began no greater than ours,
and through the power of attraction and the transmuting of its ever
increasing energies it has reached its present proportions. This flame
in man is the “light that shineth in darkness.” It is the Spiritual
Flame within himself. It lights his way as no exterior light can. This
radiating out from him brings into view, one by one, the hidden things
of the cosmos, and his ignorance is dispelled in exactly the same
proportion as his light is spread, for the darkness of the unknown can
only be removed by light, and the greater the light, the further back
the darkness is driven. This is the Lamp of the Philosopher, which he
carries through the dark passageways of life, and by the light of which
he walks among the stones and along the narrow cliff edge without fear.
But although he gain all other things and have not this light within
himself, he cannot know where he goes; he cannot watch his footsteps; and
he cannot dispel his ignorance with the light of truth.

Therefore let each student watch the fire that burns upon his altar.
Let him also make that altar, his body, as beautiful and harmonious as
possible, and let him also sacrifice upon that altar the frankincense
and myrrh, his actions and his deeds. As in the Tabernacle he offers all
upon the altar of divinity, so let him day by day dispel the symbols of
mortality--the coffin and the open grave by which he prepared himself
through the mastery of the lower emotions within himself--and recognize
that no matter how crystallized or dead his life may be, the fact that
he exists at all proves that the sprig of acacia, the promise of life
and immortality, is somewhere within himself; and although the flame of
life may appear faint or cold, if he will supply the fuel by his daily
actions, he will kindle the altar flame once more within himself, which,
shining forth, will also help his brother to kindle this flame, which is
a living sacrifice to the living God.




CHAPTER II.

THE SACRED CITY OF SHAMBALLA


In every mythology and legendary religion of the world there is one spot
that is sacred above all others to the great ideal of that religion. To
the Norseman it was Valhalla, the City of the Slain, built of the spears
of heroes, where feasting and warfare was the order of the day. Here the
heroes fought all day and reveled by night. Every day they killed the
wild boar and feasted on it, and the next day it came to life again.
In the Northland they tell that Valhalla was high on the top of the
mountains, and that it was connected to the earth below by Befrost, the
Rainbow Bridge; that up and down this bridge the Gods came, and Odin, the
All-father, came down from Asgard, the City of the Gods, and worked and
labored with mankind.

Among the Greeks, Mount Olympus was held sacred, and here the gods are
said to have lived high on the top of a mountain. The Knights of the
Grail are said to have had their castle among the crags and peaks of
Northern Spain on Mount Salvart. In every religion of the world there is
a sacred spot: Meru of the oriental, and Mount Moriah and Mount Sinai
(upon which the tablets of law were given to man); all those are symbols
of one universal ideal, and as each of these religions claimed among the
clouds a castle and a home, so it is said that all the religions of the
world have their headquarters in Shamballa, the Sacred City in the Gobi
Desert of Mongolia.

Among the oriental peoples there are wonderful legends of this sacred
city, where it is said the Great White Lodge or Brotherhood meets to
carry on the governing of world affairs. As the Assirs of Scandinavia
were twelve in number, as Olympus had twelve gods, so the Great White
Brotherhood is said to have twelve members, which meet in Shamballa and
direct the affairs of men. It is said that this center of universal
religion descended upon the earth when the polar cap, which was the first
part of the earth to crystallize, became solid enough to support life.
Science now knows that not only does the earth have two motions, that of
rotation upon its axis and revolution around the sun, but that it has
nine other motions, according to Flammarion, the French astronomer. One
of these motions is that of the alternation of the poles; in other words,
some day that part of the earth’s surface which is now the North Pole
will become the South Pole. Therefore it is said that the Sacred City
has left its central position and after much wandering is now located in
Mongolia.

Those who are acquainted with the Mohammedan religion will see something
of great interest in the pilgrimage to the Kabba at Mecca, where
thousands go each year to give honor to the Stone of Abraham, the great
aerolight, upon which Mohammed is said to have rested his foot. Old and
young alike, some even carried, wind through desert sands and endure
untold hardships, many coming from great distances, to visit the place
they cherish and love. In India we find the same thing. There are many
sacred places to which pilgrims go, even as the Templars went in our
Christian religion to the Sepulcher of Christ. Few see in this anything
more than an outward symbol, but the true student recognizes the great
esoteric truth contained therein. The spiritual consciousness in man is a
pilgrim on the way to Mecca. As this consciousness passes upward through
the centers and nerves of the body, it is like the pilgrim, climbing the
heights of Sinai, or the Knight of the Grail returning to Mount Salvart.

When the spinal fire of man starts upward in its wanderings, it stops at
many shrines and visits many holy places, for like the Masonic brother
and his Jacob’s Ladder, the way that leads to heaven is upward and
inward. The spinal fire goes through the centers or seed ground of many
great principles, and worships at the shrine of many Divine Essences
within itself, but it is eternally going upward, and finally it reaches
the great desert. Only after pain and suffering and long labor does it
cross that waste of sand. This is the Gethsemane of the higher man, but
finally he crosses the sacred desert, and before him in the heart of the
Lotus rises the Golden City, Shamballa.

[Illustration: The Lotus:

May your consciousness be lifted upward through the Tree of Life within
yourself until in the brain it blossoms forth as the Lotus, that rising
from the darkness of the lower world, lifts its flower to catch the rays
of the Sun.]

[Illustration: FRONTAL SINUS]

In the spreading of the bone between the eyes called the frontal sinus,
is the seat of the divine in man. There, in a peculiar gaseous material,
floats, or rather exists, or is, the fine essence which we know as the
Spirit. This is the Lost City in the Sacred Desert, connected to the
lower world by the Rainbow Bridge, or the Silver Cord, and it is to this
point in himself that the student is striving to rise. This is the Sacred
Pilgrimage of the Soul, in which the individual leaves the lower man and
the world below and climbs upward into the Higher Man or Higher World,
the brain. This is the great pilgrimage to Shamballa, and as that great
city is the center for the direction of our earth, so the corresponding
great city in man is the center for his governmental system.

[Illustration: The Rod That Budded:

The buds in the Rod are the seven centers within yourself, which when you
develop their spiritual powers shine out as centers of fire within your
own being. The ancients have taken flowers to symbolize these centers,
which when they shine out show that the dead stick, cut from the Tree of
Life, has budded.]

When any other thing governs man, he is not attuned to his own higher
self, and it is only when the gods, representing the higher principle,
come down the Rainbow Bridge and labor with him, teaching him the arts
and sciences, that he is truly receiving his divine birthright. In the
Orient the student looks forward with eager longing to the time when he
shall be allowed to worship before the gates of the sacred city; when he
also shall see the Initiates in silent conclave around the circular table
of the zodiac; when the veil of Isis shall be torn away, and the cover
lifted from the Grail Cup.

Let the student remember that all of these things must first happen
within himself before he can find them in the universe without. The
twelve Elder Brothers within himself must first be reached and understood
before those of the universe can be comprehended. If he would find the
great Initiates without, he must first find them within; and if he would
see that Sacred City in the Lotus Blossom, he must first open that Lotus
within himself, which he does, petal by petal, when he purifies and
attunes himself to the higher principles within. The Lotus is the spinal
column once more; its roots, deep in materiality; its blossom, the brain;
and only when he sends upward nourishment and power, can that Lotus
blossom within himself--blossom forth with its many petals, giving out
their spiritual fragrance.

Sometimes you will see in store windows funny little Chinese gods or
oriental Buddhas sitting on the blossom of a lotus. In fact, if you
look carefully, you will find that nearly all of the oriental gods are
so depicted. This means that they have opened within themselves that
Spiritual Consciousness which they call the Shushuma. You have seen the
funny little hats worn by the Hindu gods. They are made to represent a
flower upside down, and once more, like the rod of Aaron that budded, we
see the reference made to the unfolding of consciousness within. When
the lotus blossom has reached maturity, it drops its seed, and from
this seed new plants are produced. It is the same within the spiritual
consciousness, which, when the plant is finished and its work is done, is
released to work and produce other things.

In the Western World the lotus has been changed to the rose. The roses
of the Rosicrucian, the roses of the Masonic degrees, and also those of
the Order of the Garter in England, all stand for the same thing, the
awakening of consciousness and the unfolding into full bloom of the soul
qualities of man. When man awakens and opens this bud within himself,
he finds, like the gold pollen in a flower, this wonderful spiritual
city, Shamballa, in the heart of the lotus. When this pilgrimage of his
spiritual fire is accomplished, he is liberated from the top of the
mountain, as in the ascension of Christ, and the spiritual man, freed
by his pilgrimage from the Wheel of Bondage, rises upward from among
his disciples, the convolutions of the brain, with the great cry of the
Initiate, which has sounded through the Mystery Schools for ages when
the purified student goes onward and upward to become a pillar in the
temple of his God. With that last cry the true mystery of Shamballa, the
sacred city, is understood and he joins the ranks of those who in white
robes of purity, their own soul bodies, gaze down upon the world and see
others liberated in the same way, and who also sound the eternal tocsin,
“consumatum est” (it is finished).

[Illustration]

[Illustration: The Philosopher’s Stone:

This is the true stone of the philosopher, which gives him power over all
created things. This stone is himself. The experiences of his evolution
have cut and polished the rough stone until in the Initiate it reflects
the light of creation from a thousand different facets.]




CHAPTER III.

THE MYSTERY OF THE ALCHEMIST


There are very few occult students today who have not heard of the
alchemist, but there are very few who know anything about the strange men
who lived during the Middle Ages and concealed under chemical symbolism
the history of the soul. At a time, when to express a religious thought
was to court annihilation at the stake or wheel, they labored silently
in underground caves and cellars to learn the mysteries of nature which
the religious opinions of their day denied them the privilege of doing.
Let us picture the alchemist of old, deep in the study of natural lore.
We find him among the test tubes and retorts of his hidden laboratory.
Around him are massive tomes and books by ancient writers; he is a
student of nature’s mystery, and has devoted years, lives maybe, to the
work he loves. His hair has long since grayed with age.

By the light of his little lamp he reads slowly and with difficulty the
strange symbols on the pages before him. His mind is centered upon one
thing, and that is the finding of the Philosopher’s Stone. With all
the chemicals at his command, their various combinations thoroughly
understood, he is laboring with his furnace and his burners to make of
the base metals the Philosopher’s Gold. At last he finds the key and
gives to the world the secret of the Philosopher’s Gold and the Immortal
Stone. Salt, sulphur, and mercury are the answer to his problem; from
them he makes the Philosopher’s Stone; from them he extracts the Elixir
of Life; with the power that they give him he transmutes the base metals
into gold. The world laughs at him, but he goes on in silence, really
doing the things the world believes impossible.

After many years of labor he takes his little lamp and silently slips
away into the Great Unknown. No one knows what he has done, or the
discoveries that he has made, but he, with his little lamp, still
explores the mysteries of the universe. As the close of the fifteenth
century clouded him with mystery, so the dawn of the twentieth century
is crowning him with the glory of his just reward, for the world
is beginning to realize the truths he knew, and to marvel at the
understanding which his years of labor had earned for him.

Man has been an alchemist from the time when he first raised himself,
and with the powers long latent pronounced himself as human. Experiences
are the chemicals of life which the philosopher is experimenting with.
Nature is the great book whose secrets he seeks to understand through her
own wondrous symbolism. His own Spiritual Flame is the lamp by which he
reads, and without this the printed pages mean nothing to him. His own
body is the furnace in which he prepares the Philosopher’s Stone; his
senses and organs are the test tubes, and incentive is the flame from
the burner. Salt, sulphur, and mercury are the chemicals of his craft.
According to the ancient philosophers, salt was of the earth earthy,
sulphur was a fire which was spirit, while mercury was nothing, only a
messenger like the winged Hermes of the Greeks. His color is purple,
which is the blending of the red and the blue--the blue of the spirit and
the red of the body.

The alchemist realizes that he himself is the Philosopher’s Stone, and
that this stone is made diamond-like when the salt and the sulphur, or
the spirit and the body, are united through mercury, the link of mind.
Man is the incarnated principle of mind as the animal is of emotion.
He stands with one foot on the heavens and the other on the earth. His
higher being is lifted to the celestial spheres, but the lower man
ties him to matter. Now the philosopher, building his sacred stone,
is doing so by harmonizing his spirit and his body. The result is the
Philosopher’s Stone. The hard knocks of life chip it away and facet it
until it reflects lights from a million different angles.

[Illustration: The Five Pointed Star:

This picture, known to all Masons, is that of the Soul. It is the Star of
Bethlehem, which heralds the coming of the Christ within. The two clasped
hands are the spirit and body united in the marriage of the Lamb. It is
from the union of the higher with the lower that the Christ is born.]

The Elixir of Life is once again the Spirit Fire, or rather the fuel
which nourishes that fire, and the turning of the base metal into gold
is accomplished when he transmutes the lower man into spiritual gold.
This he does by study and love. Thus he is building within himself the
lost panacea for the world’s woe. The turning of the base metal into gold
can be called a literal fact, as the same chemical combination which
spiritually produces gold, will also do this physically. It is a known
fact that many of the ancient alchemists really did create the precious
metal out of lead, alloy, etc. But it was upon the principle that all
things contain some part of everything else; in other words, every grain
of sand or drop of water has in some proportion every element of the
universe therein. Therefore the alchemist did not try to make something
from nothing, but rather to extract and build that which already was, and
this the student knows is the only possible course of procedure.

Man can create nothing from nothing, but he does contain within, in
potential energy, all things; and like the alchemist with his metals,
he is simply working with that which he already has. The living
Philosopher’s Stone is a very beautiful thing. Indeed, like the fire
opal, it shines with a million different lights, changing with the mood
of the wearer. The transmuting process, whereby the spiritual fire
passing through the furnace of purification radiates from the body as the
soul body of gold and blue, is a very beautiful one.

[Illustration: The Marriage of the Sun and Moon:

This takes place in man when the heart and mind are joined in eternal
union. It occurs when the positive and negative poles within are united,
and from that union is made the Philosopher’s Stone.]

The Masons have among their symbols that of a five-pointed star with
two clasped hands within it, and in that we have the mystery of the
Philosopher’s Stone. The clasped hands represent the united man in which
the higher and the lower are working for their mutual betterment, by a
co-operative rather than a competitive system. The five-pointed star is
the soul body, born of this co-operation; it is the living Philosopher’s
Stone, more precious than all the jewels of earth. From it pour the
rivers of life spoken of in the Bible; it is the Star of the Morning that
heralds the dawn of Mastery, and is the reward that comes to those who
follow in the footsteps of the ancient alchemist.

It is well for the student to realize that the alchemy of life produces
in natural sequence all of the states of progression which are explained
in the writings of the alchemist, until finally the sun and the moon are
united as described in the Hermetic Marriage, which is, in truth, the
marriage of the body and the spirit for the mutual development of each
other. We are the alchemists who centuries ago carried on in secret our
studies of the soul, and we still have the same opportunity that we had
then, even more than then, for now we can state our opinions with little
danger of personal injury. The modern alchemist thus has an opportunity
that his ancient brother never had. On a busy street corner he daily sees
nature’s experiments carried on. He sees the mixing of metals, and from
the everyday book of life, through the power of analogy, he may study
Divinity. Through experience and often suffering the steel of his spirit
is tempered by the flame of life. As the moon in the zodiac touches off
like a fuse the happenings of life, so his own desires and wishes touch
off the powers of his soul, and the experiences may be transmuted into
soul qualities when he has developed the eye which enables him to read
the simplest of all books--everyday life.

[Illustration: The Pillars of the Temple:

These pillars symbolize the heart and mind, the positive and the negative
poles of life. Those who would enter the temple must pass BETWEEN
the pillars. Every extreme is dangerous. It is the point between all
poles that is safe to stand upon. You cannot enter the temple by the
development of either the heart or mind alone, but only by the equal
development of both.]

The alchemist of today is not hidden in caves and cellars, studying
alone, but as he goes on with his work, it is seen that walls are built
around him, and while he is in the world, like the master of old, he is
not of it. As he goes further in his work, the light of other people’s
advice and outside help grows weaker and weaker, until finally he stands
alone in darkness, and then comes the time that he must use his own lamp,
and the various experiments which he has carried on must be his guide.
He must take the Elixir of Life which he has developed and with it fill
the lamp of his spiritual consciousness, and holding that above his head,
walk into the Great Unknown, where if he has been a good and faithful
servant, he will learn of the alchemy of Divinity. Where now test tubes
and bottles are his implements, then worlds and globes he will study, and
as a silent watcher will learn from that Divine One, who is the Great
Alchemist of all the universe, the greatest alchemy of all, the creation
of life, the maintenance of form, and the building of worlds.

[Illustration: The Serpent:

This is the serpent crown of the ancient Gods. It shows that the two
paths or parts of the spirit fire have been united. This crown is the
symbol of mastery and the union takes place within the student when the
life forces are lifted to the brain.]




CHAPTER IV.

THE EGYPTIAN INITIATE


Many ages have elapsed since the Egyptian Priest King passed through
the pillars of Thebes. Ages before the sinking of Atlantis, thousands
of years before the Christian Era, Egypt was a land of great truths.
The hand of the Great White Brotherhood was held out to the Empire of
the Nile, and the ancient pyramid passages resounded with the chants
of the Initiates. It was then that the Pharaoh, now called half-human,
half-divine, reigned in ancient Egypt. Pharaoh is the Egyptian word for
king. Many of the later Pharaohs were degenerate and of little account.
It is only the early Pharaohs we now list among the Priest Kings.

[Illustration: The Masonic Apron:

In the triangle we see spirit descending into the square of matter. Let
us so purify matter that spirit may shine through it and make of us
lights to guide the footsteps of humanity.]

Try to picture for a moment the great Hall of Luxor--its inscriptive
columns holding up domes of solid granite, each column carved with the
histories of the gods. There at the upper end of the chamber sat the
Pharaoh of the Nile in his robes of state; around him his counsellors,
chief among them the priest of the temple. An imposing spectacle it was:
the gigantic frame of the later Atlantean, robed in gold and priceless
jewels; on his head the crown of the North and South, the double empire
of the ancient; on his forehead the coiled serpent of the Initiate, the
serpent which was raised in the wilderness that all who looked upon
it might live; that sleeping serpent power in man, which coiled head
downward around the tree of life, drove him from the garden of the Lord,
but which raised upon the Cross, became the symbol of the Christ.

The Pharaoh was an Initiate of Scorpio, and the serpent is the transmuted
Scorpio energy, which working upward in the regenerated individual is
called the Kundalini. This serpent was the sign of Initiation. It meant
that within him the serpent had been raised, for the true Pharaoh was a
priest of God, as well as a master of men. There he sat upon the cube
altar throne, indicating his mastery over the four elements of his
physical body--a judge of the living and of the dead, who in spite of
all his power and glory, having about him the grandeur of the world’s
greatest empire, still bowed in humble supplication to the will of
the gods. In his hands he carries the triple sceptre of the Nile, the
Shepherd’s Crook, the Anubis-headed Staff and the Flail or Whip. These
were the symbols of his work. They represent the powers which he had
mastered. With the whip he had subjugated his physical body; with the
Shepherd’s Crook he was the guardian and keeper of his emotional body;
with the Anubis-headed Staff he was master of his mind and worthy to
wield the powers of government over others, because, first of all, he
obeyed the laws himself.

[Illustration: The Sceptres of Egypt:

These are the three bodies that are the tools with which we are to build
our temple. When they are mastered they are the living proof of our right
to kingship.]

With all his robes of state and with the scarab upon his breast, and with
the All-seeing Eye above his throne, there was still nothing as precious
or as sacred to the ancient Egyptian Priest King as the triangular
girdle or apron which was the symbol of his initiation. The apron of
the ancient Egyptian carried with it the same symbolism as the Masonic
apron of today. It symbolized the purification of the bodies, when the
seat of the lower emotions, Scorpio, was covered by the white sheepskin
of purification. This symbol of his purification was the most precious
belonging of the ancient Pharaoh; and this plain insignia, worn by many
others below him in rank and dignity, but equal to him in spiritual
purification, was the most precious of all things to the Priest King.
There he sat, written upon him in the words of the Initiate, the symbols
of his purification and mastery, a wise king of a wise people. And it
was through these Priest Kings that the Divine worked, for they were of
the order of Melchisedec. Through them was formed that doctrine which
degeneracy has not been able to entirely obliterate, which we know as the
divine right of kings--divine because through spirituality and growth God
was able to manifest through them. They were conscious instruments in the
hands of a ready writer, willing and proud to do the work of those with
whom through knowledge and truth they had attuned themselves.

[Illustration: The Sacred Scarab:

In this form the ancient Egyptians worshiped Khepera, the rising Sun, and
the sacred scarab was buried with the dead as the symbol of resurrection.
For as the sun rises from the darkness of night, so the divine spirit
rises from the body that is no more. The life is eternal.]

But the time came, as in all nations, when selfishness and egotism
entered the heart of king and people alike, and slowly the hand from the
Great White Brotherhood that fed ancient Egypt was withdrawn, and the
powers of darkness transformed the land of glory into one of ruins, and
the names of mighty kings were buried beneath the oblivion of degeneracy.
Mighty cataclysms shook the world, and out of the land of darkness the
Great White Brotherhood carried the chosen people into the promised land;
Egypt, the land of glory, disintegrated into dust.

The great temples of the Pharaohs are ruins, and the temples of Isis are
but broken heaps of sandstone. But what of the priest kings who labored
there in the days of its glory? They are still with us, for those who
were leaders before are leaders now, if they have continued to walk the
path. Although his sceptre is gone, and his priestly vestments have
moulded away, the Priest King still walks the earth with the dignity and
the power and the childish simplicity that before made him great. He no
longer wears the robes of his order. Although he bears no credentials,
he is as much a priest king now as then, for he still bears the true
insignia of his rank. The coiled serpent has given place to knowledge
and love. The hand that bestowed the riches of the past does little
acts of kindness now. Although he no longer carries the sceptres of
self-mastery, still he manifests that mastery in his daily life. Although
the altar fires within the temple at Karnac have long been dead, the
true fire within himself still burns, and before that he still bows as
he bowed in the days of Egypt’s glory. Although the priest no longer is
his counsellor, and the wise ones of his country no longer aid him in
governmental problems, still he is never alone, for the priests in white
and the counsellors in blue still march with him and whisper words of
strength when he needs them.

Have you seen people that somehow you liked regardless of appearances?
Have you seen other charming people whom you hated in spite of their
charms? Have you seen learned people who were fools or impressed you
as such, or people who knew little and yet you felt were wise? Those
are the insignia of rank, which the loss of title or position cannot
destroy. Kings with or without crowns they were--not puppets dressed
in tawdry tinsel. And they still are kings and will be to the end of
time, and they still manifest their rank, not by their superiority, and
their high-headedness, but by the soul qualities which they radiate from
themselves. The purity of their lives still radiates outward from those
who wore the apron of the Initiate, for while that triangular apron with
its serpent drawn upon it has long since rotted away, still the spiritual
counterpart of that symbol radiates in their daily lives, proving beyond
all dispute that they were Priest Kings and are today. We find them in
every walk of life--in high places and down in the mire of life. But
wherever we find them, they are still the mouthpieces of the gods, and
through them comes the promise to all who strive. They are kings, not of
the earth but of heaven, and in the life of our own Master we find one
who joined himself to those who served, and was a true King even when
his only crown was a wreath of thorns.

Still in the pyramid of Gizeh, the initiations continue; still the
Initiate receives the insignia of his rank. Before that Fire within
himself he makes his vows, and upon the burning altar of his own higher
being he lays his crown and his sceptre, his robes and his diamonds, his
hates and his fears, and sanctifies his life as a Priest King, and swears
to serve none but his own higher self, the god within. His robes are his
soul body; and his crown is his life, and in the streets of life he is
enthroned. The dusky towers and factory chimneys around him fade into
the templed pillars of Luxor, and with a lunch pail on his arm, his face
brown with honest dirt, he is as much a king as when the crown of the
double Nile rested upon his brow, and the priest of the temple made him
one with his God and his fellowman.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: The Priest before the Ark of the Covenant, and the Spirit
over the Mercy Seat.]




CHAPTER V.

THE ARK OF THE COVENANT


One of the most interesting symbols that has come down to us from the
ancients is that of the Ark, or the box that was said to contain the
sacred relics. Many people believe that this belongs particularly to
the Jewish nation, but this is a great mistake, because it has been the
birthright of every country to have the Ark. All have, like the Jewish
people, lost much of their power and glory when they lost the sacred
Ark. In ancient Chaldea and Phoenicia the Ark was well known. India
celebrates it as the Lotus, and the ancient Egyptians tell how the moon
god Osiris was imprisoned in an ark. In all the Mystery Religions of the
world, individually and cosmically, the ark represents the fountain-head
of wisdom. Over it the Shekinah’s glory hovers, as a column of flames
by night and a pillar of smoke by day. Every country has seen and felt
its presence when the Priest Kings and Initiates bring out of an old
civilization, lost because of crystallization, the sacred Ark, and
surrounded by those faithful to the truth carry it into other lands and
among other peoples.

In every creed and religion we find crystallization. We find small groups
of people separating themselves from their brother man. We find those
who, clinging to the old, refuse to advance with the new, and whenever
we find this crystallization, we find the spirit of truth carried away
to other people and embodied in other doctrines. The ancient Ark of the
Israelite never had removed from it the staves by which it was carried
and moved, until finally it was placed in Solomon’s temple. Neither does
the spirit fire in man rest until finally it is enthroned in the holy
place of his solar temple. Ever towards the rising sun its bearers carry
this sacred truth.

Nations are born of those who love the truth, and are buried when they
forget it. The time has come when its silent bearers have taken the
sacred Ark and the Shekinah’s glory, and in solemn file have moved across
the waters and brought it to the new world. The call has sounded through
the universe, and those who are true to their own higher principles have
surrounded the sacred chest. Those who have sworn alliance to their own
higher being are following the priests and their sacred burden, and a
beautiful mystery temple is being built in this beautiful land of ours,
loved and guarded by those who are laboring for humanity. The staves are
still in the Ark, however, and only when real good can be done by it will
it remain.

The opportunity is now confronting the Western World. The knowledge of
the ancients, the wisdom of the ages is knocking at the door and seeking
those who will follow it. The bearers of the Ark have stopped and are
gathering a nucleus of spiritual souls to carry on their work, and
whether or not the word of the Lord will remain with a nation depends
upon its own actions, and the actions of a nation are the collective
actions of its individuals. If it finds nothing here attuned to itself,
if it finds few that will answer to its call, the call of service and
brotherhood, then will its priests lift again the staves and the sacred
work will go out into other lands.

The life of a country thus gone, like the ancient city of the Golden Gate
it will be swallowed up in oblivion. The call is sounding, and those who
love the Truth and think and care for the Light must join that band of
servers who have for centuries dedicated themselves to the preservation
of Truth. Their lives they have given a thousand times, their happiness
has been second to their duty. They are the keepers of the sacred Word,
and the law of attraction draws to them all who love and live the Truth.
A great influx of spiritual light comes to those who live the life and
have learned the doctrine, and regardless of clan or country they have
joined the silent file of watchers and workers around the sacred Ark of
the Covenant. Every individual by his daily actions is expressing more
plainly than by words his ideals, his desires, and his attitude towards
this great work. The composite attitude of a certain number of people
either shuts out or lets in the light. Therefore every individual has a
great duty, a great work has to be done, and to that the true student
must dedicate his life. Then wherever he may go, whatever he may do, he
is being led, and the Shekinah’s glory directs his footsteps.

[Illustration: The Rod that Budded, the Pot of Manna, and the Tablets of
the Law:

In these three things contained within the Ark we see the threefold
spirit contained within the ark of man’s bodies.]

In the brain of man, between the wings of the kneeling cherubim, is
the mercy seat, and there man speaks with his God as the priest of the
tabernacle spoke to the spirit of the Lord hovering between the wings
of the Angels. Man is again the Ark, and within him are the three
principles, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit--the tablets of the
law, the pot of manna, and the rod that budded. But as in the case of the
ancient Israelites, when they became crystallized the pot of manna and
the rod that budded were removed from the Ark, and all that was left were
the tablets or the letters of the law. When the individual crystallizes
and excludes various sidelights from his mind, he excludes the life force
which was flowing to him. In shutting out strangers, he shuts out his own
life, and all that he has left are the tablets of the law, the material
reasons from which the spiritual life has gone.

Solomon’s temple, or the perfected temple of the human body, the
perfected temple of the universe and the perfected temple of the soul,
finally forms the perfect shrine for the living Ark. There at the head
of a great cross it is placed, and there in man it becomes permanently
fixed. The staves of polarity upon which it was carried are removed,
and it becomes a living thing, a permanent place where man converses
with his God. There man, the purified priest, arrayed in the robes of
his order, the garments of his soul, converses with the spirit hovering
over the Mercy Seat. This Ark within is always present, but man can only
reach it after he has passed through the outer court of the Tabernacle,
after he has passed through all the degrees of initiation, and after he
has taken the Third Degree and becomes a Grand Master. Then and then only
can he enter into the presence of his Lord, and there in the darkened
chamber, lighted by the jewels of his own breast plate, he converses with
the Most High, the true spiritual essence within himself.

We are working towards this, and the time will come when each person
for himself will know the mystery of the Ark, when the student through
purification shall be led through the door of the Holy of Holies and
there be enveloped by the Light of Truth. This was his birthright which
he sold for a mess of pottage. “To this end came he into the world that
he might bear witness to this truth, that through this light all men
might be saved.” The Ark, that great spiritual principle, surrounded by
its loving workers, is calling all to follow it.

When through materiality and degeneracy a great people are destroyed or
a continent sinks beneath the ocean, then those that are true are called
around the Ark, and as its faithful servers are led out of the land of
darkness into the new world and a promised paradise. All great teachings
set forth the same thing. The student will find that it is true, and
when he allies himself with the powers of light, when he becomes a
channel for its expression, and when he radiates it from himself to all
who need it, then indeed will the Light protect him and he shall become a
Sun of God.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: The Holy Grail:

See in this cup your own body within which is the life blood of the Sun
Spirit of the Universe. Each day that we live we perpetuate the Last
Supper, and in all that we do we drink again the blood of Christ, the
life power of the Cosmos.]




CHAPTER VI.

KNIGHTS OF THE HOLY GRAIL


Before starting to take up the study of the Grail legends, it will be
well for all who are interested to read those tales that are now listed
under the heading of children’s fairy stories. For example the story of
good King Arthur and his Round Table is a cosmic myth, and while there
is little doubt that he as a man also lived, the real mystery as in the
story of the Christ, is not the literal tale, but the great mystic or
occult truth that it concealed under allegory and parable. It is the
same with the story of Parsifal which can never be really understood and
appreciated until the student sees in the Knight and later King of the
Sacred Cup, his own spiritual development and the temptations he must
also master if he would become a King of the Grail.

[Illustration: The Stone and the Sword:

WHOEVER CAN DRAW THIS SWORD FROM THIS STONE IS THE MASTER OF THE
UNIVERSE.]

In Lohengrin also the same truth is shown to the world. It is the path
of Initiation along which each must pass on his road to self-mastery. To
every nation and in every tongue sacred legends have been given to teach
man the path he must follow. The blind Homer of the Greeks who told of
the wanderings of Ulysses gave the same great truths to the world. The
Scalds of ancient Norway and Sweden and the Prophets of the Jews used
the same means, and everywhere from the Sacred Books of the East to the
legends of the American Indians we find one great connected truth told to
many different people in ways that were best suited for their development.

Such a truth is the legend of the Round Table, given to King Arthur as a
wedding gift. All true students know what wedding that was. Not of earth
but the wedding of the Spiritual and Intellectual within the Initiate
himself, when the spirit and the body are united eternally, each swearing
to honor and protect the other. Of such a marriage was the union of
Arthur and Guinevere in the legend of the King.

Let us first of all consider the coming of Arthur the King. We read in
the legend of Arthur regarding Merlin the Magician, the wise man who it
is said had charge of the coming King during his youth. Merlin represents
the hand of the Elder Brothers, who realizing that a great ego had come
into the world, had consecrated themselves to the work of preparing him
for his mission.

[Illustration: The Rosicrucian Rose:

In this flower, which was painted upon the center of King Arthur’s Table,
we see the soul of man, which through purification and service has
blossomed out with all the grandeur of the Initiate.]

It was under the direction of Merlin, the master mind, that the anvil and
stone with the sword thrust into it were raised in the square of the city
when it became necessary for a new king to be selected. It was he also
who called all of the brave knights of the country and told them that the
one who could draw forth the sword would be king of all the land. And of
all the knights in the land, Arthur the half-grown boy was the only one
who could release the sword.

There is a very wonderful mystery of the soul contained within that
divine allegory. Let us read the letters that were engraved upon the
sword. “WHO SO PULLETH OUT THIS SWORD OF THIS STONE AND ANVIL IS
RIGHT-WISE KING BORN OF ENGLAND.”

The cube stone is the body; it has been so symbolized for centuries, and
today among the Masons the Ashler is the symbol of Man. Experience is the
anvil, and it is upon this anvil that the sword is tempered. The sword is
spirit, and he who would be King in the true spiritual sense of the word
must first show his divine power by freeing the Sword of Spirit from the
casings of the lower man and the world.

It is the same symbol as that later used by Sir Galahad, the guileless
knight, the personification of the purified man, who comes without a
sword but who later arms himself with the sword of spirit that he draws
from the cube block which was floating down the river (of life) past
Camelot. Sir Galahad had the strength of ten because his heart was pure,
and the Knight of today must follow in the same path.

[Illustration: The Sacred Spear:

This is the spear of Passion that pierces the side of the Christ, the
higher principle in man. But when in the hand of the pure of heart this
power can heal the very wound it caused.]

If you have read the story of King Arthur, you will remember how he was
given Excalibur, the enchanted sword, how it came up out of the water
held by a hand draped in white. Excalibur represents light and truth,
which is the weapon of the true Initiate.

In England there still hangs on a courthouse wall the Round Table of
King Arthur. In the very center of the table is a beautiful rose painted
in natural colors. This symbol is that of the Rosicrucians, the ancient
alchemists, and there is a direct connection between the legend of the
British King and the ancient philosophers of fire.

Now let us turn our attention for a moment to the history of the Holy
Grail, or the cup from which Christ drank at the Last Supper and which
was said to have caught his blood when he was dying upon the cross.
Ancient legends tell us that this cup was made from a sacred stone which
had been the crown jewel of Lucifer, the dynamic energy of the universe.
It was said that the green stone had been struck from the crown of
Lucifer by the archangel Michael during the famous battle in heaven.

After the death of Christ it is said that Joseph of Arimathea took the
sacred cup and the spear of the Passion and carried them into a distant
land. He wandered with his sacred relics through Europe and is said to
have finally died, and those who came after him after many centuries of
tribulation carried the sacred relics to Mount Salvart in northern Spain
where they remained until Parsifal finally took the grail and spear back
to the East where it is to be now preserved.

It is around this cup and spear that the legends of Parsifal and King
Arthur have been written, and it is through study of this fact that we
are able to better understand the mystery of the Great White Lodge of
which the Round Table of Arthur and the circular temple of the knights of
the Grail is a symbol.

Although we no longer have the cup as a physical symbol, it is not gone
from among us, and as in the days of old the brave knights of the Round
Table went out to fight for right, so those knights of today who belong
to the Great White Brotherhood go out into the world in the name of truth
and labor with mankind and seek to right the wrongs of the world. It is
said that the knights of Arthur’s court always fought for virtue and
purity, and so did those who rode out of Mount Salvart.

The grail cup is the symbol of the creative force of nature; it is also
the symbol of the human race which is slowly learning the mysteries of
creation. Within the cup is the blood of Christ, that force which is
transmuting the body into soul, fast or slowly as we give it greater or
lesser opportunity.

In the sacred spear we find symbolized again the creative force, which
in the hands of Klingsor, the evil one, wounds and causes suffering, but
which when held by the pure Parsifal heals the very wound that it caused.

A great lesson is being taught to man through these allegories, but the
average person is unwilling to stop and consider them. They do not
realize that they themselves are the ones whom the Elder Brothers of
humanity must use in the fight against the forces of evil. They do not
realize that the dragons and ogres of the legends are their own lower
natures which they must overcome. They do not see in the hand to hand
combat of the knights of old for a lady’s hand the higher and lower man
fighting for the soul within.

The knight of today does not realize that the white armor that he wears
is his own purified body which is proof against all the attacks of vice
and passion, but nevertheless this is the meaning of the legend. His
shield is truth, which is a perfect protection to the inner man. His
strong right arm is the knowledge and spiritual power he has developed
within, and the sword that he uses is the spiritual light with which the
pure flame of the spirit fire dispels the darkness of ignorance and the
demons of lust.

The sacred spear and the cup which he serves are the two poles of the
creative life force within, the development of which he gains as he daily
serves his fellow men.

Far from the uninitiated the twelve Elder Brothers of mankind sitting
around the circular table of the universe watch the knights in their
battle of life, and the time comes when the student having finished his
work here is liberated at the foot of the Grail. There the candidate
stands robed from head to foot in the armor of spirit and in the pure
white of a body that has been cleansed. Then the cloth is lifted from
the sacred cup, and he is illuminated by the light which would have
killed him had he seen it without purification. He then takes his place
among the knights of the Round Table, and joins those who give up all and
labor for humanity.

When in sickness and in suffering we beg of the great unknown that he
send us help, then indeed our knight comes to us as Lohengrin came to
Elsa. When our loved ones pass into the great unknown, there stands the
brother of the Grail, the invisible helper, who through days of labor has
earned the right to become a member of that great band of servers who
gather around the table of the King, and while their bodies are asleep
still labor in their great search for light and truth, and pray for the
day when they shall also become Kings of the Holy Grail.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER VII.

THE MYSTERY OF THE PYRAMID


There comes a time in the development of the occult student when he
understands one of the great secrets of the Initiates, and that is that
every sacred thing outside of himself stands for some organ or function
within himself. This is, of course, true in the case of the Great
Pyramid, except that this particular pile of stone said by many to be
the oldest building on the surface of the earth, is the great symbol of
composite man. In other words it stands for man as a unit.

Let us first consider it simply from the exterior standpoint. When we
first look at it in the distance it seems to be one great stone, but as
we come closer we see that it is made of thousands of smaller stones,
each one carefully fitted into place. Here we see the first likeness
between the pyramid and man. We consider man to be a unit, but when we
examine more closely, we find that he is a great number of small units,
each working in harmony with the others. It is the same with everything.
We take a successful life and we think of it as an entirety, but when
we examine it, we find that it is a number of small achievements joined
together.

[Illustration: Cross Section of the Great Pyramid of Gizah.]

As thousands of workmen were used in the building of the pyramid, so
there are unnumbered workmen at work in the building of our bodies, which
are symbolical of the same building.

There are many pyramids all over the world. We find them in South America
and in Mexico; we find mounds which were made to represent them among
the American Indians, and in Europe and Britain we find remnants of the
same things. But there is only one real pyramid in all the world. Even
the others in Egypt are but copies of the Great Pyramid, and were used
as tombs for the Pharaohs, but nobody was ever found in Cheops, nor were
there ever any signs that it had been so used.

Now let us continue our analogy between the pyramid and man. If you
will look at the accompanying illustration, you will see the pyramid
laid flat, and you will notice it is made of four triangles laid around
the base square. The four-sided base of the pyramid represents the
four elements of which man’s bodies are composed. These are hydrogen,
nitrogen, oxygen and carbon, or earth, water, fire, and air. These are
called the base of all things, and upon this base the four bodies of man
are raised, each from its own element. Thus the physical body is raised
from the earth. The vital body is raised from the water, the emotional
body from the fire, and the mental body from the air.

[Illustration: The Pyramid:

Here we see the pyramid laid out so that the four triangles and the
square are clearly seen. This represents man once again, and the ancient
Pyramid is man offering his higher being upon the altar of the Great Fire
Spirit.]

There are twelve lines used in the drawing of the four triangles, which
stand for the twelvefold constitution of man when it is complete: the
threefold body, the threefold mind, the threefold soul, and the threefold
spirit. It also gives us the twelve signs of the zodiac, divided into
their respective groups.

[Illustration]

Out on the desert stands the Sphinx, the Guardian of the Threshold
mentioned by Bulwer Lytton. It stands for the bodies of man, and is that
strange being which must be passed before the student can go on in his
development. The four fixed signs of which the Sphinx is a symbol are
Taurus the Bull, Leo the Lion, Scorpio the Eagle, and Aquarius the Man,
or the human head.

[Illustration: The Sphinx:

This is that mysterious being suspended ’twixt heaven and earth, which
has the head of a human being and the body of an animal. In other words
the Sphinx symbolizes man.]

I have already given you some work on the sacrum bone, and I told you
that it was the grave digger’s spade. Here is a picture of the head of
the Sphinx, and the inverted sacrum bone when it has been turned upward.
We see the Sphinx in the inverted sacrum and also in it the inverted
Masonic keystone. All this is very interesting, but unless we realize the
inner meaning of it, its true value is lost. But it is not chance that
these things should be so.

You have most of you heard of the Dweller on the Threshold, that creature
built by our own actions and mistakes. Well out on Egypt’s desert it
stands and bars the way to the pyramid, the temple of the higher man. And
the message that it gives to the world is:

=“I am the bodies. If you would go on to the temple you must master me,
for I am within you.”=

The Sphinx again symbolizes man, with the mind and spirit of the human
rising out of the animal desires and emotions. It is the riddle of the
ages, and man is once more the answer.

It is said that in ancient times the Sphinx was the gateway of the
pyramid, and that there was an underground passage which led from the
Sphinx to Cheops. This would make the symbolism even more perfect, for
the gateway to the spirit is through the bodies according to the ancients.

Let us now enter the pyramid and passing through the corridors come
to the King’s Chamber as it is called. There are three great rooms in
the pyramid which are of great interest to the student. The highest is
the King’s Chamber, then below that is the Queen’s Chamber, and down
below the surface of the earth is the Pit. Here we again find the great
correlation between the pyramid and man. The three rooms are the three
great divisions in man which are the seats of the threefold spirit. The
lower room is the generative system under the control of Jehovah. The
center room or Queen’s Chamber is the heart, under the control of the
Christ; and the upper room or the King’s Chamber is the brain, which is
under the control of the Father. In this upper room is the coffer made
of stone, the meaning of which has never been explained, but which the
student recognizes as the third ventricle in the brain.

It is quite certain also that this coffer was used as a tomb during
initiation, when as is the case in the Masonic initiations of today,
(which are the remnants of the ancient mysteries) the candidate was
buried in the earth and resurrected, a symbol of the death of the lower
man and the liberation of the higher.

It is said that Moses was initiated in the Great Pyramid, and some also
say that Jesus was instructed there also. Be that as it may, we know that
for thousands of years since the time it was built by the Atlanteans it
has been the greatest temple of Initiation in the world. It seems also
that its work is not yet done, for mutely it is teaching those who will
see the mysteries of creation.

It is said by many that it is the original Solomon’s Temple, but this we
know is not true, for while it may be the first and original material
temple, the true temple of Solomon is the universe, the Solarman’s
temple, which is slowly being rebuilt in man as the temple of the Soul of
Man.

There is probably no point that is as important in connection with the
pyramid as that of the corner stone. On the very top of the great pyramid
is a comparatively flat place about thirty feet square. In other words
the TRUE STONE WHICH IS THE HEAD OF ALL THE CORNERS IS MISSING. If we
look at the reverse side of the United States seal, we find again the
pyramid from which the top is separated. Omar Khayyam, the Persian Poet,
gives us the secret of the keystone when he says:

    “From my base metal shall be filed a =key=,
    Which shall unlock the door he howls without.”

The value of the stone is better understood when you understand that it
completes all of the triangles at once, and without it none of them are
complete.

[Illustration: The Key and the Cross:

Upon the cross of matter that forms our bodies, hangs the key to all the
mysteries of creation. It is our duty to take this key and with it unlock
the door that conceals from us the unknown. This key is the spirit.
Release it.]

This stone is the spirit in man, which fell from its high position, and
has been lost beneath the rubbish of the lower man. This is the true cap
stone that is now hidden in the pit of man’s temple, and which he must
exhume and place again as the true crown of his spiritual pyramid.

He can only do this when he calls the thousands of workmen within himself
together and binds them to the service of the higher man. There must
be no traitors to murder the builder this time. And Lucifer, the one
rejected by man as the devil, is the one who must through the planet
Mars send man the dynamic energy which man himself must transmute from
the fire of passion to the flame of spirit. He then must take the tools
of the craft and cut and polish his own being into the cap stone of the
Universal Temple.

It is interesting to note how the casing stones that once made the
pyramid so beautiful and true were carried away to build the cities
nearby, and in connection with that it is interesting to note how the
soul and body of man, the casing stones of his spiritual temple, have
been sacrificed in order that he might have material things.

As we look at pictures of the ancient pyramid and Sphinx which have stood
on Egypt’s sands for ages, let us see in them our own mystery temple,
made without the sound of hammer or the voice of workman. And as we sadly
think of this mighty ruin, broken by ages of neglect, let us remember
our temple, and that its corner stone is missing also and our walls are
falling with neglect. Let us learn the lesson which it teaches, hasten
to perfect our pyramid, cap it with the stone of spirit, offer upon its
altars our sacrifice to the Great Sun Spirit, and bury our lower nature
in its ancient coffer. Then for us will its mysteries be revealed, and
the sealed lips of the Sphinx give up their secret.
